___________________________
The post office address of the College is Williamstown, Massachusetts 01267. The
telephone number is (413) 597-3131.
Correspondence concerning matters of general interest to the College should be
addressed to the President.
Other inquiries should be addressed to the officers named below:
Academic and student affairs Dean of the College
Admission of students Director of Admission
Alumni matters Director of Alumni Relations
Business matters Controller
Catalogs and brochures Director of Admission
Financial aid Director of Financial Aid
Graduate study in art history Director of Master of Arts in
Art History Program
Graduate study in development economics Chair of Master of Arts in
Development Economics Program
Transcripts and records Registrar
The corporate name of the College is
The President and Trustees of Williams College.
Williams College is accredited by the
New England Association of Schools and Colleges.
Published by Williams College, Hopkins Hall, 880 Main Street, Williamstown,
Massachusetts, 01267-2606 four times a year: April, July, August, September. Periodicals
postage paid at Williamstown, MA 01267-9998, and additional mailing offices.
Series 97 Number 4 USPS-684-600 September 2000
___________________________
WILLIAMS COLLEGE
DIRECTIONS FOR CORRESPONDENCE
COURSE CATALOG SEPTEMBER 2000
BULLETIN
___________________________
This document is also available on the world wide web
(http://www.williams.edu/Registrar/catalog); the electronic version is updated regularly.
African and Middle-Eastern Studies 46
. . .
African-American Studies 47
. . . . . . . . . .
American Studies 49
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Anthropology and Sociology 57
. . . . . . . .
Art 69
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Asian Studies 92
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Astronomy, Astrophysics 99
. . . . . . . . . . .
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 105
. .
Biology 107
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chemistry 115
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Classics 124
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Computer Science 131
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Contract Major 138
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Critical Languages 139
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Economics 140
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
English 153
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Environmental Studies 174
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
First-Year Residential Seminar 181
. . . . . . .
Geosciences 181
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
German 186
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
History 190
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
History of Science 219
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Interdepartmental Program 221
. . . . . . . . . .
Jewish Studies 223
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Latin-American Studies 224
. . . . . . . . . .
Leadership Studies 224
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Linguistics 226
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Literary Studies 226
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Materials Science Studies 229
. . . . . . . .
Mathematics and Statistics 230
. . . . . . . .
Music 240
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Neuroscience 250
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Performance Studies 252
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philosophy 253
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Physical Education 259
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Physics 260
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Political Economy 265
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Political Science 267
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Psychology 288
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Religion 295
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romance Languages 308
. . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian 319
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Science and Technology Studies 323
. . .
Theatre 325
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Women's and Gender Studies 331
. . . . . .
Williams-Mystic Program 339
. . . . . . . .
Williams-Oxford Programme 340
. . . . . .
Williams Program in Teaching 345
. . . . .
History of the College 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mission and Objectives 6
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Curriculum 8
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Academic Standards and Regulations 16
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Academic Advising 21
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Statement of Academic Honesty 22
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Expenses 24
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Preparation for Graduate and Professional Study 29
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Graduate Programs 32
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Prizes and Awards 33
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Courses of Instruction 43
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
CONTENTS
Winter Study Courses 346
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Presidents, Trustees and Committees 395
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Faculty 399
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Faculty Committees and Special Faculty Advisors 412
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sexual Harassment/Discrimination Advisors 414
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Offices of Administration 415
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Degrees Conferred and Enrollment 422
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Prizes and Awards Granted 428
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Index of Topics 431
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
____________________________________
Additional information about Williams College and its educational
programs can be found in other issues of the WILLIAMS COLLEGE
BULLETIN, which include the Courses of Instruction, Williams
College Prospectus and Application, and Student Handbook.
illiams College admits men and women of any background to
all the rights, privileges, programs and activities generally accorded
or made available to students at the College. It does not discriminate
on the basis of race, color, religion, creed, sexual orientation, or
national or ethnic origin in administration of its educational
policies, admissions policies, scholarship and loan programs, and
athletic and other College-administered programs. The College
does not discriminate on the basis of sex in violation of Title IX of
the Education Amendments of 1973, or the regulations thereunder,
in the education programs or activities which it operates, including
employmenttherein.TheCollege doesnot discriminateon the basis
of handicap in violation of Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of
1973, or the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, or the
regulations thereunder, in admission or access to its programs and
activities.
The Williams community includes talented students with docu-
mented disabilities who may require learning, sight, hearing, manu-
al, speech, or mobility accommodations. Although Williams oper-
ates no specially structured academic programs for individuals with
disabilities, the College is committed to providing support services
and accommodations in all programs to students who need them.
Williams endeavors to provide equal access to campus programs
and activities for all members of the college community. The Dean's
Office, through the Associate Dean for Student Services, coordi-
nates the various accommodations required to make students'
educational experiences successful. Inquiries concerning the Col-
lege's nondiscrimination policies may be referred to the Dean of the
College, Williamstown, MA 01267 (413-597-4171).
Charles Toomajian
Editor
________________________________
W
This bulletin contains information that was complete and
accurate at the time of publication. Williams College
reserves the right, however, to make from time to time such
changes in its operations, programs, and activities as the
trustees, faculty, and officers consider appropriate.
­ 3 ­
HISTORY OF THE COLLEGE
The chartering of Williams College in 1793 was an act of faith and certainly an act surpassing the
modest intentions of Colonel Ephraim Williams, for whom the college is named.
Colonel Williams had not intended to found a college. Enroute with his regiment of Massachu-
setts militia to join the battle with the French and Indians at Lake George, the Colonel had tarried
long enough in Albany to write his last will and testament on July 22, 1755. In it he bequeathed his
residuary estate for the founding and support of a free school in West Township, where for some
years he had commanded a detachment of militia at Fort Massachusetts, farthest outpost of the
province. The will stipulated that West Township, then in dispute between Massachusetts and New
York, must fall within Massachusetts and that the name of the township must be changed to Wil-
liamstown, if the free school was to be established at all.
On September 8, 1755, Colonel Williams was killed at the Battle of Lake George. On October 26,
1791, after many delays, fifteen scholars were admitted to the free school in Williamstown. Within a
year the trustees, not content with the original modest design of the founder, were captivated by the
idea of creating a college where, as they put it, "young gentlemen from every part of the Union" might
resort for instruction " in all the branches of useful and polite literature." The proposal was extremely
ambitious, to be sure, but ambition was a common American ailment. England did not develop a third
university until the nineteenth century; Williams was the twenty-first institution of higher learning to
flower in onetime British colonies, the second in Massachusetts, the sixth in New England. On June
22, 1793, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts granted a charter to Williams College.
I
The bold decision to plant a college in the wilderness betrayed the intentions of Colonel Wil-
liams; yet the new vision had been fed by the same sort of dreams that had led Ephraim Williams to
see a school and a comfortable community where only a military outpost had stood. The early trust-
ees and the legislature of the Commonwealth were to be remembered for their foresight, but in the
decades after 1793 they had reason to acknowledge that the soil they had chosen was stubbornly
uncongenial--so uncongenial, in fact, that for many years the trustees of Williams spent more time
and energy in trying to close the College than in trying to keep it open.
In 1819 they petitioned to move the college to Northhampton, and in 1821, having been spurned by
the legislature, President Zephaniah Swift Moore took matters into his own hands. Convinced that
almost everything about Williams was impossible--its location, its funds, its enrollment--he led a
group of students over the mountains into the Connecticut Valley. There he became their president
once again, at the struggling new college known as Amherst. As for Williams, one member of the
senior class wrote home to his father: "It remains for us to say whether it shall die suddenly, or whether
it shall linger along for two or three years."
In the past the public had come to the support of the institution. A lottery furnished funds essen-
tial to the opening of the free school. A public subscription was the answer of Berkshire County to
the threat of removal in 1819. What saved the College in 1821 was the willingness of the Reverend
Edward Dorr Griffin to take the job of president and the determination with which he drew upon the
College's reputation for religious conservatism to collect much-needed funds. By 1828, the Rever-
end Griffin could be seen standing in the middle of Main Street, supervising the construction of a
handsome new building, housing a chapel, a library, and classrooms, a testament to his confidence
and his skill. The building is now known as Griffin Hall.
The College which had been taking shape under Griffin and his predecessors was not unlike
many other New England colleges where the classical curriculum and a moral atmosphere served as
the basis for training young men for professional life. The college turned out its share of clergymen,
doctors, lawyers, and teachers, serving the needs of Western Massachusetts and surrounding com-
munities in New York and Vermont. But Williams was not yet a place to which "young gentlemen
from every part of the Union" resorted. In fact, Nathaniel Hawthorne, attending the commencement
exercises in 1838, jotted in his notebook some observations on the Williams students he saw there:
"Country graduates--rough, brown-featured, schoolmaster-looking...A rough hewn, heavy set of
fellows from the hills and woods in this neighborhood; unpolished bumpkins, who had grown up as
farmer-boys."
History of the College
­ 4 ­
Williams seldom knew financial security until the end of the nineteenth century. But it did have
assets that enabled it to develop into a prototype of the small New England liberal arts college. Scen-
ery, a reputation for moral soundness, a loyal body of alumni, and a devoted faculty went a long way
toward compensating for inadequate funds.
Of the scenery, Thoreau remarked, after a visit in 1844, "It would be no small advantage if every
college were thus located at the base of a mountain." For Thoreau the location of Williams was "as
good at least as one well-endowed professorship."
In the early years the religious reputation of the College depended on the essential orthodoxy of
its presidents and faculty. It gathered strength from the famous episode of the "haystack meeting" in
the summer of 1806. Five Williams undergraduates, seeking to continue their prayers and conversa-
tions in spite of a sudden thunderstorm, retired from a grove of trees to the shelter of a nearby hay-
stack, where they were inspired to launch the great adventure of American foreign missions. The
extremely informal ties with the Congregationalists saved it from the sometimes stifling strangle-
hold of an organic denominational connection.
During a crisis in the affairs of the College in 1821, a group of alumni met in Williamstown and
organized the Society of Alumni, dedicated to the future welfare of the College. Their action gave
Williams the distinction of organizing the first college alumni society in history. Alumni loyalty was
rewarded when, in 1868, the College provided for official alumni representation on the board of trust-
ees, an act of recognition in which only Harvard, among American colleges, anticipated Williams.
II
But essentially the College has built its reputation around teachers and teaching. Mark Hopkins,
who was a Williams professor from 1830 to 1887 and president of the College from 1836 to 1872, has
become a symbol of this emphasis. In American education Hopkins pioneered in making the student
the center of the educational experience, and he did it so well that one of his former students, U.S.
President James A. Garfield, immortalized his achievement in an aphorism which has passed into the
lore of American education: "The ideal college is Mark Hopkins on one end of a log and a student on
the other." The Hopkins tradition has become one of the College's great assets. It has been perpetuated
in the lives of generations of teachers.
Scenery, a reputation for building sound character, loyal but not especially affluent alumni, and
devoted teachers could keep the College open, but like most other colleges Williams did not experi-
ence growth and prosperity until the closing decades of the nineteenth century. The scenery, of
course, remained constant, but it developed into an even greater asset as the United States became
more urbanized and industrialized. Williams was still a country college; a Massachusetts court de-
cision of 1888 declared that cows owned by the college were tax exempt. The discovery that busi-
nessmen could profit from liberal education sent college enrollments upward as the century drew to
a close; now more Williams alumni were men of affairs, fewer were clergymen. By 1906, of all the
colleges in New England, Williams drew the largest percentage of students from outside New Eng-
land.
From 1793 through 1870 the Commonwealth of Massachusetts appropriated for Williams College
over $150,000, a sum of such importance that Mark Hopkins himself observed that he did "not see
how the College could have got on" without state aid. A new and more dependable source of financial
support was developed as the century drew to a close. In the 1890's Frederick Ferris Thompson of the
Class of 1856 became the first of many individuals to supersede the Commonwealth as the largest
benefactor of the College. Ephraim Williams' original bequest of $9,297 has since grown by addition-
al gifts and bequests to an endowment valued at approximately $1.3 billion.
III
Williams moved into the twentieth century firm in its intentions to remain a college, at a time when
aspirations toward university status were unsettling many of the old colleges. It adhered to a curricu-
lum that was designed for undergraduates; it made room for the elective principle, but it subjected
course election to safeguards and controls. The idea of a liberally educated man was not jettisoned in
favor of the widely accepted idea of almost complete student freedom in course election. A survey of
the college curriculum in 1925 showed that Williams had combined the principles of prescription and
election, the goals of concentration and distribution, in such a way as to be the only major American
History of the College
­ 5 ­
college without any absolutely required courses and without any uncontrolled wide-option electives.
The Williams curriculum has continued to evolve, but it has not undergone such a series of major
overhauls as characterize curriculums inspired by the popular educational fancy of the moment. Not
having abandoned itself to the elective principle in the nineteenth century, Williams did not need to
rescue itself with the general education principle of the twentieth century.
During its long history much of the life and tone of the college was shaped by students. While the
same influence continues, the competitive pressure for admission since World War II has allowed
for a new and significant degree of selectivity on the part of the College. Among the consequences
of this change have been a quickening of the intellectual life of the College and a reconsideration of
traditions and emphases no longer considered appropriate for an institution of liberal learning.
Among the first traditions to go was compulsory religious exercises, abandoned in 1962 after a
hundred years of gradual but steady erosion. Voluntary worship in the form of ecumenical chapel
services and the activities of student religious organizations carry on another long tradition. In re-
sponse to the concern of undergraduate leaders and the faculty and in recognition of the failure of
Greek Letter Fraternities to fulfill adequately objectives consistent with college purpose, the Trust-
ees in 1962 took the first of a series of actions that replaced fraternities with a residential house sys-
tem. Williams became, as a result, a much more open community. The decision to become coeduca-
tional and the admission of women to Williams as degree candidates in 1970 have reinforced the
spirit of equality and freedom conducive to a climate of learning.
In this atmosphere of change and heightened purpose the curriculum underwent appropriate
transformations, as a careful comparative study of the yearly catalogues readily shows, leading to
the present 4-1-4 curriculum and a more flexible and wide-ranging schedule and program both on
and beyond the campus. Changes in the curriculum included the addition of majors and the
introduction of interdisciplinary programs, along with the expansion of language offerings to in-
clude full, four-year cycles in Chinese and Japanese. Continuing the tradition of putting the student
at the center of the educational experience, Williams in the Fall of 1988 introduced in each depart-
ment at least one course taught as a tutorial, in which, typically, pairs of students meet weekly with
the professor to discuss a paper, problem set, or work of art produced by one of the students. By
1992 some 40 percent of the graduating class had experienced at least one tutorial course either in
Williamstown or in the Williams-Oxford program, run in association with Exeter College, Oxford,
which provides each year for some 30 Williams juniors a year-long immersion in the life of Oxford
University.
This curricular expansion reflected, and in part resulted from, the fact that the makeup of the col-
lege community was changing to mirror more closely the growing racial, ethnic, and religious di-
versity of American society. The percentage of Williams students who identified themselves as
members of one or more American minority group rose to 25 percent; of faculty almost 13 percent.
In spite of change, however, the guiding spirit of the College has not wavered from the sentiment
expressed by Mark Hopkins in his inaugural address of 1836: "We are to regard the mind, not as a
piece of iron to be laid upon the anvil and hammered into any shape, nor as a block of marble in
which we are to find the statue by removing the rubbish, nor as a receptacle into which knowledge
may be poured; but as a flame that is to be fed, as an active being that must be strengthened to think
and to feel--and to dare, to do, and to suffer."
­ 6 ­
MISSION AND OBJECTIVES
We are to regard the mind, not as a piece of iron to be laid upon the anvil and hammered into any
shape, nor as a block of marble in which we are to find the statue by removing the rubbish, or as a
receptacle into which knowledge may be poured; but as a flame that is to be fed, as an active being that
must be strengthened to think and to feel--and to dare, to do, and to suffer.
President Mark Hopkins '24
Induction Address (1836)
Our colleges will not be rich enough until they are able to bring the education they offer within the
reach of the poorest young man in the land.
President P.A. Chadbourne '48
Induction Address (1872)
Dedicated to the welfare of the great common life of the State, [the College] may not much longer
close its doors to one half of the community because of their sex, neither may it narrow its labors or its
sympathies to any class, to any favored few.
James D. Canfield '68
Centennial Oration (1893)
[Young people] now entering college, if given their biblical life span--and who knows what more or
less than three score and ten?--will be carrying responsibilities well into the 21st century...No one can
pretend to more than a guess at what they will then be called upon to comprehend. This much we do know:
that no training in fixed techniques, no finite knowledge now at hand, no rigid formula they might be given
can solve problems whose shape we cannot yet define. Nor have they time to waste in pursuit of transitory
expedients, the ephemeral, the shallow or the merely popular.
The most versatile, the most durable, in an ultimate sense the most practical knowledge and intel-
lectual resources which they can now be offered are those impractical arts and sciences around which
the liberal arts education has long centered: the capacity to see and feel, to grasp, respond and act over
a widening arc of experience; the disposition and ability to think, to question, to use knowledge to
order an ever-extending range of reality; the elasticity to grow, to perceive more widely and more
deeply, and perhaps to create; the understanding to decide where to stand and the will and tenacity to
do so; the wit and wisdom, the humanity and the humor to try to see oneself, one's society, and one's
world with open eyes, to live a life usefully, to help things in which one believes on their way. This is
not the whole of a liberal arts education, but as I understand it, this range of goals is close to its core.
President John E. Sawyer '39
Induction Address (1961)
The longer history of education in our own culture has been such as to suggest the openness, resil-
ience, flexibility and power of that age-old tradition of education in the liberal arts that at its best is
consciously geared to no less inclusive an activity than that of living itself...[And] no education which
truly aspires to be a preparation for living can afford to ignore the fundamental continuities that exist
between the cultivation of specific areas of specialized knowledge, expertise or skill (without which
we could scarcely endure) and that more fundamental and wide-ranging attempt to penetrate by our
reason the very structures of the natural world, to evoke the dimensions and significance of the beauti-
ful, to reach towards an understanding of what it is to be human, of one's position of the universe, and
of one's relations with one's fellows, moral no less than material. Towards that attempt we seem im-
pelled by the very fiber of our being. In its total absence, while doubtless we survive, we do so as
something surely less than human.
The history, moreover, of that most American of educational institutions, the independent, free-
standing liberal-arts college, witnesses forcefully to the power of that central educational institution
when wedded to the other long-standing conviction that education is not a process that can wholly be
confined to classroom, laboratory, studio or library, but one to which the diverse experience and richly
variegated moments of life in a residential community must all combine to make their particular con-
tribution. Extracurriculum as well as curriculum; play as well as work; fellowship as well as solitude;
the foreign as well as the familiar; discomfort as well as ease; protest as well as celebration; prescrip-
tion as well as choice; failure as well as success.
President Francis Oakley
Induction Address (1985)
From the section on mission and purposes of the Williams College Self-Study for Accreditation,
September 1997:
Mission and Objectives
­ 7 ­
Our mission is to nurture in outstanding students the academic and civic virtues, and the related
virtues of character, in the intellectual tradition of the residential liberal arts college and in the context
of the current and future needs for leadership in our society. The academic virtues include the capaci-
ties to read closely, explore widely, express clearly, research deeply, connect imaginatively, listen em-
pathetically. The civic virtues include commitment to engage the public realm and community life,
and the skills to do so effectively. These virtues, in turn, have associated virtues of character. One can-
not research deeply without the virtue of perseverance. One cannot listen empathetically without the
virtue of tolerance and respect. One cannot be committed to community life without the virtue of con-
cern for others. And so on.
This document focuses on areas that require attention and change. We should not forget, however,
that much of what makes Williams College strong remains constant; proposals for change take place
over time against a backdrop of firm standing commitments: Above all, we are committed to our cen-
tral endeavor of academic excellence. Whatever else we do, and we do much to create a total commu-
nity, the centrality of the academic enterprise cannot be forgotten. We seek the people and resources to
create and support a curriculum that assures the strengthening of core skills, offers wide opportunities
for learning with both breadth and depth, assures close attention of faculty to students, and reflects the
complexity and diversity of the world. We also seek to do this in an atmosphere that nurtures the sim-
ple joy of learning as a lifelong habit and commitment.
Our faculty must be a highly talented group of teachers whose primary commitment is to the educa-
tion of our students, within an academic community that values the research and creativity that ener-
gize faculty, inform teaching, engage students, and contribute to the general store of human knowl-
edge and wisdom. We draw senior academic officers from the ranks of our faculty to assure that those
values remain at the core of our decision-making.
In the tradition of the residential college, we place great emphasis on the learning that takes place in
the creation of a functioning community--the life in the dormitories, the challenge of athletics, the
expression through the arts, the debates among our political groups, the exploration of personal identi-
ty in many organizations, the opportunities for leadership in our campus governance, the compelling
need to serve others, and much more.
As a freestanding, self-governing community, we are committed to the tradition of shared gover-
nance. We seek to be inclusive in our decision-making, discussing policies and changes across a wide
array of standing, administrative, and ad hoc committees. We give students wide latitude to organize
their own lives, finding that the rewards of their learning far outweigh the risk involved.
Whatever we undertake, we seek to do at the highest possible level. We take it as our commitment
to be the exemplary liberal arts college, nothing less. We try to demonstrate leadership in our endeav-
ors, while encouraging leadership in members of the community. This requires great energy and fo-
cus. It also requires extraordinary resources. Our natural setting is, perhaps, our greatest resource,
creating an inspiring environment for reflection and for the kind of focused engagement with each
other that such excellence requires. We are committed to compensating our faculty and staff at levels
commensurate with this level of excellence. We must guard and expand our resources in a way that
assures not only financial stability but also growth to meet new challenges. To that end, we are
constantly engaging alumni, parents, and friends in ways to assure the moral and financial support our
mission requires.
Though no one of these commitments is unique to Williams College, our tradition and our re-
sources have given us the opportunity and obligation to pursue liberal arts education at the highest
level. Quite simply, we seek through the excellence of our academic enterprise, the energy of our
community life, the level of our resources, the success of our students and faculty, and the beauty of
our setting always to be able to argue that we are the best liberal arts college.
Such a claim is not made lightly or arrogantly. We view it as an obligation born of tradition. We
recognize, above all, that such a goal is never achieved once and for all, that there are always new
challenges as the traditions of the college evolve to meet the conditions of the day and the questions
raised by honest self-reflection.
Harry C. Payne
President of the College
­ 8 ­
THE CURRICULUM
Williams College offers a course of study leading to the degree of Bachelor of Arts. The course
requirements prescribe both the number of courses to be completed and the minimum grade level to
be achieved; the curriculum also requires that each student explore several fields of knowledge and
concentrate in one. The full requirements for the degree include meeting the minimum academic stan-
dards stated below, residing at the College, fulfilling the distribution requirement, completing a major,
and completing the physical education requirement.
The academic year is divided into two regular semesters and a Winter Study Program. The student
takes four courses in each semester and during January pursues a single program of study on a pass-
fail basis.
The Winter Study Program, which began in 1967, is intended to provide students and faculty with a
dramatically different educational experience in the January term. The differences are in the nature of
the courses, the nature of the learning experience, and the change of educational pace and format from
the fall and spring semesters. These differences apply to the faculty and students in several ways: fac-
ulty can try out courses with new subjects and techniques that might, if successful, be used later in the
regular terms; they can explore subjects not amenable to inclusion in regular courses; and they can
investigate fields outside their usual areas of expertise. In their academic work, which is graded Hon-
ors, Pass, Perfunctory Pass, or Fail, students can explore new fields at low risk, concentrate on one
subject that requires a great deal of time, develop individual research projects, or work in a different
milieu (as interns, for example, or on trips outside Williamstown). In addition, Winter Study offers
studentsanopportunityformoreindependenceandinitiativeinalessformalsetting, more opportunity
to participate in cultural events, and an occasion to get to know one another better.
REQUIREMENTS FOR THE BACHELOR OF ARTS DEGREE
Academic Requirement
To be eligible for the Bachelor of Arts degree a student must pass 32 regularly graded semester
courses and receive grades of C minus or higher in at least 19 of those semester courses, pass four
Winter Study Projects, fulfill the distribution requirement, complete all requirements for the major
including an average of C minus or higher, and complete the physical education requirement.
Residence Requirement
Students who begin college at Williams must spend a minimum of six semesters in residence at
Williams. Students transferring to Williams from other institutions must spend a minimum of four
semesters in residence at Williams, and those entering as sophomores are expected to spend six se-
mesters in residence. Students are considered to be in residence if they are taking a program of study
under the direction of the Williams College Faculty. Students must be in residence for both semesters
of the final year.
The degree requirements must be completed within eight semesters, including any semesters for
which a student receives credit while not in residence at Williams. Thus, semesters spent away on
exchange programs with other colleges or on junior year abroad are included in the eight semesters.
Similarly, if a student requests, and the Committee on Academic Standing grants, degree credit based
on Advanced Placement scores, then these semesters are also included in the limit of eight.
Distribution Requirement
The distribution requirement falls into two parts.
(1) First, there is a divisional requirement designed to ensure that in their course of study at Wil-
liams, students take an appropriately diverse distribution of courses across the full range of the curric-
ulum.
For the purposes of the divisional requirement, courses are grouped into three divisions: Division I,
Languages and the Arts; Division II, Social Studies; and Division III, Science and Mathematics. A full
listing of the subjects in each division appears below.
Students must complete at least three graded semester courses in each division. Two such courses
in each division must be completed by the end of the sophomore year. No more than two of the courses
used to satisfy the requirement may have the same course prefix.
Courses which fulfill the distribution requirement in Division I are designed to help students be-
come better able to respond to the arts sensitively and intelligently by learning the language, whether
verbal, visual, or musical, of a significant field of artistic expression. Students learn how to develop
The Curriculum
­ 9 ­
the capacity for critical discussion, to increase awareness of the esthetic and moral issues raised by
works of art, and to grow in self-awareness and creativity.
Courses which fulfill the Division II requirement consider the institutions and social structures that
human beings have created, whether knowingly or unknowingly, and which in turn markedly affect
their lives. These courses are intended to help the students recognize, analyze, and evaluate these hu-
man structures in order that they may better understand themselves and the social world in which they
live.
Courses which fulfill the Division III requirement are intended to provide some of the factual and
methodological knowledge needed to be an informed citizen in a world deeply influenced by scientif-
ic thought and technological accomplishment, and to cultivate skill in exact and quantitative reason-
ing.
(2) Second there is a requirement in peoples and cultures intended to help students to begin to un-
derstand the cultural diversity of American society and the world at large, so that, as citizens of an
increasingly interconnected world, they may become better able to respond sensitively and intelli-
gently to peoples of varied social backgrounds and cultural frameworks. Courses which fulfill this
requirement are thus designed to familiarize students with some dimension of American cultural di-
versity or that of the non-Western world. Each student must complete one graded semester course
primarily concerned with : (a) the peoples and cultures of North America that trace their origins to
Africa, Asia, Latin America, Oceania, or the Caribbean; Native American peoples and cultures; or (b)
the peoples and cultures of Africa, Asia, Latin America, Oceania, or the Caribbean. Although this
course, which may be counted toward the divisional distribution requirement, may be completed any
semester before graduation, students are urged to complete the course by the end of the sophomore
year.
Courses that may be used to meet the requirement in peoples and cultures are marked with an aster-
isk after the title. A list of courses offered in 2000-2001 which meet the requirement is on pages
334-337.
The Curriculum
­ 10 ­
Courses with the following designations receive divisional distribution credit as indicated:
DIVISION I. Languages and the Arts
Art History (except ArtH 268) Italian
Art Studio (except ArtS 212) Japanese
Chinese Latin
Classics Linguistics
Critical Languages Literary Studies
English Music
Experimental and Cross-Disciplinary Studies 253 Russian
French Spanish
German Theatre
Greek
DIVISION II. Social Studies
African and Middle-Eastern Studies History
African-American Studies History of Science (except HSCI 224)
American Studies Philosophy
Anthropology Political Economy
Art History 268 Political Science
Art Studio 212 Psychology
Asian Studies (except PSYC 212, 312, 313, 318, 362)
Economics Religion
Environmental Studies 101 Science and Technology Studies
ExperimentalandCross-DisciplinaryStudies Sociology
(except EXPR 253) Women's and Gender Studies
First-Year Residential Seminar 101
DIVISION III. Science and Mathematics
Astronomy Geosciences
Astrophysics History of Science 224
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Mathematics
Biology Neuroscience
Chemistry Physics
Computer Science Psychology 212, 312, 313, 318, 362
Environmental Studies 102
Please note: Any Environmental Studies course that is also cross-listed with another subject
carries distribution credit of that subject. Other Environmental Studies courses may fulfill dis-
tribution requirements as indicated under individual course listings.
The Curriculum
­ 11 ­
Major Requirement
The Major Requirement is designed to assure that all Williams undergraduates will have the experi-
ence of disciplined and cumulative study, carried on over an extended period of time, in some impor-
tant field of intellectual inquiry. Juniors are required to declare a major field of concentration; the actu-
al selection of a major is normally made at the time of registration in the spring of the sophomore year.
Major Fields
Majors are offered in the following fields:
American Studies History
Anthropology Japanese
Art Literary Studies
Asian Studies Mathematics
Astronomy Music
Astrophysics Philosophy
Biology Physics
Chemistry Political Economy
Chinese Political Science
Classics (Greek, Latin) Psychology
Computer Science Religion
Economics Russian
English Sociology
French Spanish
Geosciences Theatre
German
General Structure of Majors
1) A student ordinarily must elect at least nine semester courses in his or her major field. A particu-
lar major may also require an additional course and/or one Winter Study Project during the junior or
senior year.
A student may also fulfill the minimum requirements for a major by taking eight semester courses
in the major field and two semester courses, approved by a major advisor, in associated fields. In inter-
departmental majors, such as Political Economy, a larger number of courses may be required.
2) A prescribed sequence of courses, supplemented by parallel courses, and including a major
seminar, is required in some major fields. Other majors ask the student to plan a sequence of elective
courses, including advanced work building on elementary courses in the field, and ending in a one- or
two- semester faculty-organized course or project in the senior year. All majors provide a system of
counseling to help students plan programs reflecting individual interests as well as disciplined and
cumulative patterns of inquiry.
Courses in many major programs require prerequisite courses in related areas. A full description of
the detailed structure of each major is found under the heading of that major in the section, "Courses of
Instruction."
Contract Major
Students who wish to undertake the coherent study of an interdisciplinary subject not covered by a
regularly offered major may propose to be contract majors. Procedures for arranging a contract major
and for honors work in such a major are described in the section, "Courses of Instruction." Students
interested in this option should begin consulting with the Dean's Office and with potential faculty ad-
visors early in the sophomore year. A student completing a contract major may not do so in conjunc-
tion with a second major. For further details, see page 138.
Double Major
A student may complete two majors with the permission of each major department and the Com-
mittee on Academic Standing. Although a student may be granted permission to use a course from
one major to fulfill a particular requirement in the other, the student nevertheless must take the mini-
mum number of courses in each field without counting any course twice. A student may be a candi-
The Curriculum
­ 12 ­
date for Honors in either or both of the majors, but a course for Honors in one major may not be used
for an Honors course in the other.
Co-ordinate Programs
In addition to majoring in a field, a student may choose to concentrate elective courses on a single
topic or area, such as African and Middle Eastern Studies; African-American Studies; Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology; Environmental Studies; Neuroscience; Science and Technology Studies; or
Women's and Gender Studies. Descriptions of such possible co-ordinate programs appear under the
appropriate heading in "Courses of Instruction." If the co-ordinate program courses are directly re-
lated to the major, a student may be allowed to reduce the number of courses required to complete the
major.
Certificate in European Languages
Students may pursue a Certificate in four European languages offered at Williams (French, Ger-
man, Russian, and Spanish). The program certifies a particular degree of proficiency, cultural literacy,
and experience with the language in the context of one's college education. In order to gain the profi-
ciency and experience certified by the program, students must have taken a) at least five semesters of
college language (or the equivalent) and b) a standardized proficiency test administered by the depart-
ments. In addition, students are required to gain familiarity with the culture in question by taking at
least one course each in a) the literature, music, art, or philosophy, and b) the history, economics, or
politics of the cultural area. Students must take seven courses altogether, up to two of which may be
taken abroad. Please refer to the respective language programs for details on the specific certificates.
Physical Education Requirement
The Physical Education requirement provides students the opportunity of establishing and main-
taining a general level of fitness and well-being; of developing abilities in carry-over activities; of
discovering and extending their own physical capabilities; and of developing skills in activities with
survival implications, such as swimming, life saving, and water safety.
A swim test is required of all first-year students at the start of the academic year. Students who fail
to complete the test must pass a basic swim course given in the Physical Education program during the
first quarter of the year.
Students must complete eight quarters of physical education by the end of the sophomore year un-
less excused by the Dean of the College and the Director of Health. Extensions can be granted by the
Dean in consultation with the Physical Education Department to postpone completion until junior
year.
Students must enroll in at least three different activities in fulfilling the requirement and at least two
quarters must be devoted to one carry-over sport, as defined by the Physical Education Department.
Participation in a fall or spring intercollegiate sport is equivalent to two activity units and participa-
tion in a winter sport is equivalent to three units. A maximum of seven credits may be attained while
participating in intercollegiate sports with the exception of a two sport athlete who can fulfill the
physical education requirement by totaling eight units in two sports. Participation in a club sport is
equivalent to two activity units and may accumulate up to a total of six. Therefore, a student participat-
ing in four seasons of one intercollegiate sport must pass only one activity unit and a student partici-
pating in four seasons of a club sport must pass only two activity units.
ADDITIONAL CURRICULAR OPPORTUNITIES
Advanced Placement
At the discretion of the appropriate departments, students presenting satisfactory scores in Ad-
vanced Placement tests may be placed in advanced courses not regularly open to them, may receive
course credit toward the major, and/or may receive course credit toward the degree. A.P. credit, if
granted, can be used as a prerequisite; in partial fulfillment of the major requirement; and (if in two or
more subjects) for acceleration, i.e., completion of the degree in fewer than four years. A.P. credit
cannot be used to reduce the normal course load of any semester, to make up a deficiency incurred at
Williams, or to satisfy the Distribution Requirement.
The Curriculum
­ 13 ­
Independent Study
When a particularly able student wishes to pursue the study of a subject not covered by the normal
course offerings of the College, arrangements may be made for him or her to undertake courses of
independent study under faculty supervision. Arrangements for independent study are made with the
appropriate department at the time of registration.
Student-Initiated Courses
A Student-Initiated Course is one proposed and organized by students and sponsored by the Inter-
departmental Program for Experimental and Cross-Disciplinary Studies. In such courses, the students
carry a heavy burden of the leadership in proposing requirements, selecting material to be covered and
conducting discussions, as well as in conceiving the basic outline of the course. The instructor super-
vises the syllabus, student participation, and performance, and is responsible for evaluation of the stu-
dents.
1) In order to provide for planning, students should discuss plans for Student-Initiated Courses in
the coming year at the beginning of the previous spring semester.
2) Interested students should propose Student-Initiated Courses to the Interdepartmental Program
for Experimental and Cross-Disciplinary Studies and to a faculty instructor by the following
deadlines:
Fall Semester courses: before the end of Spring Registration
Spring Semester courses: before the end of Fall Semester
3) Proposals for Student-Initiated Courses should include descriptions of the aims and anticipated
techniques of the course, as well as a statement concerning any anticipated constraints on enroll-
ment. Enrollment might be based on such educational considerations as the student's back-
ground of knowledge, individual potential for growth and development, maximum feasible size
of discussion groups, and availability of special materials or resources.
4) All Student-Initiated Courses, including criteria for enrollment, must be approved by:
a) a faculty member who agrees to be the instructor of the course;
b) the Interdepartmental Program for Experimental and Cross-Disciplinary Studies;
c) the Committee on Educational Policy.
Normally, each section of a student-initiated course will be limited to 15 students.
5) A student may enroll in no more than one Student-Initiated Course each semester. No more than
six such courses may be credited toward a Williams B.A.
6) At the end of each Student-Initiated Course, the faculty instructor files with the Program and
with the CEP a report on the course's content, a summary syllabus, and an evaluation.
Honors Program
Williams awards the degree with Honors to those students who have demonstrated imagination,
initiative, and intellectual independence within the major. The Honors program requires two or three
courses constituting a clearly interrelated pattern of study, whether in the form of a thesis, specializa-
tion within the major, or interdisciplinary study with courses from other programs or departments. At
least one of the courses must be in addition to the minimum number required for the major; one may
be a Winter Study Project. A student who is a double major may be a candidate for Honors in either or
both of the majors, but a course for Honors in one major may not be used as an Honors course in the
other. Some programs also award honors for their concentrations.
Individual departments and programs describe special criteria, procedures, and patterns of study
for Honors in the "Courses of Instruction" section. Students should consult with their departments on
their Honors options prior to the senior year. Before the student has begun the last of the required
course units, the department or program determines whether the student is admitted to Honors candi-
dacy. The degree is awarded with Honors or Highest Honors at the end of the senior year if, in the
judgment of the department, its criteria of excellence have been met.
Tutorial Program
In the Fall of 1988, Williams introduced a Tutorial Program. Many departments offer one tutorial
during the academic year and some offer more than one. Students should examine the tutorial offer-
ings carefully in order to understand fully the subject matter of each tutorial and its operation. A com-
plete description of each tutorial to be offered appears in the relevant department's section under
The Curriculum
­ 14 ­
"Courses of Instruction." No student is required to take a tutorial, but any student who has the ap-
propriate qualifications may apply to do so.
Tutorials generally consist of two students meeting with the tutor for a weekly session. For each
meeting, one student prepares a presentation--for instance, an essay, solutions to a set of problems, a
report on laboratory exercises, or a study of a work of art--and replies to the questions and sugges-
tions of the other student and the tutor.
Assignments are designed to require the student to spend no more time over a week preparing for a
tutorial than for a conventional course. Grading and testing will be described by the tutor at the first
meeting of the tutorial. Students may obtain detailed information about a specific tutorial from the
tutor.
Please refer to page 45 for more information.
Clusters
Both faculty and students are sometimes eager to work in areas that cut across departmental and
program lines. Interdepartmental clusters are a new initiative designed around such areas of interest.
Clusters are listed in the catalog in alphabetical order. Current clusters are Jewish Studies, Latin
American Studies, Leadership Studies, Materials Science Studies, and Performance Studies. Clusters
are for educational purposes only, and will not appear on a student's transcript.
Study Away From Williams
Students may receive credit for work done at institutions or on programs other than at Williams,
under certain circumstances. A student who wishes to enroll in another institution and to transfer cred-
its to Williams should consult in advance with the Dean's Office and with the appropriate department
chair. Applications for study away require the approval of the chair of the student's major, the Dean's
Office, and the Committee on Academic Standing. Petition deadlines are in March of the preceding
year. See the Student Handbook and the Guide to Study Abroad for more information.
Williams-Mystic Maritime Studies Program
The Williams-Mystic Program offers students a challenging opportunity to focus one semester and
a winter study on the sea. Williams College faculty members serve as the Maritime Studies Program
Director and Marine Scientist. While living in historic cooperative houses at Mystic Seaport Museum,
students take full advantage of its outstanding maritime collections and library, well-equipped marine
laboratory, and diverse coastal environment. Participants enroll in a multidisciplinary program of four
Williams College courses: American Maritime History, Literature of the Sea, Oceanography or Ma-
rine Ecology, and Marine Policy. Students also learn maritime skills under professional instruction,
including music of the sea, shipsmithing, sailing, or celestial navigation. In addition, the Program of-
fers four field seminars each semester, including a two-week offshore voyage on a research schooner,
eight days exploring the coasts of California or Oregon, a three-day trip to Nantucket Island, and a
two-day trip to New York Harbor.
The incomparable facilities of Mystic Seaport, Mystic's varied marine habitat, and the companion-
ship of fellow students with diverse backgrounds, but all interested in the sea, provide an exceptional
setting for maritime studies. Interested students should consult the "American Maritime Studies" sec-
tion of this catalog and the Dean's Office for a Williams-Mystic catalog and an application. Admis-
sion is competitive. Applications must be made in the spring of the preceding year. Check with the
Dean's Office for deadlines.
Williams-Oxford Programme
Williams offers a year-long programme of studies at Oxford University in cooperation with Exeter
College, Oxford. Based at Ephraim Williams House, Williams' study center at Oxford, the Pro-
gramme is designed to offer the fullest possible integration of the students into the intellectual and
social life of one of the world's great universities. It makes full use of the Oxford tutorial system and
the Oxford three-term calendar is followed.
In addition to extensive opportunities to pursue British and Commonwealth studies, the Pro-
gramme also offers instruction in other fields for which Oxford is particularly noted or which are rep-
resented only marginally or infrequently in the Williams curriculum. Interested students should con-
sult the Dean's Office and the "Courses of Instruction" section of this catalog.
The Curriculum
­ 15 ­
Exchange Programs
The Twelve College Exchange Program includes Amherst, Bowdoin, Connecticut College, Dart-
mouth, Mount Holyoke, Smith, Trinity, Vassar, Wellesley, Wesleyan, Wheaton, and, for a semester
program, the National Theatre Institute, in Waterford, Connecticut. In addition, the College maintains
an exchange with California Institute of Technology, Howard University, Fisk University, the Thayer
School of Engineering at Dartmouth, and with Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
Information on the programs and copies of the participating schools' catalogs are available at the
Dean's Office. Application deadline is in February of the preceding academic year.
Study Abroad
Williams participates in study abroad programs in Spain and France (in cooperation with Hamilton
College); in China (as part of the Associated Colleges in China); in Sweden (in cooperation with
twelve other colleges and the University of Stockholm); in Denmark (with the University of Copen-
hagen Danish International Studies); and in Kyoto (the Associated Kyoto Program,run byagroupof
elevencolleges). Williams students may also receive credit for approved programs at a wide variety of
other institutions, or for work done directly in a foreign university or accredited four-year American
university if acceptable evaluation is possible. Students interested in study abroad should consult the
Dean's Office. Students must submit a pink petition and essay to the Dean's Office by March of the
preceding academic year for which they wish to study off campus. Students must be in good academic
standing with no deficiencies and follow the procedures as set out in the Guide to Study Abroad.
Cross-Enrollment Programs
A limited number of students may register at Bennington College or Massachusetts College of Lib-
eral Arts for courses not offered by Williams. Interested students should contact the Registrar's Office
about arrangements.
Combined Program in Liberal Arts and Engineering
The 3-2 program enables qualified students to combine a liberal arts education at Williams with
undergraduate professional training in engineering. In this program, a student studies at Williams for
3 years, completing 24 courses and 3 Winter Study Projects. He or she then transfers to a leading engi-
neering school and studies for a Bachelor of Science degree, usually for 2 more years. Upon success-
ful completion of this program, the student receives a Bachelor of Arts degree from Williams and a
Bachelor of Science degree from the engineering school. For students majoring in physics, chemistry,
computer science, or mathematics at Williams, the requirements for the senior year courses and major
exercise are waived for the Williams degree. Only students who have taken the prerequisite courses,
who have at least a B average in scientific subjects, and who have a good record in other subjects will
be recommended by their major department and approved by the Committee on Academic Standing
for this program.
Williams has a formal agreement that simplifies the application process to the 3-2 engineering pro-
gram at Columbia University. Other engineering schools offer 3-2 programs which might be ap-
proved on a case-by-case basis. All engineering schools expect that 3-2 students will have completed
several science and mathematics courses at Williams, so it is necessary to plan course selections care-
fully. The booklet "Choosing First Year Courses" includes a list of Williams courses recommended to
prospective engineers.
The 3-2 program offers an established route to entry-level employment as an engineer. In recent
years, however, most Williams students have chosen to complete the Williams B.A. in the usual 4
years and then go to graduate programs in engineering. Please see the section of this catalog titled
"Preparation for Graduate and Professional Study." Also, prospective engineers at Williams have the
opportunity to take undergraduate engineering courses at other institutions through various exchange
programs. For information about these opportunities, please see the section titled "Exchange Pro-
grams."
The pre-engineering advisor, Professor Sarah Bolton, will be happy to assist students interested in
any of the options leading to engineering careers.
­ 16 ­
ACADEMIC STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS
Attendance
In order to give students a larger share of responsibility for their own education, Williams College does
not administer a general system of required classroom attendance. The College expects students to make
full use of their educational opportunities by regular class attendance and to assume the academic risks
incurred by absences.
Although no formal system of class attendance is maintained by the College, instructors may set such
standards of attendance as they feel are necessary for the satisfactory conduct of their courses. Students
who fail to meet these standards may be warned by the instructor and notice sent to the Dean that continued
absence will result in their being dropped from the course. A failing grade will be assigned to any course
dropped after the regular course change period. Students who do not attend the first class meeting in a
semester course or Winter Study Project may be required to withdraw by the instructor. Attendance is re-
quired at announced tests and final examinations unless the student is specifically excused by the instructor
or the Dean's Office. Satisfactory attendance in eight quarters of activities approved by the Department of
Physical Education is required except for students excused by the Dean and the Director of Health.
Registration
Registration for fall and spring semesters and for the Winter Study Program takes place at designated
periods during the academic year. A late fee of $25 may be assessed for registration materials accepted
after the announced deadlines.
New students register by mail in early summer; soon after arrival at Williams, they meet with their as-
signed Academic Advisors to discuss the curriculum and their course selections. All course changes for
new students are made with the approval of the Faculty Advisors. During the first two years of study, stu-
dents are limited in the number of courses they may take in one department or subject each semester. For
full details, see pages 43-44.
Course Change Period
Course changes may be made during a designated period at the beginning of each semester. No course
changes may be made after that period except with the approval of the Committee on Academic Standing,
after consultation with the Dean's Office. During Winter Study, a second Winter Study Project may be
added if the instructor approves but the original Project may not be dropped. A processing fee of $5 per day
is assessed for each course change accepted after the announced deadline.
First-year and first-semester transfer students may be permitted to withdraw from one course (incurring
a deficiency but no grade penalty) as late as the tenth week of the semester. Upperclass students also may
once in subsequent years withdraw from a course under the same conditions. A withdrawal, recorded on
the transcript as a "W," is granted only with the approval of the instructor and a dean and only if there is
complete agreement between the instructor and the dean that, despite conscientious effort to do the work,
continuation in the course would be detrimental to the overall educational interest or health of the student.
The deficiency thereby incurred must be removed in the normal manner. See references to making up defi-
ciencies on page 18.
Course Load
Students are required to take and complete four courses each semester. In exceptional cases, students
may, upon petition to the Committee on Academic Standing and with departmental approval at the time of
registration, elect a pattern of five semester courses in the fall semester and three in the spring or three in the
fall and five in the spring; a pass-fail course cannot be used as the fifth course in this pattern.
If a student with a disability believes that he/she is unable to pursue a full course of study, the student
may petition the Disabilities and Accommodations Advisory Group for permission to pursue a reduced
course load. Such a petition must be accompanied by a professional evaluation which addresses the stu-
dent's inability to maintain a full course of study and discusses the rationale for a reduced course load.
Upon consideration of a student's petition and supporting documentation, the Disabilities and Accom-
modations Advisory Group makes a recommendation to the Committee on Academic Standing which
renders decisions. Such cases are considered on an individual basis and may be initiated at any time during
the student's tenure at Williams.
Academic Standards and Regulations
­ 17 ­
Fifth Course Pass-Fail Option
Except in the case of the unbalanced course program described above, a student may, at the beginning of
any semester, enroll in a fifth course with the permission of the instructor and on a pass-fail basis only; this
course must be specified as the pass-fail course. By the sixth week, a student must decide whether to contin-
ue the course, and if so, whether on a pass-fail or regularly graded basis. A form for designating the option
chosen will be sent from the Registrar's Office. A processing fee of $5 per day is assessed for 5th course
grading option designations accepted after the announced deadline. A course graded "Pass" may not be
used as one of the thirty-two semester courses required to complete the degree, to fulfill distribution or
major requirements, or to make up a deficiency. A pass-fail course converted to a fifth regularly graded
course may be used to fulfill distribution or major requirements or to make up a deficiency incurred in a
prior term. The grade received will be included in the calculation of the student's cumulative grade-point
average.
Winter Study Project
Students must take and pass a Winter Study Project in each of their four years. Winter Study Projects are
graded Honors, Pass, Perfunctory Pass, or Fail. All work for Winter Study Projects must be submitted by
the last day of the Winter Study Program; work may be accepted after this date only with the permission of
the Dean. Students who fail their Winter Study Projects will be placed on Academic Probation by the
Committee on Academic Standing and will be required to make up the deficiency (see page 18). Students
who fail through gross neglect of work will normally be required to resign. A student who receives a se-
cond Perfunctory Pass grade in Winter Study will be required to pass a fifth course, which may be graded
on the regular A-E or pass/fail basis, in the following spring or fall semester.
Grading System and Records
Williams uses the following system of grades: A, excellent; B, good; C, fair; D, passing; E, failing.
These letters, with plus and minus value, have the following numerical equivalents in calculating grade
averages:
A+ = 4.33 B+ = 3.33 C+ = 2.33 D+ = 1.33
A = 4.00 B = 3.00 C = 2.00 D = 1.00 E = 0
A­ = 3.67 B­ = 2.67 C­ = 1.67 D­ = 0.67
A grade report is sent by the Registrar to every student at the close of each term. A permanent record of
each student's grades is kept and this official record forms the basis for any academic action by the College.
A transcript of a student's cumulative academic record is available from the Registrar's Office upon
written request. Transcripts will not be issued for students who are in financial arrears.
Provisions relating to student records, access to them, and safeguards on their use are in the Student
Handbook.
First-Year Student Warnings
In the middle of each semester, instructors report to the Registrar those first-year students whose grades
at that time are unsatisfactory. The students and their academic advisors receive notices of warnings as a
matter of routine. The Asssociate Dean for Academic Programs will inform parents of students who re-
ceive two or more warnings unless instructed not to do so by the student within three working days of the
receipt of the warnings.
Extensions of Deadlines
Deadlines for course work are set by the instructor with the following limitations:
 for courses with final exams, the latest that written work may be due is 5:00 p.m. on the last
day of reading period.
 for courses without final exams, the latest that written work may be due is 5:00 pm. on the
third-to-last day of the exam period.
If work is due before these deadlines, the instructor may grant an extension up to these deadlines solely
at his or her discretion. Short extensions beyond these deadlines may be granted by a dean but only with the
concurrence of the instructor. No extensions will be granted beyond the examination period except in the
case of serious illness.
Academic Standards and Regulations
­ 18 ­
Instructors may require students who have missed announced quizzes or hour tests to present satis-
factory explanations to a dean before they are permitted to make up the exercises.
If a student is absent from a final examination, a make-up examination may be given only with the
permission of a dean and at a time determined by the dean.
Deficiencies
A student receives credit for a course by obtaining a grade of at least D minus. If the student fails a
course, he or she must make up the deficiency.
If a failure occurs in the first semester of a full-year course, the student may, with the consent of the
instructor, continue the course and receive credit for the second semester only. If a failure occurs in the
second semester of a full-year course, credit for passing the first semester may be retained only upon the
recommendation of the department concerned and with the approval of the Committee on Academic
Standing.
A senior who incurs a failure in the first semester in a required major course may be dropped from the
College at midyear.
Normally deficiencies can be made up only by courses taken after the deficiencies have been incurred.
Thus, for example, Advanced Placement credits may not be used to make up deficiencies.
A student must make up a deficiency in one of these ways:
1) obtain a grade of at least C minus in a summer school course, approved in advance by the Registrar,
at a regionally accredited four-year college or university; (The grade will not, however, be included
in the calculation of the student's cumulative grade point average.)
2) pass an extra graded course at Williams in the semester following the failure;
3) in the case of afirst-semester failure ofayear-long language course, obtainagrade of at leastaCminus
in the work of the second semester of that course. The failure for the first semester will, however, re-
main on the student's record and will be included in the cumulative grade point average.
A deficiency must normally be made up before the start of the following academic year, or in the case of
a deficiency incurred in the spring semester, no later than the following fall semester. A student may, in
consultation with the Dean's Office, petition the Committee on Academic Standing with an alternate plan.
Separation for Low Scholarship
It is the policy of Williams College not to permit a student to remain in residence after it has become
evident that he or she is either unable or unwilling to maintain reasonable standards of academic achieve-
ment. At the end of each term, the Committee on Academic Standing reviews all academic records that fail
to meet the following minimum academic requirements:
For first-year students: Three grades of C minus or better and no failures each semester, and
at least Perfunctory Pass on the Winter Study Project
For upperclass students: Four grades of C minus or better each semester, and
at least Perfunctory Pass on the Winter Study Project
Students whose records fail to meet these minimum academic requirements or whose records otherwise
fail to show adequate progress may be placed on academic probation or required to resign.
Students who are required to resign from the College for academic reasons are normally not permitted to
return for at least one year from the date of their resignation. A student who has been required to resign
from the College may petition the Committee on Academic Standing through the Dean for reinstatement
on two conditions only: all deficiencies must have been made up and a letter submitted to the Committee
that offers convincing evidence that the student is ready and able to complete work toward a degree at
Williams without further interruption.
When required to resign, students must vacate their rooms promptly. Financial aid students must also
see the Director of Financial Aid before leaving to discuss loan repayment and renewal of aid in the event
of readmission.
A student who fails to meet minimum academic standards in his or her final semester at Williams may
be required by the Committee on Academic Standing to meet them by earning grades of at least C minus
elsewhere before the B.A. will be awarded. If such work is required, it must be completed within three
years unless stipulated otherwise, and the courses must be approved in advance by the Registrar.
Academic Standards and Regulations
­ 19 ­
Withdrawal from the College in Good Standing
Students in good standing occasionally wish to take a personal leave of absence from the College for
sound educational reasons. Students wishing to leave the College should discuss their plans with the Asso-
ciate Dean before departure; they must submit a letter requesting permission to withdraw, pay all College
bills, and vacate their rooms promptly. Financial aid students must also meet with a representative in the
Office of Financial Aid before leaving to discuss loan repayment and renewal of aid upon return.
Normally, a student may not voluntarily withdraw from the College in good academic standing after the
eighth week of each semester. After that date, a student is expected to complete the work of the semester,
and grades will be recorded for each course in which he or she is enrolled.
A withdrawal is granted by the Associate Dean for a period of at least a full year and up to three years.
Students who leave in good standing may return with the approval of the Associate Dean. Upon return,
students are expected to complete degree requirements without further interruption.
Refunds
Payment refund or credit in the event of withdrawal is described on page 26.
Eligibility for and Completion of Majors
To be eligible for any major, students must have received grades of C minus or better in each course in
the major taken in the first two years of college and Honors or Pass on any Winter Study Project taken in
that department. A senior may enter a major only upon the approval of the department chair and the Com-
mittee on Academic Standing.
In addition to passing each major course and, where required, a major Winter Study Project, the student
must maintain an average in the major of 1.67 or higher. Seniors who have an average below 1.67 in the
major field will normally not be allowed to continue. A senior who receives a grade of E in the first semes-
ter of a required major course may be dropped from the College at mid-year. A student who falls below
these standards may continue in the major only with the approval of the Committee on Academic Stand-
ing.
A senior major exercise is not required by every department but is by some. All departments requiring
such an exercise specify it as such in the description of their major programs in the "Courses of Instruction"
section, and all students in those departments must complete the exercise satisfactorily.
Eligibility for Extracurricular Activities
A student is eligible to represent the College in any athletic, dramatic, literary, or musical event and be in
the student government, or other organization as a member, substitute, or class officer, unless he or she is
declared ineligible:
1) by the Dean;
2) by vote of the Discipline Committee; or
3) by vote of the Committee on Academic Standing because of a dangerously low record.
The Student Honor Committee may recommend to the Dean loss of eligibility as a penalty for a viola-
tion of the Honor Code.
Dean's List
All students who attain a semester average of 3.50 or higher in a program of four or more courses are
placed on the Dean's List for that semester.
Phi Beta Kappa Society
Students of the highest academic standing are eligible for election to membership in the Phi Beta Kappa
Society in accordance with the following rules:
1) The requirements for election to membership shall be a grade point average of 3.3 and Honors or
Pass in all required Winter Study Projects. There shall be two elections of new members for each class, at
the end of the junior and senior years.
2) At the end of the junior year, all students in the highest five percent of the class, ranked by cumulative
grade point average, shall be eligible for election provided they have met the requirements and have com-
pleted enough courses to be considered candidates for the B.A. degree in the following year. A student who
leaves Williams at the end of the junior year to attend graduate school may be elected under the above
procedures.
Academic Standards and Regulations
­ 20 ­
At the end of the senior year, all students not yet elected and in the highest 12.5 per cent of the class,
ranked by cumulative grade point average, shall be eligible for election provided they have met the require-
ments.
3) Students shall be eligible for election only if they have been students at Williams College for at least
two years.
4) Honorary members may be elected from distinguished alumni of at least twenty years' standing. No
more than one such member shall be elected each year.
5) Any student who shall have gained his or her rank by unfair means or who in the judgment of the
Dean of the College is not of good moral character is ineligible to election.
6) The name of a member elect shall be entered on the roll only after he or she has accepted the election
and has paid to the Treasurer the regular entrance fee.
7) Any undergraduate member who withdraws from the College before graduation or who falls short of
the minimum Phi Beta Kappa scholastic standing may, upon a two-thirds voteof the members present at
the annual meeting, be deprived of membership in the society.
8) Any undergraduate member who is expelled from the College shall be deprived of membership in
the Society.
9) While connected with Williams College as an officer of instruction or administration, any graduate of
Williams College who is a member of another chapter of Phi Beta Kappa shall be considered a regular
member of the Williams chapter.
10) While connected with Williams College as professor, associate professor or assistant professor, or
an officer of administration, any member of another chapter of Phi Beta Kappa shall have all the privileges
of the Williams chapter, including holding office and voting. While connected with Williams College, any
other officer of instruction or administration who is a member of another chapter shall have all the privi-
leges of the Williams chapter, except holding office and voting.
Awarding of Degrees
By vote of the Trustees, the degree of Bachelor of Arts is conferred at Commencement upon students
who have completed the requirements as to courses and grades to the satisfaction of the Faculty, have paid
all College dues and other College charges, and have returned all books belonging to the Library. The right
to a degree may, however, be forfeited by misconduct at any time prior to the conferring of the degree. No
degree in absentia will be conferred except by special vote of the Trustees on petition presented to the
Dean.
Graduation with Distinction
The Faculty will recommend to the Trustees that the degree of Bachelor of Arts with distinction be con-
ferred upon those members of the graduating class who have passed all Winter Study Projects and obtained
a four year average in the top:
35% of the graduating class -- Bachelor of Arts cum laude or higher
15% of the graduating class -- Bachelor of Arts magna cum laude or higher
2% of the graduating class -- Bachelor of Arts summa cum laude
­ 21 ­
ACADEMIC ADVISING
A variety of academic advice and counsel is provided to students during the course of their undergradu-
ate education. Instructors, departmental and administrative officers, and some special programs are avail-
able to help students explore and develop their academic interests and talents and take advantage of aca-
demic opportunities available through the College.
In the first year each student is assigned an academic advisor from the faculty or staff. This advisor
discusses course choices and academic requirements with the student. The Associate Dean for Academic
Programs coordinates this advising program, reviews the academic progress of individual students,
and--when appropriate--calls students in to discuss their situations.
In the sophomore year, students may seek advice from deans, former advisors, and instructors, along
with preprofessional and other special advisors (see page 413). Sophomores are also encouraged to discuss
major options and requirements with faculty members from departments and programs in which they have
an interest before declaring a major in the spring semester.
The student-run Senior Advisor program provides additional advice and information for sophomore
students in particular, as well as for first-year students and any others with questions about particular
courses, departments, majors, or areas of study. Senior Advisors are nominated by departments and pro-
grams from among the year's senior majors. During the course of the year the Senior Advisors hold several
Course and Majors Fairs, maintain regular office hours at the student centers, keep informed about any
changes in faculty and curriculum in their departments, and generally make themselves available for con-
sultation by students.
In the junior and senior years students are advised by faculty from their major departments or programs.
Each department or program determines its own advising system for its majors, although chairs are regu-
larly available for consultation.
ACADEMIC ASSISTANCE
Additional programs of academic assistance are also available through the Dean's Office. After confer-
ring with the instructor, a student needing extra help in a particular course may request a tutor recom-
mended to the Dean's Office by the department; costs of this tutoring are covered by the Dean's Office.
Students seeking to improve their writing skills in any course may take advantage of the Writing Workshop.
Trained and supervised by a coordinator, student writing tutors provide help with problems on papers al-
ready corrected and with drafts of papers in progress. The Math and Science Resource Center, a drop-in
help center staffed by student assistants, is also available to students of Chemistry 101, 102, 103, 104, 201
& 202, Biology 101, 102 & 202, Mathematics 103, 104 & 105, and Physics 131, 132, 141 & 142.
EXCHANGE AND STUDY ABROAD
Advising of exchange students and of Williams students wishing to study abroad in the junior year is
coordinated by the Dean's Office. Special orientation and information meetings are held during the fall
semester for new students and for students wishing to study abroad. Orientation and counseling of interna-
tional students is arranged by the International Student Advisor in the Dean's Office.
POSTGRADUATE AND PROFESSIONAL STUDY
For advice about planning for postgraduate opportunities, students may consult departmental advisors,
the Dean's Office, the Office of Career Counseling, or other special advisors listed in the Catalog and also
may refer to the catalog section, "Preparation for Graduate and Professional Study."
­ 22 ­
ACADEMIC HONESTY
All students are expected to be familiar with the Williams College Honor Code and to reaffirm their
commitment to the Statement of Academic Honesty by signing an Honor Code Pledge at the beginning of
each academic year. The Honor Code covers all aspects of academic honesty, including the writing of pa-
pers and laboratory reports as well as all quizzes, homework assignments, hour tests, and examinations.
Statement of Academic Honesty
As an institution fundamentally concerned with the free exchange of ideas, Williams College has al-
ways depended on the academic integrity of each of its members. In the spirit of this free exchange, the
students and faculty of Williams recognize the necessity and accept the responsibility for academic hones-
ty.
A student who enrolls at the College thereby agrees to respect and acknowledge the research and ideas
of others in his or her work and to abide by those regulations governing work stipulated by the instructor.
Any student who breaks these regulations, misrepresents his or her own work, or collaborates in the mis-
representation of another's work has committed a serious violation of this agreement.
Students and faculty are to report violations and alleged violations of this agreement. Such reports are to
be submitted to the Student Honor Committee, consisting of eight student members of the joint Faculty-
Student Honor System-Discipline Committee. This committee is responsible for determining the guilt or
innocence of the accused person or persons, and for recommending appropriate punishments to the Dean.
A committee of faculty members to be designated by the Faculty will sit with the Student Honor Commit-
tee in an advisory capacity.
A quorum of three-quarters shall be required for the Committee to meet. A vote of guilty by at least
three-quarters of those present is necessary for conviction. A recommendation for dismissal must be made
by unanimous vote of those present, and shall be carried out only with the assent of the President of the
College.
The Committee is responsible for informing the student body of the meaning and implications of this
statement. The aforementioned faculty committee shall be responsible for informing faculty members of
the meaning and implications of this statement.
Any amendments to this statement must be made through a student referendum in which two-thirds of
the student body votes, and in which two-thirds of those voting vote for the amendment. These alterations
must be ratified by the Faculty.
Adopted 1971
Guidelines
Instructors are encouraged to submit to the Honor Committee a written statement defining how the
Statement of Academic Honesty applies to their courses or laboratories, and to explain such guidelines to
their students. Instructors may set any type of final examination or hour test, ranging from closed-book,
alternate-seating classroom exercises to open-book, "take-home" examinations or papers, and any require-
ments for laboratory exercises. Some instructors encourage cooperation among students but others do not.
If a student is unsure how the Honor Code applies in a particular situation, it is ultimately the student's
responsibility to find out from his or her professor, or from a member of the Honor Committee, how the
Honor Code applies in that situation. An open and highly individualized system can last only as long as
both the students and the faculty work together to create a true academic community.
In written material, students are expected to avoid the possibility of even unintentional plagiarism by
acknowledging the sources of their work. Careful observance of accepted standards of reference and
attribution is required. The basic rules are summarized below. Students are further advised to consult a
recognized style manual to learn how to acknowledge sources correctly. While academic honesty does not
demand a footnote on statements of common fact, it does require that a student provide clear footnotes or
other appropriate documentation and give credit in the bibliography to ideas, interpretations, and facts that
particular sources have contributed to the student's final work.
The basic rules of attribution require that:
Academic Honesty
­ 23 ­
1) A direct quotation (whether a single word or a phrase, sentence, paragraph, or series of paragraphs)
must always be identified by quotation marks, by indenting and single spacing, or by reduced type size of
the quoted material, and a note must be used to state the exact source.
2) A paraphrase of the work of another must be acknowledged as such by a note stating the source.
3) Indebtedness to the specific ideas of others, or the summarizing of several pages, even though ex-
pressed in different words, must be acknowledged by a note stating the source.
4) Every instance of the use of another student's laboratory reports, computer programs, or other mate-
rial must be acknowledged by a note.
5) Even the use of a student's own previous work must be acknowledged; thus, a student must obtain
the prior permission of all instructors concerned before submitting substantially the same paper in more
than one course.
Procedures for Alleged Violations
Students or faculty members who have discovered a violation or a possible violation of the Honor Code
should report it promptly either to the Dean or to the student chair of the Honor Committee. As soon as
possible after receiving a report of an alleged Honor Code violation, the Student Honor Committee will
convene to hear the case. The person bringing the charge will present the evidence to the Committee in the
presence of the accused student, who may then speak in his or her own defense both with and without the
accuser present. After the accused student has left the proceedings, the Committee will determine inno-
cence or guilt and, if the latter, will recommend an appropriate penalty to the Dean. Depending on the
circumstances of the violation, penalties then imposed by the Dean may include such possibilities as a
directed grade of E in the course, disciplinary probation, or temporary or permanent separation from the
College.
­ 24 ­
EXPENSES
Within the limits of available funds, Williams endeavors to offer its educational opportunities to all who
qualify for admission. Income from its endowment and annual contributions from its alumni and friends
have enabled Williams to keep its tuition at about half the actual cost per student to the College.
Payment of Term Bills
College bills for one-half of all tuition and fees are mailed to parents twice a year (in mid-July and mid-
December) for payment on August 15 and January 15; a fee of $100 will be charged if payment is received
after these dates. Term bills must be paid before the semester's classes begin or the student will not be
permitted to enroll in classes or remain in residence at the College. Billing statements for accounts with
outstanding balances or current activity will be issued monthly and are due upon receipt.
All outstanding balances must be paid to the Bursar, and all books and materials must be returned to the
Library, before the student is entitled to a degree or a transcript.
College Bills
College charges for tuition, room, board, and fees for the academic year 2000-2001 are as follows:
Tuition $24,619
Room Fee (including telephone service) 3,340
Full Board 3,390
Student Activities Fee* 121
House Maintenance Fee (upperclass) 50
_______
$31,520
Other Expenses
Based on a study of expenses reported by financial aid students, a minimum normal budget for a college
year at Williams includes additional expenses estimated as follows:
Books 600
Clothing, Laundry, Recreation approximately 800
_______
Estimated year's total, exclusive of travel expenses** $32,920
________________
*A student activities fee for support of non-athletic student organizations is charged to all un-
dergraduates as part of the College term bill. It includes, for example, subscriptions to the col-
lege newspaper, and admission to most drama productions and musical events on campus.
**Travel expenses are not included in figures listed above. The cost of two round-trip tickets is
added into each successful financial aid candidate's award.
Additional Items
A House Maintenance Fee of $50 per year is charged to upperclassmen as a part of the College term bill.
It is used to provide a base for the social and cultural programs of each residential House and to meet any
unusual maintenance expenses for the Houses. First-year class dues of $50 are charged at the rate of $25
each semester.
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts requires that, effective September 1, 1989, all full- and part-time
students enrolled in institutions of higher education located in Massachusetts must participate in a qualify-
ing student health insurance plan offered by the institution or in another health insurance program affording
comparable coverage.
Expenses
­ 25 ­
The College offers a qualifying student health insurance plan to all students. The College will allow
students to waive participation in this insurance plan if the student will certify in writing, before the begin-
ning of the academic year, that the coverage offered by an alternative program chosen by the student is
comparable to that of the qualifying program available at the College.
Information about the student health insurance program offered by the College, including current details
of its cost, is mailed to all students each year. Additional information about this program or about the Com-
monwealth's requirements is available through the Thompson Health Center at (413) 597-3166.
Late registration or enrollment entails a charge of $25. There is a $5 per day processing fee for any
course change cards or 5th course grading option choices accepted after announced deadlines. There is a
charge of $25 for a lost key.
Payment of College Bills
A non-refundable deposit of $200 to reserve a place in the first-year class is required from all admitted
candidates (except certain financial aid recipients) by the Candidate's Reply Date of May 1. The deposit
appears as a credit on the term bill rendered in July.
College tuition statements for one half of all fees are mailed to the billing name(s) and addresses on
record twice a year--in July, payable by August 15, and in December, payable by January 15. Payment
may be made by check, money order, or wire transfer. Credit cards can not be used to pay tuition and fees.
A fee of $100 will be charged if payment is received after these dates.
Students who receive a scholarship(s) that was not awarded through the Williams Office of Financial
Aid must complete a Scholarship Information Sheet and mail it to the Bursar Office by early June. Provi-
sional credit will be posted to the semester bill for the following; anticipated disbursements of direct loans
for which a promissory note has been signed and returned to the Office of Financial Aid, anticipated dis-
bursements of outside loans approved by the lender, outside scholarships which have not yet been received
and applied against the student account and any remaining semester contract amount for the Ten Month
Payment Plan. If actual payment for the above provisional credits are not received by the date anticipated,
the provisional credit will expire and be removed from the student's account creating a balance due.
A check returned to the College for any reason such as "account closed" or "insufficient funds" will be
charged to the student's term bill and a "return check charge" of $20.00 will be assessed. The College
reserves the right to require that payment be made in the form of cash, cashier check or money order.
Students with bills still unpaid at the start of the semester who have not made satisfactory arrangements
with the Bursar will not be permitted to enroll in classes or remain in residence at the College. Furthermore,
if arrangements for payment after the start of the semester are approved by the Bursar and these expected
payments are not made on time, students may not be allowed to enroll for the next semester.
If efforts by the Bursar's Office to collect the monies owed are unsuccessful, the account could be
placed with a collection agency, and if the delinquency persists, the College's experience with the account
may be reported to a national credit bureau. It is the policy of the College to pass on to the debtor all reason-
able costs associated with collection of the debt through a collection agency. If at any time the student
believes information concerning payment delinquency is inaccurate, he/she should notify the College c/o
The Bursar's Office, P.O. Box 406, Williamstown, MA 01267.
There are several loan options available to parents through outside sources. These include the MassPlan
Loan through the Massachusetts Educational Financing Authority and the Federal Plus Loan Program.
Information on these loans can be found in the brochure A Guide to Borrowing for College.
Williams also offers an installment plan, administered by Key Education Resources, whereby the yearly
charges are paid in 10 equal installments starting in June, with no interest charges. There are no income
restrictions. Monthly payments will be the total cost (less any scholarships, Stafford or parent loans) di-
vided by 10. There is an administration fee for this program. Information on this program is sent each
spring to all parents or can be obtained by calling Key Education Resources at (800) 539-5363.
Expenses
­ 26 ­
Refund Policy
Federal regulations require that all educational institutions disclose their refund policy to all prospective
students. In accordance with that regulation, below is the Williams College Refund Policy for the
2000-2001 academic year.
Date of Withdrawal
Prior to start of classes September 7 100% (tuition, room, board)
Week 1 September 7-13 90% (tuition, board only)*
Week 2 September 14-20 80% (tuition, board only)*
Week 3 September 21-27 70% (tuition, board only)*
Week 4 September 28-October 4 60% (tuition, board only)*
Week 5 October 5-11 50% (tuition, board only)*
Week 6 October12-18 40% (tuition, board only)*
Week 7 October 19-25 30% (tuition, board only)*
Week 8 October 26-November 1 20% (tuition, board only)*
No refund after November 1, 2000.
Fall Semester 2000
Date of Withdrawal
Prior to start of classes February 1
February 1-7
February 8-14
February 15-21
February 22-28
March 1-7
March 8-14
March 15-21
March 22-28
No refund after March 28, 2001.
Winter Study/Spring Semester 2001
Students who are considering withdrawal from the College should be sure to meet with the Dean's Of-
fice, the Financial Aid Office and the Bursar's Office before rendering their final decision.
*Housing and miscellaneous fees are not pro-rated after the start of classes. Coverage under the Col-
lege's student health insurance plan generally terminates on the date of withdrawal. The unused portion
will be credited to the student's account.
For students receiving Title IV federal funds, repayment of federal funds on a pro-rata basis will be
determined up to the 60% point of the semester per federal regulation. Please note that withdrawal late in
the semester could result in a balance owed to the College for federal aid that must be returned to the pro-
gram.
Repayment is first made to federal programs in the following order: Unsubsidized Federal Direct Staf-
ford Loan, Subsidized Federal Direct Stafford Loan, Federal Perkins Loan, Federal Direct PLUS Loan,
Federal Pell Grant, Federal SEOG, Federal SSIG, Robert Byrd Scholarship. Any remaining credit balance
reimburses other sources in the following order: Williams scholarship, other scholarships, other parent loan
programs and family. Specific examples are available on request.
The College offers, through A.W.G. Dewar, Inc., a Tuition Refund Plan which supplements the Wil-
liams College Refund Policy in certain circumstances. A brochure describing this plan will be sent to you
under separate cover, or you may contact Dewar, Inc. directly at (781) 380-8770.
Expenses
­ 27 ­
Financial Aid
Williams has a substantial financial aid program to promote the greatest possible diversity in the social
and economic background of the student population. Students interested in financial aid policies and pro-
cedures should consult Williams College Prospectus,the Student Handbook, or the Office of Financial Aid.
Distinctive Undergraduate Scholarships
Williams College, through the Office of Financial Aid, administers over three hundred endowed schol-
arships, all of which are based on demonstrated need. Limited space prohibits the complete listing of these,
but some deserve special mention because of their distinctiveness.
GEORGE I. ALDEN SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1975 by the trustees of the George I. Alden
Trust in memory of Mr. Alden, noted teacher, businessman and leader of the industrial revolution at the
turn of the century. Preference in this award is given to students transferring from two-year community
colleges in Massachusetts, or to residents of Massachusetts matriculating as first-year students.
BRONFMAN FAMILY FUND--Established in 1990 as part of the Third Century Campaign for inter-
national programs. The family's support provides financial aid both for students coming to Williams from
foreign countries and for students spending part of their undergraduate years overseas.
CLARENCE C. CHAFFEE MEMORIAL SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1987 by alumni, family,
and friends in memory of Clarence Church Chaffee. Chafe, as he was fondly called, coached varsity tennis,
squash, and soccer at Williams from 1938 to 1970. Preference in this award is to be given to varsity tennis,
squash, or soccer players.
CLASS OF 1936 MEMORIAL SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1986 by members of the Class of
1936 and their families and friends as its 50th Reunion gift to the College. Preference is given to descen-
dents of members of the Class of 1936.
CLASS OF 1957 SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1982 by the Class of 1957 as its 25th Reunion gift
to the College. This award honors several Juniors and Seniors each year who have successfully combined
campus leadership with academic achievement.
POLLY AND WILLARD D. DICKERSON '40 SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1990 by members
of the Class of 1940 on the occasion of their 50th Reunion in honor of Willard D. Dickerson '40, Executive
Director of Development Emeritus, and his wife Polly. For 32 years from their home in Williamstown the
Dickersons cared for the College, the Class, and its members with great concern, affection, and pride.
Awarded to young men and women of promise.
MARY AGNES R. AND PETER D. KIERNAN '44 SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1989 by Fleet
Financial Group in memory of Peter D. Kiernan '44, former chairman and CEO of Fleet/Norstar Financial
Group, Inc. The scholarship was further endowed by Peter D. Kiernan III '75, and his wife Eaddo, in
memory of his father and in honor of his mother, Mary Agnes R. Kiernan. Seven scholarships are awarded
annually, with preference given first to Fleet employees and their children or to residents of regions served
by Fleet Financial Group (notably New England, New York, and New Jersey). A secondary preference is
given to students from Ireland.
JOHN W. LASELL SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1952 by five members of the Lasell family in
memory of John W. Lasell of the Class of 1920. Preference is given first to students of Whitinsville; then to
other Massachusetts residents.
HERBERT H. LEHMAN SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1964 by Mrs. Lehman as a memorial to
her husband, a former New York Governor and U.S. Senator, who graduated from Williams in 1899. Fif-
teen to twenty upperclass students are selected each year on the basis of service to both the Williams and
wider community.
MORRIS AND GLADYS LEWY SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1983 by Morris and Gladys
Lewy, parents and grandparents to two Williams graduates. Preference in these awards is given to pre-
medical students.
FRANCES B. AND PAIGE D. L'HOMMEDIEU SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1975 in memory
of Frances B. and Paige D. L'Hommedieu who had been actively interested in two-year community col-
leges in New Jersey. Consequently, preference is given to community college transfers.
Expenses
­ 28 ­
JOHN J. LOUIS, JR. '47 SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1976 by the late John J. Louis, Jr., former
Trustee of Williams, for general scholarship purposes. Preference is given to students from Illinois.
FRANCIS TILDEN NICHOLS '26 SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1974 by Francis T. Nichols, a
member of the Class of 1926, for residents of Maine with preference to be given to students from Hancock
County.
RALPH PERKINS '09 SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1960 by the family of Ralph Perkins, a
member of the class of 1909. Preference in this award is to be given to students from Ohio.
ANTHONY PLANSKY SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1980 by alumni and friends in memory of
Tony Plansky's long years of dedication and service as coach of Williams track and cross-country teams.
Preference in this award is to be given to those involved with track and cross-country.
FREDERICK H. ROBINSON '20 MEMORIAL SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1988 by the late
Mrs. Dorothy S. Robinson in memory of her husband, a member of the Class of 1920. Preference in the
award is to be given to students who demonstrate interest in music.
SPENCER FAMILY SCHOLARSHIP--Established at Williams in 1991 by Mrs. Harriet Spencer, a
former Trustee of the College, in honor of her husband's (Edson W. Spencer '48) 65th birthday and her
great affection and respect for Williams College. Preference in this award is to be given to students of Na-
tive American, African-American, Latino, or Asian-American descent.
C. V. STARR SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1981 by the C. V. Starr Foundation with prefer-
ence to be given to foreign students.
FRANCIS LYNDE STETSON SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1921-22 by Francis Lynde Stetson,
Class of 1867. Preference in these awards is to be given to students from northern New York.
JACOB C. STONE SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1928 by Jacob C. Stone, a member of the Class
of 1914, a Trustee of Williams, and a native of North Adams, Massachusetts. Preference in this award is to
be given to students from Berkshire County.
STEPHEN H. TYNG SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1940 through the bequest of Mrs. Juliet Tyng,
in memory of both her husband and son. These scholarships are the most distinctive awards presented each
year to six to eight of the most promising scholars in the first-year class. Tyng Scholars are also eligible for
assistance for up to three years of graduate/professional study.
SPECIAL MINORITY SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1988 by Williams College. Preference in
these awards is to be given to low-income minority students: first from urban areas; secondly from non-ur-
ban areas.
­ 29 ­
PREPARATIONFORGRADUATEAND PROFESSIONALSTUDY
Although the principle function of Williams is to provide a broad and solid liberal education that will be
of lasting value no matter what the vocation a student may pursue, the College recognizes that no funda-
mental conflict exists between a liberal education and preparation for a professional career; on the contrary,
a foundation of liberal studies increases professional competence in any field. A student should plan his or
her program of study so as to provide as much educational breadth and enrichment as circumstances per-
mit. A student should also give serious consideration to post-college plans early in the college career.
Each departmental major provides the foundation for graduate study in the corresponding field. Stu-
dents should consult the departmental programs listed under "Courses of Instruction" for requirements,
and for special advice regarding preparation for graduate study. Students should also consult with the ap-
propriate departmental chairman or the special faculty advisors as early as possible in their college careers
to make certain they have taken all the necessary factors into consideration.
Particular attention is called to the foreign language requirements of graduate study. Candidates for the
degree of doctor of philosophy at almost all graduate schools are required to have a reading knowledge of
both French and German. Under certain circumstances another language may replace French. Many grad-
uate schools require also a knowledge of Latin for students of English and Romantic Languages. Candi-
dates for the master of arts degree are required to have a reading knowledge of either French or German.
Students should consult departmental chairmen or the faculty advisors for the requirements in specific
fields of study.
Visual Arts
Although requirements set by various art and architectural schools differ, the basic requirements for a
variety of visual arts fields are summarized in the pamphlet "Guide to the Studio Art Major," available
from the Department of Art office in the W.L.S. Spencer Studio Art Building or the Office of Admission. A
summary of the requirements of all art and architecture schools offering Master of Arts and/or Master of
Fine Arts is available in the bulletin of the College Art Association (CAA), "MFA Programs in the Visual
Arts: A Directory." According to the current edition:
Admission to MFA programs should be based on the nature, extent, and quality of undergraduate
preparation, including courses in studio, art history, and other academic subjects. Quality of studio
preparation can best be judged on the basis of careful evaluation of work done at the undergraduate
level; therefore, a portfolio review (usually represented by slides) is regarded as an absolute necessity
in the admission process.
While many institutions consider the BFA to be the standard qualifying degree, the fact that the
applicant has attended a BA- or BS-granting institution does not necessarily rule out acceptance in
most MFA programs. Whatever the undergraduate degree, most entering graduate students tend not
to be completely prepared in one or more of the areas cited above and will require remedial make-up
work...
Some institutions use the MA degree as a qualifying prerequisite for final acceptance into MFA
candidacy, allowing the student to apply the earned credits toward the higher degree. (pp. 139-40)
Students are advised to take into consideration not only current minimum requirements but also recom-
mended courses. A summary of the essential information required for curricular planning may be found in
the "Guide to the Studio Art Major" and in the pamphlet "Choosing First Year Courses."
Business Administration
Williams offers no special course in preparation for a business career for graduate study in business
administration. The qualities which are important to succeed in business, and which graduate business
schools are seeking, are an ability to reason and to express oneself logically and clearly in written and oral
exposition; a good understanding of the physical and social environment in which business operates; a
solid background in quantitative skills; and an appreciation of human motivations and goals. This means
that a broad liberal arts program is preferred over a highly specialized one.
Within this broad prescription it may be desirable to have at least one year of economics and one year of
mathematics (including statistics and calculus). For those interested in production management or opera-
Preparation for Graduate and Professional Study
­ 30 ­
tion research, additional work in any quantitative course and/or a course in computer science would be
helpful.
But there is no particular major at Williams that is designated as preparation for the business profession.
Students interested in futures in business are encouraged to undertake a broad educational program in the
arts, humanities, and sciences. It is important that one gets involved in extra-curricular activities and that
one holds a leadership position.
Students interested in graduate work in business administration should consult with Fatma Kassamali at
the Office of Career Counseling.
Engineering
Many Williams graduates enjoy productive careers in engineering, applied science, or technical man-
agement. Successful engineers need to be able to communicate effectively, reason logically, and under-
stand both the technical and the social dimensions of a problem. A prospective engineer should pursue a
broad liberal arts education at Williams, with a strong grounding in basic science and mathematics. Most
often he or she will complete a Williams B.A. majoring in one of the sciences (usually physics, chemistry,
mathematics, or computer science) and then go to an engineering school for professional training leading
to a master's degree or doctorate in engineering. While it may be necessary to make up a few undergradu-
ate engineering courses, the opportunities at Williams to participate in scientific research and the breadth of
a liberal arts education prepare Williams graduates to succeed in engineering graduate study and in their
careers.
The booklet "Choosing First Year Courses" contains a list of Williams courses recommended to pro-
spective engineers. Students interested in engineering also have the opportunity to take undergraduate en-
gineering courses at other institutions. Williams maintains formal exchange programs with California
Institute of Technology, Thayer School of Engineering at Dartmouth College, and Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute. Williams students can arrange to study at one of these leading engineering schools for one or two
semesters, typically during the junior year. Individual arrangements may be possible at other engineering
schools. The 3-2 program offers another opportunity to study engineering at the undergraduate level. For
information about these opportunities, please see the sections of this catalog titled "Exchange Programs"
and "Combined Program in Liberal Arts and Engineering."
The pre-engineering advisor, Professor Sarah Bolton, will be happy to help plan course selections and to
discuss the possible paths to a career in engineering.
Law
Williams graduates regularly proceed directly to law schools on the strength of their liberal education.
No special courses are presented for pre-law students.
Students intending to study law should consult with the Pre-Law Advisor, Mary M. Winston, at the
Office of Career Counseling.
The Health Professions
Although a majority of students consider themselves "pre-med", many actually pursue careers in public
health, physical therapy, and dentistry (to name a few). Consequently, the Health Professions Office re-
cently expanded its services to include resources and information on a variety of careers in healthcare.
General information is available online at http://www.williams.edu/admin­depts/hp. However, it is not
wise to rely solely on this site throughout the four years spent at Williams.
Students interested in the health professions should pursue a broad liberal arts education at Williams.
With early planning, it is possible to choose from any number of majors, while still meeting the require-
ments for a health professions program. And, since program requirements vary from school to school, stu-
dents are advised to consult with the Health Professions Advisor to determine the required and recom-
mended courses for specific areas of interest.
The "Choosing First Year Courses" booklet contains a list of Williams Courses required for students
interested in applying to medical school. The courses are similar to those required for other health profes-
sions, but be sure you're taking the correct courses for your program by contacting Susan Salko, Health
Professions Advisor, in the Thompson Biology Lab Building.
Preparation for Graduate and Professional Study
­ 31 ­
Teaching and Research
The most important qualification for careers in teaching at any level is proficiency in a major. Students
interested in college teaching and research should prepare themselves at Williams for graduate work in the
subjects of their choice, whereas those interested in teaching at the elementary or secondary level should
plan to meet certification while an undergraduate or to proceed from a sound undergraduate major to a
Master of Arts in Teaching program in a reputable graduate school. (Some states and many private schools
appoint teachers without certification.) Opportunities are available during Winter Study for teaching in-
ternships at the elementary and secondary level. Certification is not required if one is interested in teaching
in private schools.
Students interested in college teaching should consult with the chairs of the departments in which they
intend to major. Those interested in teaching at the elementary and secondary level should consult with the
Director of the Program in Teaching or the Office of Career Counseling.
Religious Study
Students intending to go to theological seminary are not required to pursue a special course. Various
majors are acceptable and most liberal arts courses can be useful to the prospective minister, priest, rabbi,
or teacher of religion. However, given the increasing variety of complexity of post-graduate vocational
choices in the field of religion, it is strongly recommended that the preseminarian secure a basic foundation
in the study of religion while an undergraduate. Students contemplating advanced academic work in
religion preparatory to a career of teaching and scholarship should give serious consideration to concentrat-
ing their undergraduate studies in religion.
Anyone interested in graduate programs in religion should consult with the faculty advisor in that field.
Students interested in professional training and/or ordination are encouraged to speak to the Chaplains.
­ 32 ­
GRADUATE PROGRAMS AT WILLIAMS
Master of Arts in Development Economics
The Center for Development Economics, which opened at Williams College in 1960 with the support of
a grant from the Ford Foundation, offers an intensive one-year program in economic analysis and quantita-
tive techniques leading to the degree of Master of Arts in Development Economics.
The program is specifically designed for economists from developing countries who are already em-
barked on professional careers in public agencies. It includes required courses in development economics,
international trade and finance, monetary and fiscal policy, econometrics, and planning and policy analysis.
Center Fellows choose among research seminars in such fields as structural adjustment, population issues,
human resource development, external trade policies, agricultural development, and sustainable develop-
ment.
Fellows are normally nominated by the public agencies from which they will be on leave. A candidate
must have a B.A. or B. Sc. degree of honors quality in Economics, have two or more years of relevant
work experience, and have an effective command of spoken and written English.
Juniors and seniors majoring in economics or political economy who have special interest in economic
development or in a particular area of the world may, with the consent of the Chairof theCenter and of the
individual instructor, satisfy some of their degree requirements by taking courses at the Center.
All communications relating to the degree of Master of Arts in Development Economics should be ad-
dressed to the CDE, Assistant Director, 1065 Main Street, Williams College, Williamstown, Massachusetts
01267.
Master of Arts in the History of Art
In cooperation with the Sterling and Francine Clark Art Institute, Williams College offers a two-year
course of study leading to the degree of Master of Arts in the History of Art. The objective of the program
is to offer to a small number of students a thorough professional preparation for careers in teaching and
museums, and to enable them to pursue further research whether independently or at other institutions of-
fering higher degrees. The curriculum consists of seminars in art historical subjects and an intensive study
of foreign languages in the context of the general literature of art. Problems of criticism, connoisseurship,
and conservation arising from the study of original works of art are fundamental to the program, and op-
portunities are provided for practical experience in museum work at the Clark Art Institute and at the Wil-
liams College Museum of Art. The study of primary materials is further extended by field trips to other
collections. The degree is normally awarded after two years of resident graduate study. To earn the degree,
students must take ten courses, at least six must be graduate seminars (including 504). In connection with
the preparation of a paper for the Graduate Symposium, students will register for an eleventh course (ArtH
509), to be graded pass/fail, in their fourth semester. A demonstration of proficiency in reading two foreign
languages is required. Of these two, German is required, and French is recommended. In January of the
first year, students participate in a European study trip with a member of the faculty; in January of the
second year, students must complete a Qualifying Paper. In addition to all course work, students must, at
the end of the second year, either pass an oral examination in a declared field of concentration or present a
shortened version of the Qualifying Paper in a graduate symposium to be held in late May. To enter the
program a successful applicant must have been awarded the degree of Bachelor of Arts or its equivalent
from an accredited institution. An undergraduate major in art is not required for acceptance to the program.
For further information, write: The Director, Graduate Program in the History of Art, Box 8, Williams-
town, Massachusetts 01267, telephone (413)458-9545, or email gradart@williams.edu.
­ 33 ­
PRIZES AND AWARDS
The names of persons to whom awards have been made in 1999-2000 are given in the back of the
catalog.
George Olmsted Jr., Class of 1924 Prizes
Awarded for excellence in teaching to four secondary school teachers nominated by members of the
senior class.
Prizes in Special Studies
JOHN SABIN ADRIANCE PRIZE IN CHEMISTRY. From a fund given by John Sabin Adriance, 1882, a cash
prize is given to the student who has maintained the highest rank in all courses offered by the department of
chemistry.
ROBERT G. BARROW MEMORIAL PRIZE FOR MUSIC COMPOSITION. Established in 1989 in memory of Robert
Barrow, professor of music at Williams 1939-1976, to be awarded to a qualified music student on the basis
of his/her accomplishment in music composition at Williams College and on promise as a composer.
ERASTUS C. BENEDICT PRIZES. From a sum of money given by Erastus C. Benedict, 1821, once an
instructor in the College, first and second cash prizes are awarded for excellence in biology, French, Ger-
man, Latin, Greek, history and mathematics.
RUSSELL H. BOSTERT THESIS PRIZE IN HISTORY. A cash prize established in 1990 by Rodger L. Headrick
1958 in honor of Professor Bostert, Stanfield Professor of History, on the occasion of his retirement after
forty-two years as a member of the Williams faculty, and awarded to an Honors student for the best thesis in
American History, with special consideration to inter-American relations or Sino-American relations.
KENNETH L. BROWN PRIZE IN AMERICAN STUDIES. From a fund established by his parents in memory of
Kenneth L. Brown, 1947, a cash prize is awarded annually to a senior majoring in American Studies.
NATHAN BROWN PRIZE IN HISTORY. In honor of Nathan Brown, a member of the class of 1827 who was a
distinguished linguist and missionary to several Asian countries, the department of history awards a book to
the first-year student or sophomore who writes the best essay in a course in African, Asian, Latin American,
or Middle Eastern history.
DAVID TAGGART CLARK PRIZE INLATIN. Established by a bequest from the estate of David Taggart Clark, a
cash prize is awarded annually to a sophomore or first-year student who excels in Latin declaration or reci-
tation.
CONANT-HARRINGTON PRIZE IN BIOLOGY. A cash prize founded by the class of 1893 in memory of two of
their classmates is awarded upon the recommendation of the chairman of the department of biology for
outstanding work done in biology.
DORIS DE KEYSERLINGKPRIZE INRUSSIAN. A book awarded annually by the department of Russian in hon-
or of Doris de Keyserlingk, teacher of Russian at Williams College from 1958 to 1971, to a student who has
earned distinction in Russian studies.
GARRETT WRIGHT DE VRIES MEMORIAL PRIZE. From a fund in memory of Garrett De Vries, 1932, given
by his father, Dr. Joseph C. De Vries, a cash prize is awarded annually on recommendation of the depart-
ment of Romance languages for excellence in Spanish.
JEAN DONATI STUDENT EMPLOYEE AWARD IN MUSIC. Established in 1988 by colleagues and friends, in rec-
ognition of Jean Donati's service to the music department in management of both office and concert opera-
tions (1966-1988). Awarded to a senior who has done the most for the music department as a student em-
ployee during his/her years at Williams.
HENRY A. DWIGHT BOTANICAL PRIZE. From afund created by the bequest of Nellie A. Dwight to establish
a prize in memory of her father, Henry A. Dwight, 1829, a cash prize is awarded annually to the student
who maintains the highest standing in botany or a related area of study.
ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES COMMITTEEAWARD. For outstanding contributions to the Environmental Studies
community at Williams.
FREEMAN FOOTE PRIZE IN GEOLOGY. Established in 1986 by a group of alumni in honor of Professor
Emeritus of Geology Freeman Foote. For an outstanding senior thesis in Geology.
ROBERT W. FRIEDRICHS AWARD IN SOCIOLOGY. Established in 1986 by parents of a graduating senior, to be
awarded to a senior major for excellence in sociology.
GILBERT W. GABRIEL MEMORIAL PRIZE IN THEATRE. From a fund established in 1953 by a group of friends
in memory of Gilbert W. Gabriel, 1912, a cash prize is awarded to that senior who has made the most nota-
ble contribution to the advancement of theatre at Williams College. The committee of award includes the
director of the Adams Memorial Theatre, one other faculty member, and the president of the Gargoyle So-
ciety.
Prizes and Awards
­ 34 ­
SAM GOLDBERG COLLOQUIUM PRIZES. Established in 1985 by a gift from Professor Sam Goldberg of Ob-
erlin College. For the best colloquium presentations in mathematics and in computer science.
FRANK C. GOODRICH 1945 AWARD IN CHEMISTRY. Estabalished by Mrs. L. Carrington Goodrich to honor
her son, Professor Frank C. Goodrich '45. An award in Chemistry given each year to a student (or students),
chosen by the chemistry faculty who demonstrated excellence in chemistry research. This award supports
travel to professional meetings where the student may present his or her research.
WILLIAM C. GRANT, JR. PRIZE IN BIOLOGY. A cash award to recognize that graduating biology major who
has demonstrated the highest excellence and greatest insights in integrating different fields within the bio-
logical sciences.
FREDERICK C. HAGEDORN, JR. PREMEDICAL PRIZE. From afund created in 1971 by friends and the family of
Frederick C. Hagedorn, Jr., 1971, in his memory, a cash prize is awarded to a premedical student entering
the senior class, on the advice of the Faculty Premedical Advisory Committee, "in recognition of academic
achievement and the embodiment of the principles of the medical profession."
THOMAS G. HARDIE III MEMORIAL PRIZE IN ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES. Established in 1976 by friends and
members of his family in memory of Thomas G. Hardie III, 1978. Awarded for the best student work in
environmental studies judged in an annual competition. The prize consists of a certificate and publication of
the work of the Tom Hardie Memorial Series.
CHARLES W. HUFFORD BOOK PRIZE. Established in 1988 in memory of Charles W. Hufford, 1989, by his
family, friends, and classmates and awarded to the student teaching assistant in Political Science 206 who
has served with the same high enthusiasm and excellence exhibited in that capacity by Charles Hufford.
CHARLES W. HUFFORD MEMORIAL FELLOWSHIP. Established in 1988 in memory of Charles W. Hufford,
1989, by his family, friends, and classmates and awarded to a member of the junior class to support inde-
pendent research or work in the field of political economy or political science during the summer before the
senior year.
ARTHUR JUDSON PRIZE IN MUSIC. Established in 1984 by a gift of $10,000 from the Arthur Judson
Foundation. Selection to be made by the Faculty of the Music Department. Awarded to a student for
achievement in music, with preference given to those "choosing or planning a career in Music Manage-
ment or Music Administration."
ARTHUR C. KAUFMANN PRIZE IN ENGLISH. In memory of Arthur C. Kaufmann, 1899, a fund has been es-
tablished by his fellow workers for a book prize awarded annually on the recommendation of the English
department for excellence in English.
MUHAMMAD KENYATTA COMMUNITY SERVICE PRIZE. Established in 1993 to honor the memory of Muham-
mad Kenyatta, '66, this prize will be awarded each year to the graduating senior whose undergraduate ex-
perience reflects outstanding community service involvement with Berkshire County.
WILLIAM W. KLEINHANDLER PRIZE FOR EXCELLENCE IN MUSIC. Established in 1991 in memory of William
Kleinhandler '50 as an annual prize for excellence by a student in the department of Music.
RICHARD W. KROUSE PRIZE IN POLITICAL SCIENCE. From a fund established in 1987 by the political science
department in memory of Professor Richard W. Krouse (1975-1986), awarded annually to a junior or se-
nior who has done distinguished work in Political Science and who best exemplifies the intellectual and
humane qualities that characterized the life of Professor Krouse.
JACK LARNED INTERNATIONAL MANAGEMENT PRIZES. In memory of Jack Larned, 1942, two annual prizes
are awarded for student papers of superior quality dealing with the management of development in govern-
ments and private or public enterprises in African, Asian, or Latin American countries. One award will be
for undergraduate students at Williams. The other will be for graduate students at the Center for Develop-
ment Economics. Selection of the winners will be made by faculty members who specialize in economic
development and related fields.
LINEN SENIOR PRIZES IN ASIAN STUDIES. Three prizes to graduating seniors who achieve distinction and
show outstanding promise. One prize to an Asian Studies major; one prize each to any senior, whether a
major in the Department of Asian Studies or not, who has taken Chinese language and Japanese language
during her/his Williams career.
LINEN SENIOR THESIS PRIZE IN ASIAN STUDIES. Prize to a graduating senior who writes an outstanding hon-
ors thesis, with preference given to majors in the Department of Asian Studies, but also open to non-majors
who write a highest honors thesis, with a substantial focus on Asia, supervised by a member of the Asian
Studies faculty.
H. GANSE LITTLE, JR. PRIZE IN RELIGION. Established in 1997 by former students to honor Professor Little,
who taught in the religion department at Williams from 1963-1997, to be awarded to a senior major for
excellence in the study of religion.
DAVID N. MAJOR 1981 PRIZE IN GEOLOGY. Established in 1984 in memory of David N. Major, 1981, who
died in an accident aboard an oceanographic vessel in June 1980. Awarded to an outstanding graduating
senior in geology.
Prizes and Awards
­ 35 ­
LEVERETT MEARS PRIZE IN CHEMISTRY. From a fund established by a member of the class of 1906, a cash
prize is awarded to that senior majoring in chemistry who has been admitted to graduate study in the medi-
cal sciences or to medical school, and who, in the opinion of the members of the chemistry department, has
had a distinguished record in chemistry and shows outstanding promise.
WILLIS I. MILHAM PRIZE IN ASTRONOMY. Established in 1968 by Betsey M. Milham, a cash prize is
awarded to a senior who is majoring in science or mathematics, is a member of Phi Beta Kappa and has a
grade of `A' in at least one year course in the department of astronomy.
JOHN W. MILLER PRIZE IN PHILOSOPHY. A group of grateful alumni who studied under Professor John W.
Miller have established a fund as a continuing symbol of their appreciation of his teaching. The income
shall be used to purchase a book prize to be awarded to the individual selected by the chairman of the phi-
losophy department as the outstanding philosophy student for the year.
MORGANPRIZE INMATHEMATICS. A cash prize established in 1993 by Frank Morgan, Professor of Mathe-
matics, and awarded at commencement to a senior major for accomplishment and promise in Applied
Mathematics, Statistics, or Mathematics teaching as judged by members of the department.
RICHARD AGER NEWHALL BOOK PRIZE IN EUROPEAN HISTORY. In honor of Richard Ager Newhall, distin-
guished historian and teacher of history at Williams College, 1924-1956, the department of history awards a
book to the first-year student or sophomore who writes the best essay in an introductory course in European
History.
JAMES ORTON AWARD IN ANTHROPOLOGY. Established in commemoration of James Orton, 1855, a natural-
ist and explorer, to be awarded to a senior major for excellence in Anthropology.
FREDERICK M. PEYSER PRIZE IN PAINTING. Awarded annually by a faculty selection committee to a student
for a distinguished painting.
JAMES LATHROP RICE PRIZE IN CLASSICAL LANGUAGES. From the bequest of James Lathrop Rice, 1884, for
the encouragement of Latin and Greek scholarship, a cash prize is awarded to a junior or senior for distin-
guished work in Latin studies, and a similar prize is awarded for distinguished work in Greek.
ROBERT F. ROSENBURG PRIZE FOR EXCELLENCE IN ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES. Established in 1989 and
awarded to a member of the graduating class in recognition of outstanding scholarship, potential for solving
local, national, or international environmental problems, and strong prospects for leadership in the environ-
mental community.
ROBERT F. ROSENBURG PRIZE IN MATHEMATICS. Established in 1991 from the bequest of Robert F. Rosen-
burg, 1937, a cash prize is awarded by the mathematics faculty to a senior for excellence in mathematics.
SIDNEY A. SABBETH PRIZE IN POLITICAL ECONOMY. Established in 1988 by Michael G. Sabbeth, 1969, in
memory of his father, a cash prize for a senior majoring in political economy who best combines the disci-
plines of political science and economics with a sense of compassion and respect for the dignity of the hu-
man spirit. The selection to be made by the chair of the program after consultation with the Advisory Com-
mittee.
BRUCE SANDERSON PRIZE IN ARCHITECTURE. From a fund established by the friends, family, and class-
mates in memory of Bruce Sanderson, 1956, who died while serving in the United States Navy. Since
Bruce Sanderson found his special interest at Williams and at graduate school in architecture, a cash prize is
awarded to the senior who, in the opinion of the faculty members who teach architecture, shows the greatest
achievement and promise in this field.
RUTH SCOTT SANFORD MEMORIAL PRIZE IN THEATRE. Established in 1969 by Marshall D. Sanford, to be
awarded to a graduating senior with demonstrated ability in the theatre, with preference given to a candidate
who intends graduate study in theatre, the selection being made by the theatre faculty.
RUTH SCOTT SANFORD MEMORIAL FELLOWSHIP IN THEATRE. Established in 1969 by Marshall D. Sanford, to
be awarded to a Williams student for graduate study in the theatre or for participation as an apprentice or
assistant with the Williamstown Summer Theatre. The selection is made by the director of the Adams Me-
morial Theatre and the director of the Williamstown Summer Theatre.
SCHEFFEY AWARD. This award, in the name of Lewis and Andrew J. W. Scheffey (the first director of the
Center for Environmental Studies) is given in recognition of outstanding environmental leadership.
ROBERT C. L. SCOTT PRIZE FOR GRADUATE STUDY IN HISTORY. A cash prize from a fund established by for-
mer students of Professor Robert C. L. Scott to honor his years of service to Williams and awarded to a
senior Honors students in history who is planning to attend graduate school in the field of American or
European history.
SENTINELS OF THE REPUBLIC ADVANCED STUDY PRIZE. From a fund established in 1944 by the Sentinels of
the Republic, this prize designates an unusually gifted senior as the Sentinels of the Republic Scholar, who
receives a substantial stipend to cover costs associated with a year-long advanced research project in Amer-
ican politics under the direction of the Political Science faculty.
EDWARD GOULD SHUMWAY PRIZE IN ENGLISH. In memory of Edward Gould Shumway, 1871, a fund has
been established by his daughter, Mary Shumway Adams, from which a cash prize is awarded annually to a
senior majoring in English who has, in the judgment of the English department, done the most distin-
guished work in English literature.
Prizes and Awards
­ 36 ­
JAMES F. SKINNER PRIZE IN CHEMISTRY. Established in 1988 by the family, friends, and former students of
James F. Skinner, 1961, Professor of Chemistry 1966-1988, in memory of his dedicated service to his stu-
dents, Williams College, the chemistry department, and the community. A cash prize is awarded annually
to a member of the graduating class who has been admitted to graduate study in chemistry, has had a distin-
guished record in chemistry, and shows outstanding promise for both teaching and scholarship.
THEODORE CLARKE SMITH BOOK PRIZE IN AMERICAN HISTORY. In honor of Theodore Clarke Smith, distin-
guished historian and teacher of history at Williams College, 1903-1938 and 1943-44, the department of
history awards a book to the first-year student or sophomore who writes the best essay in a course in Ameri-
can History.
HOWARD P. STABLER PRIZE IN PHYSICS. Awarded to the student who has demonstrated initiative, creativity,
perseverance, and achievement, especially in a senior thesis. The award is named for Professor Emeritus
Howard Stabler. It was established in gratitude for Professor Stabler's excellent direction of so many honors
theses in Physics over the years.
SHIRLEY STANTON PRIZE IN MUSIC. Established in 1982 by family and friends in memory of Shirley Stan-
ton, who served the college community through the music department and the Conference Office. Awarded
to that student who has best fulfilled his or her potential in music while at Williams.
CARL VAN DUYNE PRIZE IN ECONOMICS. Established in 1983 by family, colleagues, friends, and the Philip
H. Seaman Fund in memory of Carl Van Duyne, Associate Professor of Economics at Williams who died in
1983. Selection made by the economics department faculty from among juniors who are economics or
political economy majors who have exhibited "not only a technical excellence in economics but also the
inquisitive mind and motivation of a true scholar." This prize provides a "stipend for the senior year as well
as another for the first year of graduate school if the recipient goes on to do graduate work in economics. In
addition, the Van Duyne Scholar receives a stipend if he is able to devote the summer before the senior year
to full-time research in Economics."
LASZLO G. VERSENYI MEMORIAL PRIZE. In memory of Laszlo G. Versenyi, Mark Hopkins Professor of
Intellectual and Moral Philosophy, who taught at Williams from 1958 until 1988. This is a cash prize
awarded by the Philosophy department to a senior who is planning to attend graduate school in Philosophy.
Special consideration is given to students who plan to make Latin, Greek, or German apart of their continu-
ing study of Philosophy, in recognition of Professor Versenyi's brilliant abilities in those languages.
HAROLD H. WARREN PRIZE IN CHEMISTRY. Established in 1984 by Peter W. Wege, 1971 in recognition of
Professor Harold H. Warren's outstanding contribution to the department of chemistry from 1950 to 1984.
Awarded for excellence in introductory organic chemistry.
KARL E. WESTON PRIZE FOR DISTINCTION IN ART. In appreciation of Karl Weston's, 1896, great service to
Williams College as teacher and as Director of the Lawrence Art Museum, a book prize is awarded each
year at commencement to a senior majoring in art whose work has shown unusual brilliance, imagination,
and industry.
WITTE PROBLEM SOLVING PRIZE. Awarded to a mathematics student who has demonstrated creativity and
ingenuity in solving challenging mathematical questions appearing either in class or in related activities.
Essay Prizes
GAIUS C. BOLIN, 1889, ESSAY PRIZE IN AFRO-AMERICAN STUDIES. A cash prize established in memory of the
first black graduate of Williams and prominent Poughkeepsie lawyer, for the best essay submitted by a
Williams undergraduate in the field of Afro-American Studies.
THE MICHAEL DAVITT BELL PRIZE. This prize established by Michael Davitt Bell, Professor of English
and American literature, annually recognizes the best essay on a topic in American literature. The essay can
be a Senior Honors Thesis or any other outstanding American literature essay submitted by a Williams
student.
BULLOCK POETRY PRIZE. A cash prize awarded by the department of English for the best poem or group
of poems by an undergraduate. The prize was made possible originally by a bequest of Mrs. Mary Cum-
mings Eudy, a former member of the Academy, and is now continued through the generosity of an anony-
mous donor. Twenty-four colleges and universities in various parts of the United States participate.
HENRY RUTGERS CONGER MEMORIAL LITERARY PRIZE. From a fund established by members of the class of
1899, in memory of their classmate, Henry Rutgers Conger, a cash prize is awarded annually for the best
contribution of prose or poetry submitted to a literary magazine published by the undergraduates of the
College, as judged by a committee from the department of English.
ARTHUR B. GRAVES PRIZES. Established by Arthur B. Graves, 1858, for the best six essays prepared by
seniors on subjects assigned by the following departments: art, economics, history, philosophy, political
science, religion. The fund also provides a cash award or awards for the best report or reports delivered in
the senior political economy project.
Prizes and Awards
­ 37 ­
C. DAVID HARRIS JR. BOOK PRIZE IN POLITICAL SCIENCE. In memory of C. David Harris Jr., 1963, who died
during his college career, a book is awarded annually to the Political Science major who writes the best
paper in Political Science 103, 206, 231, or 232. The prize was donated by his classmates through the Wil-
liams College Social Council, of which David was a member, and the winner is selected by the political
science department.
RICHARD LATHERS ESSAY PRIZE IN GOVERNMENT. From a fund given by Richard Lathers, 1877, a prize giv-
en to the senior who writes the best essay of not less than one thousand words on the duty or relation of
citizens to the government.
THEURSULAPRESCOTT ESSAYPRIZE INPOLITICAL SCIENCE. Established in 1999 from a bequest to the Politi-
cal Science Department given by Ursula Prescott, a Williamstown resident who audited many political sci-
ence classes in her retirement, acash prize is awarded to the senior who writes the best essay on internation-
al relations or comparative politics.
ROBERT C. L. SCOTT PRIZE IN HISTORY. A cash prize from a fund established by former students of Profes-
sor Robert C. L. Scott to honor his years of service to Williams and awarded to the best senior Honors thesis
in the field of American or European history.
SENTINELS OF THE REPUBLIC ESSAY PRIZE IN GOVERNMENT. Established in 1944 by a gift from the Sentinels
of the Republic, a cash prize awarded by the political science department to the student who has written the
best essay in the course of the year on some subject relating to the American federal system of government,
the preservation of civil liberty, the maintenance of free enterprise, and the proper distribution of powers
and responsibilities between the Federal and State Governments.
STANLEYR. STRAUSSPRIZE IN ENGLISH. Established in 1985 by friends of Stanley R. Strauss, 1936, in hon-
or of his 70th birthday on June 3, 1985. Awarded to a member of the senior class majoring in English who
has written the most outstanding critical Honors thesis, judged on the quality of research as well as on the
quality of exposition.
WILLIAM BRADFORD TURNER PRIZE IN HISTORY. From the income of a fund given by the family of William
Bradford Turner, 1914, who was killed in action in France in September, 1918, a cash prize is awarded for
the best thesis or essay in the field of American history or institutions.
BENJAMIN B. WAINWRIGHT PRIZE IN ENGLISH. From a bequest of Benjamin B. Wainwright, 1920, a cash
prize for the best short story submitted by a student, to be judged by a committee of the department of Eng-
lish.
DAVID A. WELLS PRIZE IN POLITICAL ECONOMY. From a bequest of David A. Wells, 1847, a prize is
awarded for an essay upon a subject in political economy. Competition is limited to seniors and to graduates
of not more than three years' standing. The successful essay may be printed and circulated by the College.
General Prizes
CHARLES R. ALBERTI, 1919, AWARD. Established in 1994 by gifts from his son and grandson, Charles R.
Alberti '50 and C. Christopher Alberti '75, an annual cash prize for a member of the student body who has
significantly enhanced the sense of community on campus and who has the potential for doing so in wider
communities in the future.
STERLING B. BROWN, 1922, CITIZENSHIPPRIZE. Initially established in 1974 by three members of the Class
of 1974 and carried on by the Afro-American Studies Program, this prize honors Sterling B. Brown, Class
of 1922, retired Professor of English at Howard University. Awarded to the graduating senior whose under-
graduate experience reflects outstanding leadership and involvement in campus affairs, academic achieve-
ment, and communication of new ideas, with preference to be given to members of the Black Student
Union.
GROSVENOR MEMORIAL CUP. Given by the members of the Interfraternity Council of 1931 in memory of
their fellow member, Allan Livingston Grosvenor. Awarded annually to the junior who has best demon-
strated concern for the college community and beyond through extensive dedicated service and who has
served with the utmost integrity and reliability. The committee of award consists of the chairman and the
secretary of the College Council and three other members selected by the Council.
JAMES C. KELLOGG III AWARD. Established by his friends in memory of James C. Kellogg III,
1937, the award is to be given annually to a Williams graduate or nongraduate for a truly distinguished
career in any field.
JAMES C. ROGERSON CUP AND MEDAL. Presented by Mrs. James C. Rogerson and the class of 1892 in
memory of Mr. Rogerson, a member of that class. The cup, a permanent possession of the College, is
awarded annually for one year by the President of the College to an alumnus or to a senior for service and
loyalty to the College and for distinction in any field of endeavor; a bronze medal is awarded for permanent
possession of the recipient.
WILLIAM BRADFORD TURNER CITIZENSHIP PRIZE. From a fund established in memory of William Bradford
Turner, 1914, who was killed in action in France in September, 1918, a cash prize is awarded to the member
of the graduating class who, in the judgment of the faculty and of the graduating class, has best fulfilled her
or his obligations to the College, to fellow students, and to self. The committee of award, appointed by the
President of the College, is composed jointly of faculty members and members of the graduating class.
Prizes and Awards
­ 38 ­
WILLIAMS COLLEGE COMMUNITY BUILDER OF THE YEAR. Given to the graduating senior who demonstrates
outstanding leadership in developing Multiculturalism and building community as a Williams College
Community Builder.
WILLIAMS COLLEGE MULTICULTURAL CENTER STUDENT OF THE YEARS. Given to the graduating senior who,
in his/her four years at Williams, personified the tenets and ideals of Multiculturalism and through his/her
activism worked towards its realization.
Rhetorical Prizes
DEWEY PRIZE. A cash prize, founded by Francis Henshaw Dewey, 1840, is awarded to the member of
the graduating class who presents the most creditable oration in point of composition and delivery at the
commencement exercises.
MURIELB. ROWEPRIZE. In appreciation to Muriel B. Rowe for nearly aquarter of a century of dedication
and commitment to The Williams College Chapter of the Phi Beta Kappa Honor Society, the prize is
awarded annually to the Phi Beta Kappa Speaker.
ELIZUR SMITH RHETORICAL PRIZE. Established in the year 1866, this cash prize is awarded each year to
encourage excellence in public speaking.
A.V.W. VAN VECHTEN PRIZE. A cash prize established by A. V. W. Van Vechten, 1847, awarded for im-
promptu speaking. The assignment of this prize is made by a committee of the faculty on the basis of a
public competition.
Athletic Prizes
FRANCIS E. BOWKER, JR. SWIMMING PRIZE. A cup given by the late Francis E. Bowker, Jr., 1908, on which
is engraved the name of the first-year student of the men's swimming team who exhibited high qualities of
performance, leadership, and sportsmanship.
JAMES R.BRIGGS '60BASEBALL AWARD. Presented annually to a member of the varsity baseball team re-
gardless of graduating class who, in the opinion of his teammates, best embodies the ideals of leadership,
teamwork, and the values of the student-athlete.
BELVIDERE BROOKS MEMORIAL MEDAL. From a fund established by alumni of the College, friends of
Captain Belvidere Brooks, 1910, who was killed in action at Villesavoye, France, August 21, 1918, this
medal is presented to the members of the team whose playing during the season has been of the greatest
credit to the College. No person shall receive the medal more than once.
BOURNE-CHAFFEE WOMEN'S TENNIS AWARD. Presented in 1978 by members and former members of the
Williams Women's Tennis Team for the varsity player who best embodies the qualities of leadership, skill,
spirit, and sportsmanship that exemplify the traditions of women's tennis at Williams College.
BRZEZINSKI TRACK PRIZE. Awarded annually to the female track athlete who has exhibited loyalty to the
team, determination, perseverance under adversity, and hard working dedication to reach the maximum of
her potential goal.
J. EDWIN BULLOCK WRESTLING TROPHY. Presented in 1960 by his fellow coaches and awarded annually
to that varsity wrestler who because of his superior performance, courage, and loyalty has been of credit to
his college.
W. MARRIOTT CANBY ATHLETIC SCHOLARSHIP PRIZE. A cash prize established by W. Marriott Canby, 1891,
and awarded at commencement to the senior who has attained the highest average standing in scholarship
during his or her course. The recipient must have been in college since the beginning of his or her junior
year, and must have represented the College in a recognized intercollegiate athletic contest.
CLASS OF 1981 BASKETBALL AWARD. Established to promote excellence in the sport, this award is pres-
ented to that woman who best combines the attributes of skill, desire, leadership, and coachability in order
to help further the team's progress toward its goals. The award is a pewter bowl, and the athlete will have
her name inscribed on a permanent plaque.
CLASS OF 1986 MOST IMPROVED AWARD. Awarded to that member of the men's lacrosse team who in his
second year of varsity competition has shown the most improvement.
CLASS OF 1925 SCHOLAR-ATHLETE AWARD. Presented in 1977 by the Class of 1925. Awarded annually to
that senior woman athlete whose commitment and excellence in athletics and scholarship are an inspiration
to the Williams community. The recipient will have her name inscribed on a permanent trophy and receive
a replica for her possession. The selection committee consists of the Dean, the Chairman of the Faculty
Committee on Athletics, coaches of two women's teams or clubs named by the Director of Athletics, a
woman student, preferably a member of the Faculty Committee on Athletics, and the Director of Athletics.
DANIEL A. CREEM MEMORIAL TRACK PRIZE. Awarded annually to the male track athlete who has exhib-
ited loyalty to the team, determination, perseverance under adversity, and hard working dedication to reach
the maximum of his potential goal.
BRIAN DAWE AWARD. Presented to Williams College by the 1977 men's crew to show their appreciation
to Brian Dawe for his efforts in building a crew at Williams. To be awarded annually to that oarsman who,
in the opinion of his coaches, best combines those qualities necessary to achieve excellence in rowing.
Prizes and Awards
­ 39 ­
DR. I. S. DRIBBEN 1924 AWARD. Presented annually as a tribute to two Williams College golf coaches,
Richard Baxter and Rudy Goff. Awarded on the basis of dedication, sportsmanship, and perseverance.
FOX MEMORIAL SOCCER TROPHY. In tribute to the inspiring qualities of leadership and integrity which dis-
tinguished Myles Fox, 1940, Williams soccer captain, killed in action on Tulagi while serving with the
United States Marine Corps. Each year there shall be inscribed on the trophy the name of the soccer player
whose achievements of character and sportsmanship best typify those of the "Skipper." The trophy was
awarded anonymously by a Williams alumnus in 1953.
GOLF TROPHY. Presented in 1952 on the fiftieth anniversary of the first Williams golf team by four
members of that team; Richard H. Doughty, 1903, Richard W. Northrup, 1904, E. Donaldson Clapp, 1904,
and Edward A. Clapp, 1906. On this trophy is inscribed the name of the winner of the annual college golf
tournament, who also receives a smaller trophy for his permanent possession.
WILLARD E. HOYT, JR. MEMORIAL AWARD. Presented by the Alpha Delta Phi Class of 1960 in memory of
Willard E. Hoyt, Jr., 1923. Awarded annually to that senior male athlete whose spirit and superior efforts on
behalf of Williams athletics have been combined with a genuine academic interest. The selection commit-
tee consists of the Dean, a varsity coach named each year by the Director of Athletics, the President of the
Purple Key Society, the Chairman of the Faculty Committee on Athletics, and the Director of Athletics.
TORRENCE M. HUNT '44 Tennis AWARD. Presented to the men's and women's player who, by their effort,
dedication, enthusiasm and quality of play, made a significant contribution to Williams College tennis.
NICKELS W. HUSTON MEMORIAL HOCKEY AWARD. Established in 1984 by Ford Huston in memory of his
brother, Nickels W. Huston, 1950, and to be awarded annually to the first-year player who contributes the
most to the success of the hockey team.
ROBERT W. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL TROPHY. Presented by the members of Delta Kappa Epsilon in memory
of Robert Woodall Johnston, 1949. Awarded annually to the most valuable varsity baseball player.
KIELER IMPROVEMENT AWARD. Given in honor of Dr. and Mrs. Charles B. Kieler by their son to that
member of the men's squash team who works hardest during the year to improve racquet skills, physical
conditioning, and competitive spirit.
CHRIS LARSON MASON FIELD HOCKEY AWARD. Awarded to the player selected by the coach and team who
has shown great sportsmanship, skill, hard work, and team work.
WILLIAM E. MCCORMICK COACH'S AWARD. In thirty-six years, from 1953 to 1989, at the helm of the Wil-
liams College hockey program, William McCormick served as a teacher, coach, and friend to two genera-
tions of athletes. He also set a high standard of personal service to the Williams College community. In
recognition of this legacy, this award is presented each year to the member of the hockey team who best
exemplifies the qualities and ideals for which Coach McCormick stood during his years behind the bench:
leadership, loyalty, a selfless devotion to the team, a youthful delight in the game of hockey, and above all, a
strong personal commitment to community service. This award was established with a respect, affection
and deep appreciation of his former players.
MOST IMPROVED WOMEN'S LACROSSE AWARD. Presented to the player who has completed the first year of
her varsity competition and has shown the most improvement as voted by her teammates.
ROBERT B. MUIR MEN'S SWIMMING TROPHY. Presented in 1960 by Mr. and Mrs. George S. Dively, parents
of Michael A. Dively, 1961. Awarded annually to the outstanding male varsity swimmer on the basis of
performance, leadership, and sportsmanship.
ROBERT B. MUIR WOMEN'S SWIMMING TROPHY
. Presented in 1977 by Peggy and Sam Maples, 1944, a
former Williams College swimmer. Awarded annually to the outstanding woman varsity swimmer on the
basis of performance, leadership, and sportswomanship.
ANDREW D. C. OLIVER INTRAMURAL SPORTS AWARD. Established in 1980 by theClass of 1976 in honor of
Andy, who gave loyal and dedicated service to the Williams intramural program, which embodies the
ideals of sports for all students regardless of athletic skill or ability.
FRANKLIN F. OLMSTED MEMORIAL AWARD. Given in 1963 by Mrs. Franklin F. Olmsted in memory of her
husband, 1914, who was a member of the first Williams cross country team. Awarded annually to a mem-
ber of the men's cross country team on the basis of character, perseverance, and sportsmanship.
ANTHONY PLANSKY AWARD. Given in 1953 by George M. Steinbrenner III, 1952, and awarded annually
to the best varsity track athlete on the basis of performance, leadership, and sportsmanship.
LEONARD S. PRINCE MEMORIAL SWIMMING PRIZE. In memory of Leonard Sidney Prince, 1914, donated by
his father, S. S. Prince. Presented to the outstanding first-year student or sophomore woman member of the
swimming team who best exemplifies the qualities of leadership, performance, and sportswomanship.
PURPLE KEY TROPHIES. Two trophies for the senior man and senior woman letter-winners who best ex-
emplify leadership, team spirit, ability, and character. Chosen by the Director of Athletics, president of the
Purple Key, two members of the Athletic Department, and one faculty member chosen by the Purple Key.
MICHAEL E. RAKOV MEMORIAL AWARD. Presented in 1957 by the members of Alpha Delta Phi, to be
awarded annually to the member of the varsity football team who, in the opinion of his coaches, is the most
improved lineman, and who possesses superior qualities of leadership, aggressiveness, and determination.
Prizes and Awards
­ 40 ­
PAUL B. RICHARDSON SWIMMING TROPHY. Presented by Mr. Paul B. Richardson of Belmont, on which is
recorded each year the name of the male swimmer or diver winning the greatest number of points in dual
collegiate meets during the swimming season.
ROCKWOOD TENNIS CUP. In memory of Lieutenant Richard Burton Rockwood, 1916, who was killed in
action in France, his mother, Mrs. R. L. Rockwood, has given a fund to provide a cup to be awarded annual-
ly to the winner of the singles in the fall tennis tournament.
CHARLES DEWOODY SALMON AWARD. Presented in 1960 by his former teammates in memory of Captain
Charles D. Salmon, USAF, former Little All-American guard and captain of the 1951 Williams College
football team, killed in the service of his country. Awarded to that member of the varsity football squad who,
in the opinion of the coaching staff, has made the most significant contribution to the varsity football team in
his sophomore or first year of eligibility. Presented by the team of 1951 in the sincere hope that it will serve
to inspire the recipients in the years to follow to seek the same supreme qualities of performance and leader-
ship which Chuck Salmon exemplified.
SCRIBNER MEMORIAL TENNIS TROPHY. Presented in 1954 by his friends in memory of Frederick M. Scrib-
ner, Jr., 1949, killed in action in Korea on February 20, 1953, this trophy is awarded annually to the member
of the men's varsity tennis team who best combines sportsmanship, team spirit, and character.
EDWARD S. SHAW 1962 MEMORIAL SQUASH AWARD. Awarded annually to that member of the Varsity
Squash team who best exemplifies the ideals of sportsmanship, character, and team spirit.
SHULMAN TENNIS CUP. Named after Thomas W. Shulman, 1958, and to be awarded annually to that
woman who is the winner of the singles championship in the Spring tennis tournament for Williams
women.
WILLIAM E. SIMON IMPROVEMENT AWARD. Given in the name of William E. Simon by his son, William E.
Simon, Jr., 1973, to that member of the tennis team who improves most during the course of the year by
demonstrating the same dedication to maximizing one's God-given talents with a firm sense of fair play
which William E. Simon sought to instill in his son, a former member of the Williams College Tennis Team.
CAROL GIRARD SIMON SPORTSMANSHIP AWARD. Given in the name of Carol Girard and Simon her son,
Williams E. Simon, Jr., 1973, to that member of the tennis team who displays the outstanding level of good
sportsmanship which Carol Girard Simon sought to instill in her son, a former member of the Williams
College Tennis Team.
SQUASH RACQUETS PRIZES. Presented by the donors of the squash racquets building, Clark Williams,
1892, John P. Wilson, 1900, and Quincy Brent, 1901, as a permanent trophy to be competed for in an annual
elimination tournament for students.
WOMEN'S SQUASH AWARD. Established in 1980, for the most valuable player of the season as voted by
the Squash Letter Award Winners.
TEAM OF 1982 WOMEN'S VOLLEYBALL AWARD. To be presented to the player who combines excellence in
performance, leadership, and sportsmanship and who exhibits dedication to the sport of volleyball and team
play.
OSWALD TOWER AWARD. A plaque in honor of the contribution of Oswald Tower, 1907, to basketball, as
editor of the Basketball Rules for forty-four years and as a basketball rules interpreter. Presented in 1960 by
former Williams players to the most valuable player of the men's varsity in the opinion of the coaches and
manager.
DOROTHY TOWNE TRACK AWARD. Given in 1985 by Zbigniew Brzezinski and awarded annually to the
best woman track athlete on the basis of performance, leadership, and sportsmanship. On the trophy will be
inscribed the name of the winner, who will receive a smaller trophy for her possession.
RALPH J. TOWNSEND SKI TROPHY. Presented in 1959 by former members of the Williams skiing teams for
the men's varsity skier who best exhibits the qualities of sportsmanship, competition, and team spirit
associated with Williams and skiing.
25TH ANNIVERSARY OF WOMEN IN ATHLETICS AT WILLIAMS. Awarded annually at Class Day to the senior
woman who has distinguished herself in her commitment and contributions to the Department of Physical
Education, Athletics and Recreation. The winner will have engaged in any of the activities offered by the
department, and will have been an example of the joy and pleasure derived by participation in such activi-
ties. Nominations will be solicited from the Chair of the Department, the Coordinator of Physical Educa-
tion, the Coordinator of Dance, Members of the Dance Companies, the Director of the Outing Club, Direc-
tor of Sports Medicine, members of both varsity and junior varsity women's teams, and members of club
teams. The winner will be selected by a vote of the faculty of the athletic department.
WILLIAMS ALUMNAE SKIING AWARD. This pewter pitcher was donated in 1976 by Deborah Marshall,
1974, and Carmany Heilman, 1976, leaders of the first Williams Women's Ski Team. This award recog-
nizes the woman who best embodies the values of sportsmanship traditionally held by women skiers at
Williams: leadership, competitiveness, and commitment to her team.
WILLIAMS COLLEGE ALUMNI ASSOCIATION OF MARYLAND LACROSSE AWARD. Presented in 1959 by the Wil-
liams College Alumni Association of Maryland as a permanent trophy on which is inscribed each year the
name of the outstanding men's varsity lacrosse player.
Prizes and Awards
­ 41 ­
WILLIAMS COLLEGE ALUMNI ASSOCIATION OF MARYLAND WOMEN'S LACROSSE AWARD. Awarded to the most
valuable player of the year.
WILLIAMSWOMEN'SHOCKEY MOSTVALUABLE PLAYERAWARD. To be presented to the most valuable player
of the year.
WOMEN'S LACROSSE AWARD. The Women's Lacrosse Award was established in 1977 by the women's
lacrosse team in order to promote excellence in the sport. It is to be awarded each year to the person who, in
the opinion of the team, has demonstrated excellence in all levels of women's lacrosse--sportsmanship,
skill, and team spirit.
YOUNG-JAY HOCKEY TROPHY. Presented by George C. Young, 1938, and John C. Jay, 1938. For a mem-
ber of the Williams varsity hockey team notable for loyalty and devotion to the interest of Williams hockey:
courage, self-control, and modesty; perseverance under discouraging circumstances; and a sense of fair
play towards his teammates and his opponents.
Fellowships Awarded by Williams College
Faculty Selection Committees examine candidates for the awards listed below. Application must be
made through the Dean's Office or appropriate department.
HORACE F. CLARK PRIZE FELLOWSHIPS. Established in 1894 under the provisions of the will of Madame
Marie Louise Souberbeille in memory of her father, 1833. One or two awards to help support one year of
graduate study to members of the senior class chosen on the basis of superior scholarship, general ability,
and interest in scholarly research.
CLASS OF 1945STUDENT WORLD FELLOWSHIP
. Designed to support summer research by juniors studying
abroad. This grant is intended to support study that can promote conflict resolution, international under-
standing, and world peace, although other worthwhile projects not directly linked to these aims will be con-
sidered.
DOROTHY H. DONOVANMEMORIAL FELLOWSHIP. Established in 1978 by Hedley T. Donovan in memory of
his wife, Dorothy H. Donovan. The income is directed to the support of Williams graduates at Oxford Uni-
versity, initial use for those attending Exeter or Worcester with the hope that Hertford College might eventu-
ally be included.
FRANCIS SESSIONS HUTCHINS MEMORIAL FELLOWSHIP. Established in 1931 by friends of Mr. Francis Ses-
sions Hutchins, 1900. To assist students in continuing and completing their college course and in obtaining
a start in business or professions in the early years following their graduation, the selection to be made by
the President. To be awarded to students "situated as Hutchins himself was when in college. . .giving prom-
ise. . .of becoming, as he did, a useful, worthy, and lovable citizen."
HUBBARD HUTCHINSON MEMORIAL FELLOWSHIP. Established in 1940 by Mrs. Eva W. Hutchinson in
memory of her son, 1917. Awarded to a member or members of the graduating class who produce the most
creative work in music composition, poetry, fiction, painting, sculpture, photography or choreography; then
to those who show unusual talent and promise in performance; then to those majoring in philosophy or the
sciences. The purpose of the award is to assist in continuing work in the special field of interest for a period
of two years following graduation.
CHARLES BRIDGEN LANSING FELLOWSHIP IN LATIN AND GREEK. Established in 1929, by bequest of Mrs.
Abby S. L. Selden in memory of her father, Charles Bridgen Lansing, 1829. Awarded either at the graduate
or undergraduate level.
NATHANIEL M. LAWRENCE TRAVELING FELLOWSHIP. Established in 1986 by family and friends of Nathaniel
Lawrence, Professor of Philosophy at Williams from 1960 to 1986. To support a student traveling fellow-
ship, the award "not based on grades, but on originality, merit, and feasibility".
ALLEN MARTIN FELLOWSHIP
. Established by Allen Martin, himself a Carroll A. Wilson Fellow, this fel-
lowship helps to support a Williams graduate studying at Worcester College, Oxford for a term of two
years. Applicants are not restricted by major or other interest and may pursue undergraduate or graduate
degrees at Worcester.
JOHN EDMUND MOODY FELLOWSHIP
. Established in 1927 by Mr. John Moody in memory of his son, Class
of 1921. To enable a graduate of Williams College to pursue studies at Oxford University for the two years
following graduation. The recipient is chosen from those who have majored in Greek, Latin, English, histo-
ry, political science, philosophy, religion, or economics. The basis of award is general intellectual ability as
shown in the major field of study, with special reference to character, need of assistance, and promises of
original and creative work.
RUCHMAN STUDENT FELLOWSHIPS. Established in 1993 by Allan B. Ruchman '75 and Mark C. Ruchman
'71, this fellowship provides a research stipend to two Williams seniors who demonstrate a firm commit-
ment to graduate study and intention to pursue a career in teaching at the college level. Ruchman Fellows
take part in the activities of the Oakley Center for the Humanities and Social Sciences during their senior
year.
Prizes and Awards
­ 42 ­
DR. HERCHEL SMITH FELLOWSHIPS. Established in 1979 by Dr. Herchel Smith to enable two or more grad-
uates of Williams College to pursue studies at Emmanuel College, Cambridge for the two years following
graduation. One recipient is chosen from those who have majored in the humanities or social sciences; the
other from those who have majored in mathematics or the natural sciences. One set of criteria includes
general intellectual ability and attainment in the major field of study with special reference to the promise of
original and creative work, and character; the other set of criteria includes leadership, scholastic attainment,
and physical vigor after the manner of selection of Rhodes scholars.
STEPHEN H. TYNG AND STEPHEN H. TYNG, JR. FOUNDATION FELLOWSHIP. Holders of Tyng Scholarships in
their undergraduate years are eligible for Tyng Fellowships for a maximum of three years of graduate or
professional study in any field of learning at any recognized university.
ROBERT G. WILMERS MEMORIAL FELLOWSHIP. Given in memory of Robert G. Wilmers, '90, this grant pro-
vides support for summer travel and research for students in their junior year at Williams.
CARROLL A. WILSON FELLOWSHIP IN MEMORY OF JOHN E. WILSON. Established in 1949 by the will of Car-
roll A. Wilson, 1907, in memory of his son, who was killed in the World War II crossing of the Rhine,
March 28, 1945. The income to be devoted to scholarships for attendance at Oxford University, for mem-
bers of the senior class chosen "after the manner of Rhodes Scholarships, with special attention to leader-
ship, scholastic attainment, and physical vigor."
George J. Mead Fund
In 1951 Williams College received a substantial gift from the Estate of George J. Mead. Mr. Mead ex-
pressed in his will an intention "that this gift shall be used to improve the quality of leadership and service in
all branches of government, whether Federal, State, or municipal, by encouraging young people of reliabil-
ity, good sense and high purpose to enter with adequate preparation those fields of politics and constitution-
al government upon which must rest the future of this nation."
A portion of this gift constitutes a Revolving Fund that directly assists promising students with inade-
quate means who are specializing in political science, history, American Studies, political economy, or eco-
nomics. The remaining portion, or Special Fund, is primarily intended to finance a summer intern program
in government involving selected sophomores and juniors.
Teaching Fellowships, Hong Kong and Guangzhou
UNITED COLLEGE, CHINESEUNIVERSITY OFHONG KONG. Begun in 1961, this two-year fellowship is offered
to a member of the graduating class for teaching English and possibly other subjects at United College, one
of three sister colleges comprising the Chinese University of Hong Kong. The appointee, known as a
Teaching Fellow or Tutor, also studies Chinese (Mandarin or Cantonese) and selected aspects of Chinese
culture. Students are chosen by a selection committee, chaired by Professor Crane. Interested students
should contact Professor Crane for application forms. Deadline November 30th.
SUN YAT-SEN UNIVERSITY OF MEDICAL SCIENCES, GUANGZHOU. Supported by alumni, the College, and the
trustees of the Lingnan Foundation, this one-year fellowship is awarded to a member of the graduating class
for teaching English language and literature to doctors and staff and for continuing study of Chinese lan-
guage (Mandarin or Cantonese) and culture. Students are chosen by a selection committee, chaired by Pro-
fessor Crane. Interested students should contact Professor Crane for application forms. Deadline November
30th.
Teaching Assistantship Program for Graduates in France
Each year the Department chooses one or sometimes two students to participate in a French Government
assistantship program. The Williams student chosen spends the year following graduation teaching English
at a lycée in the Paris area and is the recipient of a French government stipend. Interested students must
apply to the Department early in the second semester. Priority will be given to French majors.
­ 43 ­
COURSES OF INSTRUCTION 2000-2001
COURSE NUMBERING SYSTEM
Courses in the 100 series are open regularly to qualified members of all classes.
Courses in the 200 series are open regularly only to qualified sophomores, juniors, and seniors.
Courses in the 300 series are open regularly only to qualified juniors and seniors.
Courses in the 400 series are open regularly only to qualified seniors and graduate students.
Courses in the 500 series are open regularly only to graduate students.
Within a given series, numbers do not indicate a relative level of courses.
The (F) or (S) following a course's number indicates the semester, fall or spring, in which the course will
be offered.
Courses designated by a single number are semester courses.
Year courses are designated by an odd number and an even number joined by a hyphen; the work of the
two semesters constitutes an integral, indivisible course. Therefore, if a student does not pass the second
half of a year-long course, he or she forfeits credit for the first half and incurs a deficiency as a result of the
forfeiture. Students who register for a year course are required to do both semesters of that course within
the same academic year.
In some departments, course numbers have special meanings that are explained in their listings.
SEQUENCE COURSES
This term, found in the description of majors, refers to the courses which must be taken in a prescribed
sequence.
PARALLEL COURSES
This term, found in the description of majors, refers to the courses prescribed by the major in addition to
the sequence courses. A choice among possible alternatives is often offered.
REGISTRATION REMINDERS:
All on-campus students must register through SELFREG, the online registration system.
1) A course in which registration is deemed insufficient may be withdrawn atthe beginning of the semester
without previous notice.
2) An instructor has the right to: a) require a student to drop a course if the student does not attend the first
scheduled meeting of that course; b) refuse permission to add a course if a student has not attended the
first scheduled meeting of that course.
3 a) First-year students may take no more than one course with the same course prefix, nor more than two
in one department, in a semester.
b) Sophomores may take no more than two courses with the same courseprefix,nor morethan threein
one department, in a semester.
c) Sophomores may take no more than three courses with the same course prefix, nor more than four in
one department, during the full year.
d) A student may take no more than a total of five courses with the same course prefix, nor more than
eight in one department, during the first two years.
e) Any exception to the above early concentration rulemay be requested by a petition (goldenrod) to the
Committee on Academic Standing (C.A.S.) filed at the time of registration.
4) An incoming junior must declare a major by filing a "Major Declaration Form" during preregistration.
A current junior or senior may change or add a major by filing a "Major Declaration Form" subject to
the approval of the C.A.S.
5) Declaration of a double major is subject to the approval of the C.A.S. Contract majors are ineligible for a
second major.
6) Students wishing to undertake an independent study must submit a petition (green) to the C.A.S. before
the start of the semester in which a student plans to take the independent study.
7) Petition forms for any of the above requests may be obtained at the Registrar's Office.
8) When choosing a course cross-listed in two or more subjects, students should specify which designation
they wish to have recorded--at the time they register for that course.
9) Courses listed as (Not offered 2000-2001) normally will be offered in the following academic year.
10) Courses normally meet three times a week in fifty-minute periods, twice a week in seventy-five-min-
ute periods, or once a week for 150 minutes as indicated within the course description. The days of
the week that courses meet are represented by the first letter of each day. For example, M for Monday
(except that R is used for Thursday).
*****
Courses of Instruction
­ 44 ­
PEOPLES AND CULTURES DISTRIBUTION REQUIREMENT
An asterisk following a course title indicates that the course may be used to meet the Peoples and Cul-
tures Distribution Requirement. A list of courses offered in 2000-2001 which meet the requirement is on
pages 334-337.
*****
STUDENT-INITIATED COURSES
A Student-Initiated Course is one proposed and organized by students and sponsored by the Interdepart-
mental Program for Experimental and Cross-Disciplinary Studies. In such courses, the students carry a
heavy burden of the leadership in proposing requirements, selecting material to be covered and conducting
discussions, as well as in conceiving the basic outline of the course. The instructor supervises the syllabus,
student participation, and performance, and is responsible for evaluation of the students.
1) In order to provide for planning, students should discuss plans for Student-Initiated Courses in the
coming year at the beginning of the previous spring semester.
2) Interested students should propose Student-Initiated Courses to the Interdepartmental Program for
Experimental and Cross-Disciplinary Studies and to a faculty instructor by the following deadlines:
z fall semester courses: before the end of spring registration
z spring semester courses: before the end of fall semester
3) Proposals for Student-Initiated Courses should include descriptions of the aims and anticipated tech-
niques of the course, as well as a statement concerning any anticipated constraints on enrollment.
Enrollment might be based on such educational considerations as the student's background of knowl-
edge, individual potential for growth and development, maximum feasible size of discussion groups,
and availability of special materials or resources.
4) All Student-Initiated Course proposals, including criteria for enrollment, must be approved by:
a) a faculty member who agrees to be the instructor of the course;
b) the Interdepartmental Program for Experimental and Cross-Disciplinary Studies;
c) the Committee on Educational Policy (C.E.P.).
Normally, each section of a Student-Initiated Course will be limited to 15 students.
5) A student may enroll in no more than one Student-Initiated Course each semester. No more than six
such courses may be credited toward a Williams B.A.
6) At the end of each Student-Initiated Course, the faculty instructor files with the program and with the
C.E.P. a report on the course's content, a summary syllabus, and an evaluation.
*****
WRITING-INTENSIVE COURSES
Courses designated as "writing-intensive"--those with a plus symbol (+) following the course
title--stress the process of learning to write effectively. Such courses include a substantial amount of writ-
ing (cumulatively, at least 20 pages), usually divided into several discrete assignments. Normally, at least
one of these assignments is returned for revision and resubmission. Instructors pay close attention to mat-
ters of punctuation, grammar, style, and the construction of arguments when assigning grades to written
assignments, and these issues are further pursued in class discussions and individual meetings. A list of
writing-intensive courses offered in 2000-2001 is on page 338.
*****
STUDY AWAY FROM WILLIAMS
Students may receive credit for work completed at other institutions or programs.Applicationsfor study
elsewhere require the approval of the chair of thestudent'smajor,theDean's Office,and theCommitteeon
Academic Standing. Students studying away during the junior year should have already completed the
physical education requirement and at least two courses in each division toward the divisional distribution
requirement.
*****
THESE SYMBOLS ARE USED IN DEPARTMENTAL MASTHEADS TO INDICATE
FACULTY STATUS:
*On leave for the year
* *On leave first semester
* * *On leave second semester
§Visiting or adjunct, part-time first semester
§ §Visiting or adjunct, part-time second semester
§ § §Adjunct WSP
*****
­ 45 ­
THE TUTORIAL PROGRAM AT WILLIAMS
In the fall of 1988, Williams introduced a tutorial program. Students are invited to examine the tutorial
offerings carefully in order to understand fully the substantive content of each tutorial and its mode of op-
eration. A list of the tutorials to be offered in 2000-2001 is included in this section, and a complete descrip-
tion of each may be found in the relevant department's section of this catalog. No student is required to take
a tutorial, but any student who has the appropriate qualifications is invited to do so.
While the details of the functioning of tutorials will vary in order to accommodate the diverse subject
matter of the various departments of the College, there are important common characteristics to which
specific attention may be called.
Tutorials place a much greater weight on student participation than do regular courses or even small
seminars. In general, each tutorial will consist of two students meeting with the tutor for one hour or 75
minutes each week. At each meeting one student will make a prepared presentation--read a prepared
essay, work a set of problems, report on laboratory exercises, examine a work of art, etc.--and the other
student and the tutor will question, probe, push the student who is presenting her work about various as-
pects of the presentation. The student then must respond on the spot to these probings and questions. A
tutorial is directly concerned with teaching students about arguments, about arriving at and defending a
position, and about responding on the spot to suggestions and questions. This kind of exercise will help the
student gain insight and understanding of what knowledge is and how it is accumulated and how there can
be different interpretations and different understandings of the same phenomenon. The student presenta-
tion drives the tutorial, and the presentation by the student obviously means that student preparation and
response are crucial to an effective tutorial. The presentation is based on assigned and suggested reading
and other work (laboratory, art work, theatre, etc.) by the tutor.
In some tutorials both students will make a shorter presentation each week and both will react and com-
ment on the other's presentation. In all cases the tutorial is built around presentations by students.
In most instances there will be no more than 10 students in a tutorial. In the first and last week of the
semester, the whole group will meet together, and in the 10 weeks in-between students will meet in pairs
with their tutor. Students should therefore expect to make 5 presentations that occupy about an hour, or 10
that require one half hour. Assignments will be designed such that the student should, in general, be re-
quired to spend no more time over a week preparing for the tutorial than for a conventional course. It is
likely however that as a student begins her first tutorial course, she will have to spend somewhat more time
preparing for it than she does for her other courses. Once the routine becomes more established and famil-
iar, the tutorial is expected to require about the same total time per week as does a regular course. The
student should appreciate, however, that the weekly tutorials require exceptional regularity and on-time
performance.
Grading, testing, and similar details will be described by the tutor at the first meeting of the entire group.
Drops and Adds: Because of the particular arrangements of the tutorial, it is necessary to limit adds to the
first week of classes only. No adds can be made after that time. Spaces in tutorials are limited, and a late
drop may unfairly deprive another student of an opportunity. Students are urged, therefore, to think very
carefully about their initial decisions.
PLEASE NOTE: Tutorials cannot be taken on a pass/fail grading basis.
More Information: Students may obtain detailed information about a specific tutorial from the as-
signed tutor, or about The Tutorial Program as a whole from its director, Professor Chris Waters (De-
partment of History).
Tutorials Offered 2000-2001
American Maritime Studies
AMS/ENGL 231T(F,S) Literature of the Sea Bercaw Edwards (fall), Beegel (spring)
Art
ARTS 317T(F) The Miniature Levin
ARTS 371T(F) Addressing Identity--The Non-Traditional Figure Podmore
ARTS 382T(S)/
THEA 326T(S) The Moving Image and Performance Style L. Johnson, Bucky
ARTS 418T(S) Senior Tutorial Podmore
Astronomy
ASTR 207T(F) Extraterrestrial Life in the Galaxy:
A Sure Thing, or a Snowball's Chance?+ Kwitter
Biology
BIOL 402T(S)/
ENVI 404T(S) Current Topics in Ecology (Same as Environmental Studies 404T)+ TBA
Chemistry
CHEM 316T(S) Bioinorganic Chemistry Schofield
Computer Science
CSCI 336T(S) Computer Networks Murtagh
Tutorials, African and Middle-Eastern Studies
­ 46 ­
Economics
ECON 357T(F) The Strange Economics of College Schapiro
English
ENGL 356T(S) Dead Poets' Society Bundtzen
ENGL 370T(S) Narrative into Film Carter-Sanborn
History
HIST 487T(F)
(formerly 374T) The Second World War: Origins, Course, Outcomes, and Meaning+ Wood
Music
MUS 203T(F), 204T(S) Composition Suderburg (fall), D. Kechley (spring)
Physics
PHYS 402T(S) Applications of Quantum Mechanics+ Majumder
PHYS 411T(F) Classical Mechanics and Fluid Mechanics+ K. Jones
Political Science
PSCI 331T(S) Non-Profit Organization and Community Change+ A. Willingham
Psychology
PSYC 354T(F) Social Interaction and Psychopathology+ Heatherington
Religion
REL 270T(S) Father Abraham: The First Patriarch+ Darrow
Theatre
THEA 322T(S) Performance Criticism+ Bean
AFRICAN AND MIDDLE-EASTERN STUDIES
(Div. II)
Chair, Professor WILLIAM R. DARROW
Advisory Committee: Professors: DARROW, D. EDWARDS, C. HILL, MACDONALD, MCFAR-
LAND*. Visiting Professor: KAIJAGE§§. Associate Professors: E. D. BROWN. Assistant Professors:
BURTON, GOLDBERG, GOLLIN**, KRAUS, M. LYNCH, MUTONGI*, ROUHI. Senior
Lecturer: E. GRUDIN**.
African and Middle-Eastern Studies is an interdisciplinary program focusing on the politics, societies,
cultures, and historical development of the peoples of Africa and the Middle East. The program offers a
wide range of courses in the area, as well as opportunities to study abroad and possibilities for graduate
fellowships and careers.
Students considering completing the concentration are urged to register with the chair of the program
during their sophomore year. Normally, students will be expected to take six courses from at least three
different departments. One of these courses should be from among the "Concepts Courses" listed below.
Four should be from the "Core Courses." The sixth course will be African and Middle-Eastern Studies 401
or 402. In special cases the chair may permit substitution of an approved winter study project, or work
completed elsewhere, for one or more of the electives. Proposals for honors work in African and Middle-
Eastern Studies, normally involving at least a one semester thesis and an oral examination, must be sub-
mitted in writing by the beginning of the senior year and approved by the African and Middle-Eastern
Studies Committee.
Fulfillment of the requirements of the concentration will be recorded on the student's official transcript.
Concepts Courses
All students are required to take at least one of the following courses, preferably near the beginning of
their program.
ANSO 205 Ways of Knowing
Anthropology 101 The Scope of Anthropology
Anthropology 102/Environmental Studies 106 Human Evolution: Down from the Trees, Out to the
Stars
Anthropology/Environmental Studies 209 Human Ecology
Economics 204/Environmental Studies 234 Economic Development in Poor Countries
Economics/Environmental Studies 212 Sustainable Development
Economics 215 The World Economy
Political Science 202 (formerly 120) World Politics: An Introduction to International Relations
Core Courses
All students are expected to take four of the following electives. Note that students are normally ex-
pected to present courses from at least three different disciplines to complete the program, and that in spe-
cial cases credit can be given for a WSP or work done elsewhere.
Anthropology 224 Middle East Cultures
Anthropology/EXPR/Religion 273 Sacred Geographies
African and Middle-Eastern Studies, African-American Studies
­ 47 ­
Anthropology 331 Witchcraft, Sorcery, and Magic
ANSO/AMES 402 Ritual, Politics, and Power: Understanding Political Action
ArtH 220 The Mosque
ArtH 278 The Golden Road to Samarqand
Classics/Religion 203 Introduction to Judaism
Critical Languages 201-202 (Arabic, Hebrew, or Swahili)
English 342 Postcolonial Literature
History 102 (formerly 116)/Environmental Studies 116 Environmental History of Africa
History 202 (formerly 270) Early African History Through the Era of the Slave Trade
History 203 (formerly 269) A Survey of Modern African History, 1800-Present
History 209 (formerly 275)/Religion 231 The Origins of Islam: God, Empire, and Apocalypse
History 304 (formerly 325) South Africa and Apartheid
History 309 (formerly 278)/Religion 232 Women and Islam
History 402 (formerly 373) African Political Thought
History 409 (formerly 363)/Religion 234 Religion and Revolution in Iran
History 425/Religion 215 East Meets West in the Middle Ages: The First Crusade
Music 125 Music Cultures of the World
Music 126 Music of Asia
Political Science 204 (formerly 140) Introduction to Comparative Politics: The Powers of National-
ism
Political Science 244 Middle East Politics: State Formation and Nationalism
Political Science 267 Arab-Israeli Relations
Religion/Classics 209 The Religious Landscape of the Roman Mediterranean
Religion 233 Islamic Mysticism: The Sufis
Religion 270T Father Abraham: The First Patriarch
Religion/Classics 274 Women's Religious Experiences in the Ancient Mediterranean World
AMES 402(S) Topics in African and Middle-Eastern Studies: Ritual, Politics and Power:
Understanding Political Action (Same as ANSO 402)*
The "Capstone Course" for all concentrators, this course provides students with the opportunity to consoli-
date their work in the area through study and research of a select topic. Topics vary from year to year and
generally alternate between the Middle East and Africa.
(See under Anthropology/Sociology for full description.)
AMES 493(F)-W031, W031-494(S) Senior Thesis
To be taken by candidates for honors by the thesis route in African and Middle-Eastern Studies.
AMES 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
AFRICAN-AMERICAN STUDIES (Div. II)
Chair, Assistant Professor CRAIG STEVEN WILDER
Advisory Committee: Professor: A. WILLINGHAM. Associate Professors: E. D. BROWN.
SINGHAM. Assistant Professors: FARRED*, MUTONGI*, WILDER. Senior Lecturer: E.
GRUDIN**. Mellon Postdoctoral Fellow: SEE.
African-American Studies is an interdisciplinary program that examines the history, the cultures, and the
social and political experiences of people of African ancestry in the Western Hemisphere. The program
encourages students to take advantage of its interdisciplinary focus and to examine the vibrant and varied
intellectual traditions that constitute the study of the African Diaspora.
All candidates for a concentration in African-American Studies must complete a total of five courses:
one United States subject, one Caribbean or South American, one African, and two electives. At least one
of these courses must be in the performing or fine arts.
Students may select their required courses from the following:
One course in a United States or Canadian subject:
AAS 200/Political Science 233) Beyond Double Consciousness: Gunnar Myrdal and the Construc-
tion of Race as Dilemma
English/American Studies 220 Introduction to African-American Writing
History 281 (formerly 261) African-American History Through Emancipation
History 282 (formerly 262) African-American History From Reconstruction to the Present
Music 122 African-American Music
Music 130 History of Jazz
Political Science 213 Theory and Practice of Civil Rights Protest
Theatre/American Studies 211 Topics in African-American Performance: Theatre, Film, and Dance
of the Harlem Renaissance
One course in a Caribbean/South American subject:
History 242 (formerly 287) Latin-American from Conquest to Independence
History 249 (formerly 225) The Caribbean from Slavery to Independence: A Comparison of Empires
African-American Studies
­ 48 ­
History 331 (formerly 307) The French and Haitian Revolutions
History 346 (formerly 314) History of Modern Brazil, 1822 to the Present
History 443 (formerly 355) Slavery, Race and Ethnicity in Latin America
History 472 (formerly 351) Slavery, Capitalism, and Revolution: The Impact of the New World on
Europe, 1700-1900
One course in an African subject:
History 102 (formerly 116)/Environmental Studies 116 Environmental History of Africa
History 202 (formerly 270) Early African History through the Era of the Slave Trade
History 203 (formerly 269) A Survey of Modern African History, 1800-Present
History 304 (formerly 325) South Africa and Apartheid
History 402 (formerly 373) African Political Thought
Music 125 Music Cultures of the World
Music 220 African and African-American Music and Dance (Deleted 2000-2001)
Two electives (from the above or the following):
AAS/Women's and Gender Studies 302/American Studies 304 U.S. Masculinity and Its Others
AAS 491 or 492 Senior Project
Economics 204/Environmental Studies 234 Economic Development in Poor Countries
Economics/Environmental 212 Sustainable Development
Economics 237 The Economics of Inequality and Poverty
Economics 386 The Economics of Inequality
English 342 Postcolonial Literature
History 164 (formerly 104) Slavery in the American South
History 180/Religion 222 "The God of History": Slavery and Race in Christian Thought
History 364 (formerly 311) History of the Old South
History 365 (formerly 312) History of the New South
History 370 (formerly 308) Studies in American Social Change
History 382 (formerly 318) The Black Radical Tradition in America
History 456 (formerly 360) Civil War and Reconstruction
History 478 (formerly 381) The Ghetto from Venice to Harlem
Music 140 Introduction to the Music of Duke Ellington
Music 141 Introduction to the Music of John Coltrane
Music 209 Music in History III: Musics of the Twentieth Century
Music 212 Jazz Theory and Improvisation I
Music 213 Jazz Theory and Improvisation II
Political Science 234 Racial Theory
Political Science 235 Multiculturalism and Political Theory
Political Science 239 Political Thinking About Race: Resurrecting the Political in Contemporary
Texts on the Black Experience
Political Science 312 Southern Politics (Deleted 2000-2001)
Political Science 313 Power and Protest in American Political Development
Political Science 318 The Voting Rights Act and the Voting Rights Movement
Political Science 331T Non-Profit Organization and Community Change
Political Science/American Studies 332 Fugitive Identities: Slavery and the Boundaries of American
Politics
Political Science 343T Multiculturalism in Comparative Context
Psychology 341 Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination
Sociology 103 Behind the Rhetoric of Race: Race, Ethnicity and Public Policy
Sociology 203 Social Inequality
Sociology 220 Ethnicity (Deleted 2000-2001)
Theatre 210 Multicultural Performance
Theatre 213T Paul Robeson: Visible Man
HONORS PROGRAM IN AFRICAN-AMERICAN STUDIES
A candidate for honors in African-American Studies must maintain at least a B+ average in the con-
centration and be admitted to candidacy by the program faculty. An honors candidate must complete her/
his project in a semester (and Winter Study). A candidate will enroll for either AAS 491 or 492 (and Winter
Study) during her/his senior year to write a forty-page thesis or to do an equivalent project in the perform-
ing and studio arts. A faculty advisor, in consultation with the chair, can change the particulars of an honors
project.
An honors project should demonstrate unusual creativity, depth, and intellectual rigor. A candidate for hon-
ors is permitted and encouraged to pursue non-traditional projects, such as presentations in the performing
arts, visual arts, or creative writing, as well as more traditional interdisciplinary studies. The advisor will
evaluate an honors project, and the program faculty will decide whether to confer honors. A student wish-
ing to become a candidate for honors in African-American Studies should secure a faculty sponsor and
inform the program chair in writing before spring registration of her/his junior year.
African-American Studies, American Studies
­ 49 ­
AAS 200 Beyond Double Consciousness: Gunnar Myrdal and the Construction of Race as
Dilemma (Same as Political Science 233) (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)*+
The course will be devoted to the reading of a primary document--Gunnar Myrdal's An American Dilem-
ma--about race and the constitution of national identity in the United States. After its publication in 1944,
the book was to be enormously influential in the way Americans thought about race and in framing the
politics, including civil rights protest, that developed in the years after World War II. The bulk of the course
will be devoted to an examination of the text giving attention to the way Myrdal crafted an argument about
race and about social science investigation. We look as well at the social and political context in which it
emerged, the critical reception, and its increasing consignment as a document for liberal politics that set the
atmosphere for dramatic changes that led eventually to the full affirmation of racial equality as a public
policy goal.
Class format: seminar.
Requirements: class participation, short papers and final paper.
A. WILLINGHAM
AAS 302(S) U.S. Masculinity and Its Others (Same as American Studies 304 and Women's
and Gender Studies 302)*
(See under Women's and Gender Studies for full description.)
AAS 491(F), 492(S) Senior Project
Non-honors candidates do a regular winter study project offered by the program or a "99." Candidates for
honors in African-American Studies must do W030 for the winter study period following 491 or prior to
taking 492.
THE AFRICAN-AMERICAN STUDIES CONCENTRATION AND THE AMERICAN STUDIES
MAJOR
Several courses in African-American Studies count for credit in the American Studies major. There-
fore, students in American Studies can easily complete requirements for an African-American Studies
concentration by electing one course in an African subject and by taking African-American Studies 491.
Another three courses must be chosen which satisfy both American Studies and African-American
Studies requirements.
AMERICAN STUDIES (Div. II)
Chair, Associate Professor: MARK T. REINHARDT
Faculty 2000-2001: Professor: K. LEE. Associate Professors: KUNZEL*, REINHARDT, WONG.
Assistant Professors: BACON, BEAN, CARTER-SANBORN, L. JOHNSON, KENT*, M. LEWIS*,
VERTER. Visiting Assistant Professor: SANBORN. Lecturer: CLEGHORN. Mellon Postdoctoral
Fellow: SEE.
GENERAL PROGRAM DESCRIPTION
The American Studies Program uses interdisciplinary approaches to develop students' understanding of
the complexity of the culture(s) usually labeled "American." Examining history, literature, and other forms
of expression, we explore the processes of cultural definition as contested by diverse individuals and
groups. We ask new questions about aspects of American life long taken for granted; we also use Ameri-
can culture as a laboratory for testing classic and contemporary theories about how cultures work.
NON-MAJORS, FIRST-YEAR STUDENTS, AND SOPHOMORES
American Studies 201 is open to non-majors including first-year students with Advanced Placement
credit in American History. All elective courses are open to students who meet the requirements of the
departments that sponsor those courses. American Studies 302 and 403 are open to non-majors with per-
mission of the instructor.
RATIONALE FOR COURSE NUMBERING
The introductory course is offered at the 200 level to suggest the desirability of some preliminary train-
ing in college-level history, literature, sociology, or political science. The intermediate course, 302, is of-
fered primarily for juniors, although it is open to sophomores who have had 201 and will be away from
campus during the spring of their junior year. 300-level independent study courses are offered to upperclass
students. 403 is designed for senior majors; it, like 302, is open to students who can demonstrate adequate
preparation to the instructor.
THE MAJOR
Required major courses:
American Studies 201
American Studies 302
American Studies 403
Elective courses:
Eight courses: five should be chosen from one of thespecialization fields listed below, the other three
chosen from among any of the electives listed. Students are expected to take courses from at least two
American Studies
­ 50 ­
disciplines when choosing the courses that make up their specializations. Students are also required
to take at least one course from a list of pre-1900 courses. Advanced Placement credit in appropriate
areas, or departmental courses not listed here, may be substituted for electives in the major, with per-
mission of the program chair.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN AMERICAN STUDIES
Candidates for honors in American Studies will undertake a substantial, year-long independent project
during their Senior year. All students who wish to write an honors thesis should consult with a prospective
faculty advisor in the spring of their junior year. Applicants should have a solid record of work of high
caliber, normally defined as maintaining at least a B+ average in courses taken for the major. Students
writing honors theses will register for AMST 491, W030, and AMST 492. The awarding of honors will be
determined by the American Studies Program Committee, based on the recommendation of the student's
advisor and two other faculty readers.
ADVISING
All majors will be assigned a faculty advisor. Majors must meet with their advisor during the first week
of classes during the fall semester and at the time of the spring semester registration period in order to have
their courses and plans for the American Studies major approved. Both majors and non-majors are encour-
aged to talk at any time with the program chair or other affiliated faculty about the major.
AMERICAN STUDIES AND OTHER PROGRAMS
Students majoring in American Studies are encouraged to consider pursuing concentrations in African-
American, Environmental, and Women's and Gender Studies. Many of the courses counted for those con-
centrations may also earn credit toward the American Studies major.
STUDY AWAY FROM WILLIAMS
We encourage students to pursue cross-cultural comparative studies. A major in American Studies can
be combined with study away from Williams for a semester or a year if plans are made carefully. Many
courses that will be approved for College credit may also count toward the American Studies major if their
subject matter is American culture.
Students planning to be away in the junior year should have taken American Studies 201 before they
leave; those away for junior-year spring term should take American Studies 302 in their sophomore year.
Students should consult as early as possible with the chair or their advisor about their plans for fulfilling the
requirements of the major.
AMERICAN STUDIES COURSES
AMST 100(S) Politics and Freedom (Same as Political Science 100S)
(See under Political Science for full description.)
AMST 124(S) Exemplary Lives (Same as English 124)
(See under English for full description.)
AMST 133(F) The Frontier in American Literature and Film (Same as English 133)+
(See under English for full description.)
AMST 135(F) African-American Literary Lives (Same as English 135)+*
(See under English for full description.)
AMST 201(F,S) Introduction to American Studies
To be an "American" means something more than U.S. citizenship. In this course, we focus on the prob-
lems and possibilities of American identity. Access to American-ness is shaped by factors such as class,
race, ethnicity, gender, sexuality, religion, and region--categories which themselves change in meaning
over time. Given the geographical, racial, and cultural diversity of the United States, the ways in which
Americans imagine nation inevitably vary over time, according to place, and among different individuals
and groups. Rather than a survey of any one aspect or period of American history, literature, or popular
culture, this course is an introduction to the interdisciplinary field of American Studies, a field defined both
by the range of texts we read (essays, novels, autobiographies, photographs, films, music, architecture,
historical documents, legal texts), and by the questions we ask of them: How have different Americans
imagined what it means to be an American? What ideas about national history, patriotism, and moral char-
acter shape their visions of American-ness? How do the educational system, mass media, government pol-
icies regarding citizenship and immigration shape American identities? How are boundaries of inclusion
and exclusion in the nation drawn? What uses have been made of the claim to an American identity, and
what is at stake in that claim? How have Americans imagined a national landscape, a national culture, and
to what ends?
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR, 11:20-12:35 TR First Semester: CLEGHORN, REINHARDT
1:10-2:25 TF Second Semester: CLEGHORN
AMST 202(S) American Studies in Practice
The aim of this course is to take American Studies beyond the college campus and put its insights and
theoretical concerns to practical use. How, for example, can different definitions of American-ness affect
American Studies
­ 51 ­
the way we retrain displaced workers for our new service and information based economy? How do the
contours of ethnicity in America influence the success of "diversity" workshops in schools? How do
American conceptions of "wilderness" and "progress" affect local controversies over land use? How do
the "culture of the mind" and the "culture of the hands" shape the way an institution like MassMOCA
settles into a working people's community like North Adams? We will explore such issues through a
hands-on experience in community development here in Northern Berkshire County. Our community de-
velopment project varies annually, but students should emerge from the course able to apply their class-
room learning to the concrete realities of community development work, as well as with set of method-
ological skills (such as participant observation, interviewing, and interpreting census data), and planning
tools (program design and evaluation) relevant in community development and public policy settings. Stu-
dents should expect to spend 2-3 hours per week off campus.
Requirements: bi-weekly lab assignments and two papers.
Prerequisite: American Studies 201 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limited to 12.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF Lab: 1-4 W BACON
AMST 209(F) American Literature: Origins to 1865 (Same as English 209)
(See under English for full description.)
AMST 210(S) American Literature: 1865-Present (Same as English 210)
(See under English for full description.)
AMST 211 Topics in African-American Performance: Theatre, Film, and Dance of the Harlem
Renaissance (Same as Theatre 211) (Not offered 2000-2001)*
(See under Theatre for full description.)
AMST 218(F) Introduction to U.S. Latina and Latino Writing (Same as English 218)*
(See under English for full description.)
AMST 220(S) Introduction to African-American Writing (Same as English 220)*
(See under English for full description.)
AMST 246 Cultural Encounters in the American West (Same as History 368) (Not offered
2000-2001)*
(See under History for full description.)
AMST 250(F) Introduction to U.S. Latino Studies (Same as History 286)*
(See under History for full description.)
AMST 259(F) History of American Photography (Same as ArtH 259)
(See under Art for full description.)
AMST 302(S) Junior Seminar in American Studies: American Minstrelsy (Same as Theatre
321)*
This course will confront the representations and revisions of America's first, original mass entertainment,
blackface minstrelsy. From its original conception as a blackened-up white man dancing as an "authentic"
crippled African American to its more recent use by avant-garde theatre troupes and popular entertainment
figures, minstrelsy has always facilitated social commentary on race and gender roles in America. The
nineteenth century will be discussed in relation to three eras: early minstrelsy, middle minstrelsy, and late
minstrelsy. Early minstrelsy will focus on the legends of the beginning of minstrelsy and its relatively be-
nign material based on the song and dance of African-Americans; middle minstrelsy will bring to light
minstrelsy's well-known racism and sexism in the era of women's suffrage and abolitionist movements;
and late minstrelsy will facilitate discussions on African-Americans' participation in minstrelsy, as well as
its absorption into vaudeville and musical theatre. The twentieth-century minstrelsy examples will include
black musical revues (Shuffle Along), Broadway musicals (Show Boat, King and I), MGM movie musicals
(Babes in Arms), and contemporary television situation comedies (Martin). Readings will be historical and
contemporary.
The course will follow a lecture/discussion format.
Evaluation will be based on a midterm and final research papers (developed over semester), one presenta-
tion on research paper, and attendance in class and at several arranged viewings of performances on video-
tape.
Priority given to American Studies senior majors, and then to Theatre majors.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR BEAN
AMST 304(S) U.S. Masculinity and Its Others (Same as African-American Studies 302 and
Women's and Gender Studies 302)*
(See under Women's and Gender Studies for full description.)
AMST 320 Adolescence in America (Same as History 376) (Not offered 2000-2001)
(See under History for full description.)
AMST 332 Fugitive Identities: Slavery and the Boundaries of American Politics (Same as
Political Science 332) (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)*
(See under Political Science for full description.)
American Studies
­ 52 ­
AMST 338(S) Literature of the American Renaissance (Same as English 338)
(See under English for full description.)
AMST 346 Women of Color in the U.S.: Public and Private Cultures (Same as English 346
and Women's and Gender Studies 346) (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)*
(See under English for full description.)
AMST 358(S) Black Heroes in American Literature (Same as English 358)*
(See under English for full description.)
AMST 364(S) Imagining Urban America, Three Case Studies: Boston, Chicago, and L.A.
(Same as History 466)
(See under History for full description.)
AMST 367(F) Treacherous Terrain: Asian American Literary and Cultural Production (Same
as English 367)*
(See under English for full description.)
AMST 368T The Politics and Rhetoric of Exclusion: Immigration and Its Discontents (Same
as History 488T) (Not offered 2000-2001)+
(See under History for full description.)
AMST 381(F) Old New Technologies (Same as ArtS 381)
(See under Art Studio for full description.)
AMST 386(S) Asian American Women's Writing (Same as English 386)*
(See under English for full description.)
AMST 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
AMST 403(F) Senior Seminar in American Studies: Notions of Race and Ethnicity in
American Culture (Same as History 469)*
While "race" and "ethnicity" have always played fundamental roles in shaping the course of American
history and the image of American society, our understanding of the concepts of race and ethnicity has
often been less than clear. Our goal in this course is to determine and examine how Americans have de-
fined race and ethnicity at various points in our history and how these notions have been acted out in policy,
practice, and theory. Examples of the social and legal construction of race and ethnicity and their expres-
sion in American culture will include white-Native American relations, slavery and its legacy, the "Yellow
Peril," science and race, and contemporary race relations.
Evaluation will be based on class participation and three written assignments: an annotated bibliography,
an historiographical essay, and a final research paper.
Enrollment limited to 18. Priority given to American Studies senior majors, and then to History majors.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W WONG
AMST 405 Automobiles and American Civilization (Same as Environmental Studies 405) (Not
offered 2000-2001)
(See under Environmental Studies for full description.)
AMST 491(F)-W030, W030-492(S) Senior Honors Project
SPECIALIZATION FIELDS
To provide focus for work in the major, each student will choose one of the Specialization Fields listed
below and record this choice when registering for the major. (This commitment can be revised, in consulta-
tion with the chair.) At least five electives will be taken from among those designated to support a special-
ization field. In extraordinary cases, students who wish to do so may be permitted to design their own spe-
cialization field. Fulfillment of concentrations in African-American Studies, Environmental Studies, and
Women's and Gender Studies may be used as the basis for individually designed specialization fields. All
such arrangements must be approved by the American Studies Committee.
CULTURAL PRACTICES
Elective courses:
Cultural practices are the complex means by which peoples of the Americas express themselves, adopt-
ing, altering, and inventing artifacts, and social forms and practices.
ANSO 311 Modern and Postmodern Culture
ANSO 387 Propaganda
ANSO 341 Culture and Violence
Anthropology 207 North-American Indians
ArtH/Environmental Studies 201 American Landscape History
ArtH/Environmental Studies 252 Campuses
ArtH/American Studies 259 History of American Photography
American Studies
­ 53 ­
ArtH 264 American Art and Architecture, 1600 to Present
ArtH 304/Environmental Studies 324 American Transport History (Deleted 2000-2001)
ArtH/Environmental Studies 305 North-American Suburbs
ArtH 306/Environmental Studies 326 North-American Dwellings
ArtH 307/Environmental Studies 327 The North-American Park Idea
ArtH 352 Topics in American Art: The Crisis of Victorian Painting
ArtH 403 The American House
English 111 Thinking and Writing About Television (Deleted 2000-2001)
English 117 American Cinema in the 70s: The Other American Renaissance (Deleted 2000-2001)
English 123 Contemporary American Short Fiction
English/American Studies 127 The Harlem Renaissance (Deleted 2000-2001)
English/American Studies 133 The Frontier in American Literature and Film
English/American Studies 209 American Literature: Origins to 1865
English/American Studies 210 American Literature: 1865-Present
English/American Studies 218 Introduction to U.S. Latina and Latino Writing
English/Women's and Gender Studies 219 Introduction to Literature by Women
English/American Studies 220 Introduction to African-American Writing
English/AMS 231T Literature of the Sea
English/American Studies 338 Literature of the American Renaissance
English 341 American Genders, American Sexualities
English 342 Postcolonial Literature
English 347 Henry James
English 349 American Modernism of the 1920s
English 352 American Realism (Deleted 2000-2001)
English 354 Contemporary American Poetry
English/Literary Studies 355/American Studies 403 Theorizing Whiteness (Deleted 2000-2001)
English 357 Contemporary American Fiction
English 364 Classical Hollywood Comedy
English 371 Feminist Theory and the Representation of Women in Film
English 376/ArtS 384 Documentary Technologies
English 377 Suicides and Survivors
English 385 Indian Fictions (Deleted 2000-2001)
English/ArtS 387 American Gothic Video (Deleted 2000-2001)
French 215 The Fashioning of Fashion: Theory and Practice
History 148 (formerly 102) The Mexican Revolution: 1910 to NAFTA
History 157 (formerly 115) The Great Depression: Culture, Society, and Politics in the 1930s
History 175 (formerly 114) Families and Social Change: An Introduction to the Study of Private Life
History 301B Autobiography as History: An American Character?
History 353 (formerly 319 Politics and Culture in Colonial British America
History 358 (formerly 242) The "Good War": World War II and American Culture and Society
History 368 (formerly 246)/American Studies 246 Cultural Encounters in the American West
History 376 (formerly 320) /American Studies 320 Adolescence in America
History 378 (formerly 344) /Women's and Gender Studies 344 The History of Sexuality in America
History 379 (formerly 324) /Women's and Gender Studies 324 Women in the United States Since
1870
History 382 (formerly 318) The Black Radical Tradition in America
History 385T Inventing Gender: America 1600-1850 (Deleted 2000-2001)
History 386 (formerly 317) Intellectual Traditions of Chicano Nationalism
History 389 (formerly 327) Major Themes in the History of Native Americans
History 453 (formerly 361) Salem Witchcraft
History 466 (formerly 364)/American Studies 364 Imagining Urban America, Three Case Studies:
Boston, Chicago, and L.A.
History 471 (formerly 369) Methods in Latino Studies: Community, Family, and Identity Formation
History of Science 240 Technology and Science in American Culture
Literary Studies 111 Introduction to Cultural Studies: Traveling Fictions--Encountering the Other
Through Tourism, Time Travel, Exile
Literary Studies 215/Spanish 205 The Latin-American Novel in Translation
Music 111 Popular Music: Revolutions in the History of Rock
Music 114 American Music
Music 122 African-American Music
Music 130 History of Jazz
Music 140 Introduction to the Music of Duke Ellington
Music 141 Introduction to the Music of John Coltrane
Music 212 Jazz Theory and Improvisation I
Political Science 212 Mass Media in American Politics
Political Science 239 Political Thinking About Race: Resurrecting the Political in Contemporary
Texts on the Black Experience
American Studies
­ 54 ­
Political Science/American Studies 332 Fugitive Identities: Slavery and the Boundaries of American
Politics
Religion 283 Introduction to the Semiotics of Culture (Deleted 2000-2001)
Sociology 215 Crime in the Streets
Sociology 368 Technology and Modern Society
Theatre 210 Multicultural Performance
Theatre/American Studies 211 Topics in African-American Performance: Theatre, Film, and Dance
of the Harlem Renaissance
Theatre 213T Paul Robeson: Visible Man
POWER, POLITICS, AND BELIEF
Any political or social movement is ultimately based on a set of beliefs about what the world is, or ought
to be. This specialization examines American society in terms of its underlying belief system and ideolo-
gies, how these are translated into political, institutional, and cultural life, and how they shape the nature
and distribution of power in society.
ANSO 387 Propaganda
Economics 208 Modern Corporate Industry
Economics 209 Labor Economics
Economics 220 American Economic History
Economics 237 The Economics of Inequality and Poverty
Economics 355 Feminist Economics
Economics 386 The Economics of Inequality
English/American Studies 218 Introduction to U.S. Latina and Latino Writing
English/American Studies 220 Introduction to African-American Writing
English 341 American Genders, American Sexualities
English 342 Postcolonial Literature
English/American Studies/Women's and Gender Studies 346 Women of Color in the U.S.: Public and
Private Culture
English/Literary Studies 355/American Studies 403 Theorizing Whiteness (Deleted 2000-2001)
History 148 (formerly 102) The Mexican Revolution: 1910 to NAFTA
History 157 (formerly 115) The Great Depression: Culture, Society, and Politics in the 1930s
History 164 (formerly 104) Slavery in the American South
History 243 (formerly 288) Modern Latin America, 1822 to the Present
History 252 (formerly 243) America from San Gabriel to Gettysburg, 1492-1865
History 253 (formerly 244) The United States From Appomattox to AOL, 1865 to Present
History 281 (formerly 261) African-American History Through Emancipation
History 282 (formerly 262) African-American History From Reconstruction to the Present
History 326 Rise and Fall of the Mexican Revolution (Deleted 2000-2001)
History 343 (formerly 328) Gender and History in Latin America
History 344 (formerly 305) Latin-American Revolutions and the United States
History 346 (formerly 314) History of Modern Brazil, 1822 to the Present
History 353 (formerly 319) Politics and Culture in Colonial British America
History 354 (formerly 321) Gender and Community in Early America
History 354T The Anglo-American World in the Eighteenth Century: War, Society, and Politics,
1700-1775 (Deleted 2000-2001)
History 358 (formerly 242) The "Good War": World War II and American Culture and Society
History 364 (formerly 311) History of the Old South
History 365 (formerly 312) History of the New South
History 368 (formerly 246)/American Studies 246 Cultural Encounters in the American West
History 370 (formerly 308) Studies in American Social Change
History 372 (formerly 313) The Rise of American Business
History 379 (formerly 324)/Women's and Gender Studies 324 Women in the United States Since
1870
History 380 (formerly 227) Comparative American Immigration History
History 382 (formerly 318) The Black Radical Tradition in America
History 386 (formerly 317) Intellectual Traditions of Chicano Nationalism
History 389 (formerly 327) Major Themes in the History of Native Americans
History 453 (formerly 361) Salem Witchcraft
History 454 (formerly 386) The American Revolution
History 456 (formerly 360) Civil War and Reconstruction
History 488T (formerly 368T)/American Studies 368T The Politics and Rhetoric of Exclusion: Im-
migration and Its Discontents
History of Science 240 Technology and Science in American Culture
Political Science/American Studies 100S Politics and Freedom
Political Science 101 (section 02) Moral and Political Reasoning
Political Science 201 (formerly 110) Power, Politics, and Democracy in America
Political Science 207 Political Elections
American Studies
­ 55 ­
Political Science 208 The Politics of Family Policy
Political Science 209 Poverty in America
Political Science 211 Public Opinion and Political Behavior
Political Science 212 Mass Media in American Politics
Political Science 214 (formerly 313) Congressional Politics Today
Political Science 216 Constitutional Law II: Individual Rights
Political Science 218 Presidential Politics
Political Science 219 Constitutional Law I: Structures of Power
Political Science 230 American Political Thought
Political Science 239 Political Thinking about Race: Resurrecting the Political in Contemporary Texts
on the Black Experience
Political Science 311 The Personal and the Political in Practice: Gender, Sexuality, and Political Pow-
er in America (Deleted 2000-2001)
Political Science 312 Southern Politics (Deleted 2000-2001)
Political Science 315 American Political Parties
Political Science 316 Public Policymaking in the U.S.
Political Science 318 The Voting Rights Act and the Voting Rights Movement
Political Science 319 The First Amendment
Political Science/American Studies 332 Fugitive Identities: Slavery and the Boundaries of American
Politics
Political Science/Women's and Gender Studies 336 Sex, Gender, and Political Theory
Political Science 338 American Legal Philosophy
Political Science 410 Senior Seminar in American Politics
Religion 221/History 373 (formerly 221) American Religious History
Religion 224/History 374 (formerly 224) North-American Catholic History
Religion/Sociology 225 Religion and Popular Culture in America
Religion 226/History 381 African-American Religious History
Religion/Environmental Studies 276 Grounding the Sacred: Religion and Ecology in the United
States
Religion 277 Apocalypses: Varieties of Millennial Discourse
Sociology 203 Social Inequality
Sociology 206 Religion and the Social Order
Sociology 210 The Construction of Social Problems
Sociology 215 Crime in the Streets
Sociology 218 Law and Modern Society
Sociology 265 Drugs and Society
SPACE AND PLACE
This route focuses on the human landscape and the built environment. Courses listed below variously
undertake the reading of geographical regions, patterns of habitation, imagined spaces, property relations
and/or artifacts.
ANSO 311 Modern and Postmodern Culture
Anthropology 103 Pyramids, Bones, and Sherds: What is Archaeology?
Anthropology 207 North-American Indians
Anthropology 215 Secrets of Ancient Peru: Archaeology of South America
Anthropology 217 Mesoamerican Civilizations
Anthropology/EXPR/Religion 273 Sacred Geographies
ArtH/Environmental Studies 252 Campuses
ArtH 264 American Art and Architecture, 1600 to Present
ArtH 304/Environmental Studies 324 American Transport History (Deleted 2000-2001)
ArtH/Environmental Studies 305 North-American Suburbs
ArtH 306/Environmental Studies 326 North-American Dwellings
ArtH 307/Environmental Studies 327 The North-American Park Idea
ArtH 403 The American House
Economics/Environmental Studies 238 The Regions of America
English 115 The Space of Literature (Deleted 2000-2001)
English 342 Postcolonial Literature
Environmental Studies 101 Humans in the Landscape
EXPR 242/ArtH 268/ArtS 212 Cyberscapes
EXPR 252 Service, Community, and Self
Geosciences 105 Geology Outdoors
Geosciences 201/Environmental Studies 205 Geomorphology
Geosciences/Environmental Studies 208 Water and the Environment
History 364 (formerly 311) History of the Old South
History 365 (formerly 312) History of the New South
History 380 (formerly 227) Comparative American Immigration History
History/Environmental Studies 393 (formerly 306) Urban Theory
American Studies
­ 56 ­
History 466 (formerly 364)/American Studies 364 Imagining Urban America, Three Case Studies:
Boston, Chicago, and L.A.
History 478 (formerly 381) The Ghetto from Venice to Harlem
Literary Studies 111 Introduction to Cultural Studies: Traveling Fictions--Encountering the Other
Through Tourism, Time Travel, Exile
Political Science 312 Southern Politics (Deleted 2000-2001)
Political Science 317/Environmental Studies 307 Environmental Law
Political Science 335 The Public Sphere
Political Science 349T Cuba and the United States
Religion/Environmental Studies 287 Inhabiting Nature: Religious, Philosophical, and Sociological
Perspectives (Deleted 2000-2001)
Sociology 215 Crime in the Streets
RACE AND ETHNICITY
This specialization takes up the question of American identities as those are determined and sometimes
confounded by racial and ethnic difference. How has difference within the American "community" been
defined, and by whom? What have been the real historical, cultural, economic, and social effects of these
discursive definitions?
Anthropology 207 North-American Indians
Anthropology 216 Native-Peoples of Latin America
Economics 237 The Economics of Inequality and Poverty
English/American Studies 127 The Harlem Renaissance (Deleted 2000-2001)
English/American Studies 218 Introduction to U.S. Latina and Latino Writing
English/American Studies 220 Introduction to African-American Writing
English 341 American Genders, American Sexualities
English 342 Postcolonial Literature
English/Literary Studies 355/American Studies 403 Theorizing Whiteness (Deleted 2000-2001)
English 385 Indian Fictions (Deleted 2000-2001)
History/American Studies 111 Topics in Asian-American History (Deleted 2000-2001)
History 148 (formerly 102) The Mexican Revolution: 1910 to NAFTA
History 164 (formerly 104) Slavery in the American South
History 243 (formerly 288) Modern Latin America, 1822 to the Present
History 249 (formerly 225) The Caribbean from Slavery to Independence: A Comparison of Empires
History 281 (formerly 261) African-American History Through Emancipation
History 282 (formerly 262) African-American History From Reconstruction to the Present
History 286 (formerly 250)/American Studies 250 Introduction to U.S. Latino Studies
History 326 Rise and Fall of the Mexican Revolution (Deleted 2000-2001)
History 364 (formerly 311) History of the Old South
History 365 (formerly 312) History of the New South
History 368 (formerly 246)/American Studies 246 Cultural Encounters in the American West
History 370 (formerly 308) Studies in American Social Change
History 380 (formerly 227) Comparative American Immigration History
History 382 (formerly 318) The Black Radical Tradition in America
History 384 (formerly 331) Comparative Asian-American History, 1850-1965
History 385 (formerly 332) Contemporary Issues in Recent Asian-American History, 1965-Present
History 386 (formerly 317) Intellectual Traditions of Chicano Nationalism
History 387 (formerly 211) Puerto Ricans in the United States
History 389 (formerly 327) Major Themes in the History of Native Americans
History 390 (formerly 343) An Intellectual History of Southwestern Indians
History 443 (formerly 355) Slavery, Race and Ethnicity in Latin America
History 456 (formerly 360) Civil War and Reconstruction
History 470 (formerly 358) The Chinese-American Experience
History 471 (formerly 369 Methods in Latino Studies: Community, Family, and Identity Formation
History 472 (formerly 351) Slavery, Capitalism, and Revolution: The Impact of the New World on
Europe, 1700-1900
History 478 (formerly 381 The Ghetto from Venice to Harlem
History/American Studies 488T (formerly 368T) The Politics and Rhetoric of Exclusion: Immigra-
tion and Its Discontents
Literary Studies 111 Introduction to Cultural Studies: Traveling Fictions--Encountering the Other
Through Tourism, Time Travel, Exile
Music 122 African-American Music
Music 130 History of Jazz
Political Science 101 (Section 02) Moral and Political Reasoning
Political Science 213 Theory and Practice of Civil Rights Protest
Political Science 233/AAS 200 Beyond Double Consciousness: Gunnar Myrdal and the Construction
of Race as Dilemma
Political Science 246 Contemporary Mexican Politics (Deleted 2000-2001)
American Studies, Anthropology and Sociology
­ 57 ­
Political Science 249 Latin-American Politics
Political Science 312 Southern Politics (Deleted 2000-2001)
Political Science 318 The Voting Rights Act and the Voting Rights Movement
Political Science/American Studies 332 Fugitive Identities: Slavery and the Boundaries of American
Politics
Political Science 344 Rebels and Revolution in Latin America
Political Science 349T Cuba and the United States
Psychology 341 Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination
Religion 226/History 381 African-American Religious History
Sociology 103 Behind the Rhetoric of Race: Race, Ethnicity, and Public Policy
Sociology 203 Social Inequality
Sociology 220 Ethnicity (Deleted 2000-2001)
Theatre 210 Multicultural Performance
Theatre/American Studies 211 Topics in African-American Performance: Theatre, Film, and Dance
of the Harlem Renaissance
Theatre 213T Paul Robeson: Visible Man
PRE-1900 COURSES
ArtH 264 American Art and Architecture, 1600 to Present
Economics 220 American Economic History
English/American Studies 209 American Literature: Origins to 1865
English/American Studies 338 Literature of the American Renaissance
History 164 (formerly 104) Slavery in the American South
History 242 (formerly 287) Latin America from Conquest to Independence
History 252 (formerly 243) America from San Gabriel to Gettysburg: 1492-1865
History 281 (formerly 261) African-American History Through Emancipation
History 353 (formerly 319) Politics and Culture in Colonial British America
History 354T The Anglo-American World in the Eighteenth Century: War, Society, and Politics,
1700-1775 (Deleted 2000-2001)
History 364 (formerly 311) History of the Old South
History 368 (formerly 246)/American Studies 246 Cultural Encounters in the American West
History 380 (formerly 227) Comparative American Immigration History
History 385T Inventing Gender: America 1600-1850 (Deleted 2000-2001)
History 453 (formerly 361) Salem Witchcraft
History 454 (formerly 386) The American Revolution
History 472 (formerly 351) Slavery, Capitalism, and Revolution: the Impact of the New World on
Europe, 1700-1900
History of Science 240 Technology and Science in American Culture
Political Science 230 American Political Thought
Political Science/American Studies 332 Fugitive Identities: Slavery and the Boundaries of American
Politics
ANTHROPOLOGY AND SOCIOLOGY (Div. II)
Chair, Professor DAVID B. EDWARDS
Professors: M. F. BROWN, D. EDWARDS, JACKALL**. Associate Professor: JUST. Assistant
Professors: BACON, CRIST, FOIAS*, NOLAN**. Visiting Assistant Professor: CHURCHILL§,
MONNIER, TOSTEVIN.
The Department of Anthropology and Sociology at Williams aims to help students achieve an inte-
grated understanding of biography, history, culture, and social structure in both traditional and modern so-
cieties.
Anthropology explores the full range of human experience by introducing students to the study of tribal
and peasant societies, especially those on the periphery of the West, as well as to the cultural complexities
of stratified, industrial societies such as our own. Integrated with the study of specific peoples is an ex-
amination of the various analytical schemes anthropologists have developed to understand them. Courses
offered in the department represent two of Anthropology's major subfields: sociocultural anthropolo-
gy--that is, the comparative study of human social life, institutions, and beliefs--and archaeology, the
study of the origins and lifeways of prehistoric peoples.
Sociology studies the social and institutional intricacies of modern industrial societies and the social
psychological dilemmas facing the individual in our epoch. Sociology courses introduce students to classi-
cal and contemporary social thought about men and women and society, to the systematic analysis of so-
cial institutions and social interaction, and to the social analysis of modern culture. The Sociology major at
Williams emphasizes the humanistic tradition of sociology, stressing qualitative approaches to understand-
ing how social reality is constructed.
MAJORS
The department offers separate majors in both Anthropology and Sociology, with a broad and diverse
array of courses in both disciplines. The department is committed, however, to the unity of the social
Anthropology and Sociology
­ 58 ­
sciences. To this end, Anthropology and Sociology offer joint core courses in methodology and theory, as
well as several elective courses in common. All joint courses are designated "ANSO."
Requirements
For the degree in Anthropology or Sociology, students must complete a minimum of nine courses as
outlined below:
(1) Core Courses. Majors in both disciplines must take a sequence of four core courses. Three of these
are joint (ANSO) courses. The sequences are:
Anthropology Joint (ANSO) Sociology
ANTH 101 The Scope SOC 101 Invitation to
of Anthropology Sociology
ANSO 205
Ways of Knowing
ANSO 305
Social Theory
ANSO 402
Senior Seminar
(2) Elective Courses. Majors in Anthropology or Sociology must take five elective courses from the
course listings of their respective disciplines or from the joint ANSO listings. Two of the courses
chosen are normally at the 300 level or above. In close consultation with their departmental advisors,
students may take some selected courses from other disciplines to fulfill major requirements in either
Anthropology or Sociology.
AREA STUDIES CONCENTRATION
Students who wish to combine a major in Anthropology or Sociology with an Area Studies concentra-
tion are encouraged to do so. Courses taken to satisfy an Area Studies requirement may be counted toward
the major with prior approval of a student's departmental advisor. The only exception to this rule is the
Area Studies senior seminar, which cannot ordinarily be counted toward the Anthropology or Sociology
degree.
LANGUAGE STUDY, STUDY ABROAD, AND WINTER STUDY
Departmental advisors will help interested students integrate a major with study abroad, foreign lan-
guage study, or field research during the winter study period. The department encourages Williams stu-
dents to take advantage of established foreign study programs in Egypt, Japan, India, Hong Kong, and
various European and African countries. Because some foreign study programs do not offer courses that
can be counted toward the Anthropology or Sociology degrees, however, sophomores planning to study
abroad in junior year must consult with the departmental advisor before declaring a major.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN ANTHROPOLOGY OR SOCIOLOGY
Honors and highest honors are normally awarded for the completion of a year-long research project that
has resulted in an original thesis of high quality. Students wishing to write an honors thesis should engage a
member of the department faculty as a Thesis Advisor as soon as possible andmust submit a proposal for
the thesis for department approval no later than preregistration in the spring of the junior year. If the pro-
posal is approved, they will be permitted to register for Anthropology and Sociology 493-W031-494, dur-
ing which they will write and defend a thesis. If their overall work in the major continues to be of high
quality and the thesis is deemed of a similar quality, they may be awarded honors or highest honors in
Anthropology or Sociology.
ANTHROPOLOGY / SOCIOLOGY COURSES
JOINT CORE COURSES
ANSO 205(S) Ways of Knowing
An exploration of how one makes sense of the social world. Some of the key questions of the course are:
What are the philosophical and epistemological underpinnings of social inquiry? How does one frame in-
tellectual problems and go about collecting, sifting, and assessing field materials? What are the uses and
limits of statistical data? What is the importance of history to sociological and anthropological research?
How can one use archival and other documentary materials to enrich ethnographic research? What are the
empirical limits to interpretation? What is the relationship between empirical data and the generation of
social theory? How does the social organization of social research affect one's inquiry? What are the typi-
cal ethical dilemmas of fieldwork and of other kinds of social research? How do researchers' personal
biographies and values shape their work? We will approach these problems concretely rather than ab-
stractly through a series of case studies of how men and women in the world of affairs, ranging from
detectives, epidemiologists, and corporate lawyers, make sense of their worlds in order to act re-
sponsibly. We will also draw upon the field experiences of departmental faculty in settings as di-
verse as the jungles of Guatemala, the mountains of Sumbawa, Afgan refugee camps, immigrant
communities in Chicago, big city police departments and district attorney offices, corporate offices
Anthropology and Sociology
­ 59 ­
on Wall Street, and criminal drug courts across America. There will also be some practical training
in basic field methods, census and survey interpretation, and archival research.
Requirements: a series of short papers and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Anthropology 101 or Sociology 101 or permission of instructor.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W JACKALL
ANSO 305(F) Social Theory
This course tries to recapture common ground on the sharply contested plain of "social theory." It begins
with pairs of classic anthropological and sociological studies showing how the two disciplines typically
approach fundamental problems of human experience and address such key questions as: How do men
and women in different societies and epochs construct and maintain social order? How do they allocate
authority, responsibility, and blame, as well as social prestige, power, and material wealth? What systems
of beliefs and reinforcing symbols do they fashion to come to grips with evil, misfortune, and mortality?
What happens when social worlds fall apart? In considering such issues through concrete studies, we will
reconstruct the intellectual and social histories of both disciplines, examining in particular how the two
disciplines abandoned common ground and language, with sociologists gravitating toward paradigms of
scientific predictability and anthropologists toward relativistic frameworks of interpretation. The course
explores the confrontations of both disciplines with the troubling puzzles of modernity. It analyzes the con-
temporary appropriation of the "primitive," as well as the significance of remote anthropological discover-
ies, often in re-enchanted form, of the same demystified, commercial, bureaucratic processes that sociolo-
gists study in the metropolis. Finally, the course examines the migration of ideas from anthropology and
sociology to disciplines as diverse as literary and art criticism, philosophy, religion, political science, and
history, and the counterflow of ideas back to anthropology and sociology. The course emphasizes the con-
flict between interpretive frameworks and ways to reconcile and build upon these intellectual differences in
order to make sense of the social world.
Prerequisites: Anthropology 101 or Sociology 101 and ANSO 205 or permission of the instructor.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR M. F. BROWN
ANSO 402(S) Senior Seminar: Ritual, Politics, and Power: Understanding Political Action
(Same as African and Middle Eastern Studies 402)*
This course is a capstone seminar, required of all department majors, but open to interested seniors and
juniors in any department. Each year we will use a single analytical topic to explore in depth the theoretical
and methodological foundations of the discipline.
Politics seems at first glance to be a category of action that one would find in any society. In practice, how-
ever, few concepts are as problematic to apply cross-culturally. Our notions of what constitutes politics do
not map well onto other cultures and consequentially often hinder rather than amplify understanding. One
of the objectives of this course is to examine our own preconceptions (for example, those concerning the
nature of authority, the state, coercion and persuasion, and the individual) by considering them in relation to
formulations found in other social contexts. A second objective is to understand the cultural dimension of
political organization and the ways in which political power is contested and legitimated. Examples are
taken primarily from the Middle East, sub-Saharan Africa, and South and Southeast Asia.
Discussion seminar.
Requirements: a research paper, two short response papers, and class facilitation.
Prerequisites: Anthropology 101, 103, Sociology 101, any upper-level Anthropology or Sociology course,
or permission of instructor. Enrollment limited to 25.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR D. EDWARDS
JOINT ELECTIVE COURSES
ANSO 201 Violence (Not offered 2000-2001)
This multidisciplinary course analyzes violence and aggression within broad historical and comparative
frameworks. The course begins with an examination of the universality of violence and humankind's
ceaseless fascination with it. It then proceeds through an examination of types and meanings of violence.
Topics include: war and warriors; industrialized violence; ethnic and racial savagery; violence in the name
of God; political violence; terror; honor and violence; sexual violence; criminal violence; and self-destruc-
tiveness. The course concludes with a look at forces of order and peace in several historical contexts. Spe-
cial attention paid throughout to representations of violence in art, literature, and cinema. Readings include
selections from Homer, Aeschylus, Tacitus, Suetonius, Dostoevsky, Arendt, Sorel, Marx, Durkheim, Web-
er, Bloch, Tambiah, and Deutscher, along with many other classical and contemporary writers.
Class format: lecture and discussion.
Requirements: extensive reading, class presentations, midterm and final exams, term paper.
Enrollment limited to 25. Priority to first-year students and sophomores.
JACKALL
ANSO 214 The Rise and Fall of Civilizations (Same as Environmental Studies 224) (Not
offered 2000-2001)*
Over the centuries, philosophers and historians have asked how did societies evolve from simple hunter-
gatherer bands to urban complex civilizations? Human prehistory and history have shown the repeated
cycles of the rise, expansion and collapse of early civilizations in both the Old and New World. What do
Anthropology and Sociology
­ 60 ­
the similarities and differences in the development of these first civilizations tell us about the nature of
societal change, of civilization and the state, and of human society itself? The course will examine these
issues through an introductory survey of the earliest civilizations in Mesopotamia, Egypt, India, Mesoam-
erica and South America. Classical and modern theories on the nature, origin, and development of the state
will be reviewed in the light of the archaeological evidence.
Class format: lectures, films, and class discussions.
Requirements: midterm, final exam, and short paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 40.
FOIAS
ANSO 216(F) Community and Identity
Even as accelerating technological changes, profound economic upheavals, and increasing political con-
flicts reshape American social structure and American lives, Americans continue to refer to the milieux in
which they live and work as "communities." Indeed, the notion of "community," whether the term is used
nostalgically or hopefully, has a powerful resonance in American public forums. Yet contemporary notions
of "community" are rooted in an increasingly unknown and unacknowledged social history both of com-
munity life itself and of scholarship on particular communities. In this course, we will read several classic
analyses of American communities from the 1920s to the present, such as the Lynds' famous Middletown
(1929), to Vidich's and Bensman's Small Town in Mass Society (1957), to Jonathan Rieder's Carnarsie
(1985), with special attention to the relationships between the larger society and individual communities.
How and why do some communities consider themselves protected from larger social forces, while others
see themselves engulfed by them? How and why do some communities locate their communal identities
precisely in overt conflicts with the larger society? Students will do studies of particular communities as
term projects to explore, among other themes, the ideologies behind communities' self-presentations to the
world.
Class format: seminar.
Requirements: mid-term essay, field-study paper.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR CHURCHILL
ANSO 230 Sociolinguistics (Same as Linguistics 202) (Not offered 2000-2001)
(See under Linguistics for full description.)
ANSO 240(S) Gender and Science: Historical and Contemporary Issues (Same as Women's
and Gender Studies 240)
This course explores intersections of gender, feminism, science, and technology. The themes we will in-
vestigate are women in science, critical studies of scientific representations of sex and gender, technology
and the body, and feminist epistemologies. Specific topics include: the historical exclusion of women from
universities and scientific societies; women's contributions to major scientific discoveries; women as invis-
ible technicians; the construction of gender differences in scientific writing and practice; feminist critiques
of the scientific method; women, ecology, and the scientific revolution; the writings of men and women
primatologists; and connections between ways of knowing and gender.
Format: seminar.
Requirements: several short papers; one final research paper. Enrollment limited. Priority given to majors
and WGST concentrators.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF CRIST
ANSO 241(S) Globalization and Environment
The aim of this course is to achieve a broad understanding of the present-day environmental predicament;
to examine economic, technological, and cultural causes of the environmental crisis; to survey major twen-
tieth century social movements and critical discourse on environment; and to investigate the contemporary
convergence between environmental science and ethics. Topics include: worldwide population growth and
consumption patterns, with emphasis on first-third world comparison; the impact of industrialism and the
global market on the natural world; connections between poverty, conflict, scarcity, and environmental de-
terioration; food production and water management in the twenty-first century; the development of alterna-
tive technologies; the perspectives of deep ecology, social ecology, ecofeminism, and sustainable develop-
ment; and the politics of knowledge in scientific analyses of biodiversity loss, climate change, and global
pollution.
Format: seminar.
Requirements: several short papers; one final research paper. Enrollment limited to 25. Priority given to
majors and Environmental Studies concentrators.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR CRIST
ANSO 311 Modern and Postmodern Culture (Not offered 2000-2001)
This class will explore how the modern processes of cultural and structural pluralization, rationalization,
urbanization, and the triumph of technology have undermined traditional sources of meaning; affected un-
derstandings of the self, community, and social relationships; and complicated the individual's quest to
make meaningful sense of the world. Investigation into the effects of modernity on social arrangements
and individual consciousness will include analysis of what new strategies, forms of discourse, and codes of
moral understanding individuals are appealing to in the contemporary context in order to cope with or
Anthropology and Sociology
­ 61 ­
"face up to" the quandary of modernity. The course will also consider whether modern culture has itself
evolved into a new epistemic order. Has ours become a postmodern culture? Or is it best characterized as
the further advancement of modernity-what some call "high modern" culture? What further perplexities
might so-called postmodern developments (i.e., fragmentation, anti-foundationalism, globalization, and
the collapse of the great modernist narratives) pose on individual and collective quests to make meaningful
sense of the world; on social understandings of the past and visions for the future; and on collective efforts
to sustain the public order?
Class format: discussion seminar.
Requirements: midterm, book review essay, and research paper.
NOLAN
ANSO 320 Health and Illness in Cross-Cultural Perspective (Not offered 2000-2001)*
Medical practices reflect the cultural values and beliefs of the societies in which they arise. This course will
compare the ideology and social dynamics of health care in a variety of non-Western and Western soci-
eties. Topics will include: changing health patterns through human history; cultural definitions of well-be-
ing and illness; the social impact of illness; ritual healing and its interpretation; cross-cultural differences in
childbirth practices; and health care in pluralistic societies.
Class format: seminar.
Requirements: two written exercises and a take-home final exam.
Prerequisite: Anthropology 101 or ANSO 205 recommended, but not required.
Enrollment limited to 25.
M. F. BROWN
ANSO 328T Emotions and the Self (Not offered 2000-2001)*+
Everyone everywhere experiences emotions, and everyone everywhere is faced with the task of conceptu-
alizing a self-hood and its place in the social world. This course analyzes a variety of recent attempts in the
social sciences to come to grips with topics that have long been avoided: the nature of the interior experi-
ence and an epistemological framework for its cross-cultural comparison. Exploring the borderlands be-
tween anthropology, sociology, and psychology, we will bring the tools of ethnographic analysis to bear on
central pan-human concepts: emotions and the self. By examining these phenomena as they occur in other
cultures, we will be better placed to apprehend and challenge the implicit (and often unconsciously held)
assumptions about emotions and the self in our own culture, both in daily life and in academic psychologi-
cal theory. What are emotions? Are they things--neuro-physiological states--or ideas--sociocultural
constructions? How are they to be described; compared? What is the self? How are selves constructed and
constituted? How do various cultures respond to categories of emotion and self, and how can we develop a
sense of the relationship between self and emotion?
Class format: tutorial.
Open to first-year students.
JUST
ANSO 341 Culture and Violence (Not offered 2000-2001)*
This course will consider two propositions related to culture and the problem of violence. The first is that,
while violence is generally viewed as antithetical to society, violence (as institution and experience) is the
foundation of society and the social order. The second proposition is that there exists a structural and sym-
bolic continuity between the elementary forms of violence found in so-called primitive societies and those
which exist in complex societies, including our own. In examining these propositions, we will look at a
number of case studies to determine how violence is implicated in the constitutions of society and whether
or not violence itself can be said to have its own meaning, logic, and order. Among the questions we will
consider are the following: How are individuals conditioned to act in violent ways? How is violence ritual-
ly patterned and culturally sanctioned? And are there discernible patterns in the relationship between vio-
lence and power in simple and complex societies?
Discussion seminar.
Requirements: two response papers, a research paper, and class facilitation.
Prerequisite: Anthropology and Sociology majors, or permission of instructor.
D. EDWARDS
ANSO 352 Following the Leader: Charisma, Tradition and Bureaucracy (Not offered
2000-2001)
An analysis of leadership and legitimacy within the framework of Max Weber's sociology. The course
proceeds through comparative historical studies of religious, military, political, and intellectual leaders, in
good times and bad, to appraisals of contemporary leaders in bureaucratic settings. Special emphasis on the
different types and styles of leadership, on the moral dilemmas of leaders in the face of perceived exigen-
cies, and on various claims to authority and their reception.
Seminar format.
Requirements: class presentations and a major paper.
Permission of the instructor required. Enrollment limited to 20.
(This course is part of the Leadership Studies cluster.)
JACKALL
Anthropology and Sociology
­ 62 ­
ANSO 387 Propaganda (Not offered 2000-2001)
A sociological analysis of the phenomenon of mass persuasion in modern society. The course will examine
the institutional and technical apparatus of modern propaganda and the role of intellectuals and technicians
in shaping and disseminating propaganda. The symbolic content of specific kinds of propaganda--politi-
cal, commercial, social, and organizational--will be considered with attention to propaganda that seeks to
overthrow social structures as well as maintain them. The course will proceed through a series of intensive
case studies with a particular focus on propagandists themselves, considered as experts with symbols, and
on the institutional milieux in which they work. Among other examples, we will examine the U.S. Com-
mittee on Public Information during World War I; the Nazi Ministry of Propaganda; the propaganda ma-
chinery in contemporary revolutionary states of both the left and right; conservative and liberal "public
interest" groups; propaganda in contemporary social movements and national political campaigns; the
workings of corporate personnel offices; and advertising and public relations agencies in the United States.
Throughout the course, we will analyze how the language, ideologies, and visual symbols of particular
varieties of propaganda seem to affect mass audiences.
Requirements: full participation in seminar, short papers, and a major paper.
JACKALL
ANTHROPOLOGY COURSES
Reminder: check the Anthropology/Sociology (ANSO) listings for additional courses.
ANTH 101(F,S) The Scope of Anthropology*
Is there such a thing as "human nature"? Why have human societies developed such a bewildering range
of customs to deal with problems common to people everywhere? This course addresses these questions
by introducing students to the comparative study of human social life and culture. Topics surveyed in the
course include economics, language and thought, kinship and marriage, law and politics, and the wide
variations in human belief systems, including religions. The course also considers the ways that anthropol-
ogy, a discipline that was until recently practiced almost exclusively by Westerners, approaches other soci-
eties in search of insights on our own customs and values. Ethnographic descriptions of both "simple"
tribal societies and complex modern ones are a prominent part of the readings.
Class format: a combination of lectures and class discussion of case studies and ethnographic films.
Requirements: a midterm, a final exam, a term paper, and class participation.
Enrollment limited to 30, with priority given to first-year students and sophomores.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF, 1:10-2:25 MR First Semester: M. F. BROWN, D. EDWARDS
1:10-2:25 TF Second Semester: JUST
ANTH 102(F) Human Evolution: Down from the Trees, Out to the Stars (Same as
Environmental Studies 106)
One important way of understanding what it means to be a human being is to see humankind as an evolv-
ing species. This course traces the story of our evolution, in terms of both the fossil evidence of our ana-
tomical evolution and the archaeological, primatological, and conjectural evidence for the evolution of hu-
man behavior. We will trace five million years of human (and near-human) history as our ancestors are
transformed from creatures of the forest canopy to upright scavengers of the African plains, to the fire-us-
ing species that burst out of Africa and spread across the globe, to the cold-adapted Neanderthals, to the
anatomically modern humans whose ability to manipulate symbolic communication has placed footprints
on the moon while bringing us to the verge of self-destruction.
Class format: lecture and discussion.
Requirements: research paper, two quizzes, and two exams.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF MONNIER
ANTH 103(S) Pyramids, Bones, and Sherds: What is Archaeology?*
Anthropology examines not only living societies, but also prehistoric cultures whose remains are found
worldwide. This course will present how archaeology examines the various aspects of human society from
the physical record of prehistory. How do we study the subsistence and settlement patterns, the political
and social organization, and the economy and ideology of prehistoric societies who have left behind mute
material records? The objective of anthropological archaeology is to bring to life these prehistoric cultures
through archaeological analysis. The different goals, approaches and methodologies of modern archaeolo-
gy will be discussed theoretically and then applied to case studies.
Class format: lectures, class presentations and discussion of case studies.
Requirements: class presentations, two papers, midterm and final exams.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 40.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR MONNIER and TOSTEVIN
ANTH 107(S) Introduction to Linguistics (Same as Linguistics 101)
(See under Linguistics for full description.)
ANTH 207 North-American Indians (Not offered 2000-2001)*+
An introduction to the subsistence strategies, social life, and religious vision of native North Americans.
Particular attention will be paid to the sharp differences among Native-American world views and to di-
verse strategies for cultural survival in contemporary America. Readings will include autobiographical,
Anthropology and Sociology
­ 63 ­
ethnographic, and historical works, as well as examples of contemporary Native-American literature.
Class format: seminar, with a high level of class participation expected.
Requirements: a midterm, a final exam, and one 15-page research paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 25; priority given to Anthropology and Sociology majors. Open to
first-year students.
M. F. BROWN
ANTH 209(S) Human Ecology (Same as Environmental Studies 209)*
An introduction to coevolutionary perspectives on human history, this course will explore the adaptive
strategies of early human populations, the complex processes that led to the development of agriculture and
animal husbandry, and the impact of food production on gender relations, social organization, and the dis-
tribution of resources. Readings explore the philosophical implications of humankind's dual identity as
biological organisms and creators of symbols.
Requirements: two 8- to 10-page papers and a take-home final exam.
No prerequisites, but previous exposure to ecological concepts and basic genetics highly desirable. Enroll-
ment limited to 25.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF M. F. BROWN
ANTH 213 Center and Periphery: State, Society, and the Individual in Southeast Asia (Not
offered 2000-2001)*
From the Opium Warlords of the Golden Triangle to headhunters in Borneo, from the royal courts of Java-
nese Sultans to pedicab drivers, Southeast Asia presents a broad spectrum of peoples, cultures, and polities.
This course provides an introduction to the worlds of Southeast Asia by looking at the relationships be-
tween people, society and the state. Thematically the course is organized around the ever-shifting relation-
ships between central authority--both colonial and indigenous--and tribal and peasant communities in the
hinterlands. Among other topics, we will examine the "theatre state" in nineteenth-century Bali, the con-
version of the Tagalog to Christianity, history as seen through the eyes of Ilongot headhunters, and the
nightmare of Cambodia under the Khmer Rouge.
Class format: seminar.
Requirements: take-home midterm and a research paper.
No prerequisites.
JUST
ANTH 215 The Secrets of Ancient Peru: Archaeology of South America (Not offered
2000-2001)*
The Spanish Conquest of South America in the sixteenth century presented a new and alien world to the
Western societies. The various civilizations from the earliest Chavin culture to the latest Inca empire were
generally misunderstood by the Spanish conquistadores. This introductory course will present a review of
the nature of the sociopolitical, economic, and ideological aspects of the various Latin-American cultures
of South America in light of the archaeological sites, artifacts, art and earliest historical texts.
Class format: lectures, films, and class debates.
Requirements: midterm, final exam, and 10-page research paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 40.
FOIAS
ANTH 216(S) Native Peoples of Latin America*
An introduction to the cultural heritage of Central and South America. After a brief review of Latin-Ameri-
can prehistory, the course will consider such issues as the demographic and political impact of the Con-
quest; the economic, social, and religious life of contemporary Indian and peasant communities; and the
dynamics of cultural redefinition and survival in the turbulent political arena of the modern Latin-Ameri-
can state.
Class format: seminar.
Requirements: two essays and a take-home exam.
No prerequisites. Open to first-year students. Enrollment limited to 25.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR M. F. BROWN
ANTH 217 Mesoamerican Civilizations (Not offered 2000-2001)*
This course will take a holistic approach to the study of the various interacting cultures of Central America
from the Preclassic (1500 B.C.-A.D. 250) to the Postclassic periods (A.D. 1000-1519). The nature of Me-
soamerican civilization and its development will be explored through a detailed survey of the beginning of
sociopolitical complexity in the Preclassic, and the evolution of states during the Classic period in Central
Mexico and the Maya lowlands. The cultural transformations that occurred over the whole Mesoamerican
cultural area around A.D. 1000 will provide the introduction to the Postclassic period in which the large
Aztec empire gained regional supremacy.
Class format: lectures, films, class presentations and discussions.
Requirements: midterm, final exam, and 10-page research paper.
Prerequisite: any of the three introductory archaeology courses. Enrollment limited to 40.
FOIAS
Anthropology and Sociology
­ 64 ­
ANTH 218(S) Colliding Cultures: The Anthropology and History of Contact*
Living in the age of the Internet, global media, and massive intercontinental migrations, we all recognize
the impact that culture contact has in shaping human experience in the twentieth century. How important,
however, was culture contact in the recent and distant past? What can the different contexts of past culture
contact tell us about the future? This course examines the role of culture contact in all of its diverse forms,
from the diffusion of isolated cultural information to migration and full-scale invasion. A multidisciplinary
approach to the study of culture contact is advocated here by integrating the theoretical perspectives of
anthropological archaeology, ethnography, history, biology, population genetics, and geography in the ex-
amination of specific case studies from the Stone Age to the nineteenth century. The true significance of the
Information Age and the modern globalization of human society can only be understood once the complex
processes of culture contact are placed in their proper context.
Class format: seminar.
Requirements: weekly 1- to 2-page response papers and one final research paper.
No prerequisites. Open to first-year students.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR TOSTEVIN
ANTH 219 The Art and Archaeology of Maya Civilization: A Marriage Made in Xibalba
(Same as ArtH 209 and EXPR 209) (Not offered 2000-2001)*
The ancient Maya civilization was one of the most sophisticated and complex cultures of prehispanic Cen-
tral America. Its complex calendrics, astronomy, mathematics and hieroglyphic writing system are well
known worldwide. The course will examine the trajectory and nature of ancient Maya civilization from the
combined perspectives of art history and archaeology. The evolution of the Maya state during the Preclass-
ic period (1000 B.C.-A.D. 250) will be evaluated by looking at the rich archaeological evidence and at the
Preclassic art styles. The Classic Maya civilization (A.D. 250-1000) will then be presented through a de-
tailed survey of the archaeology and art of this period. Finally, the collapse of Classic Maya civilization and
its transformation and endurance during the Postclassic period and under Spanish rule (A.D. 1000-1600)
will be critically evaluated through a detailed review of the archaeological and iconographic evidence.
Class format: lecture and discussion.
Requirements: midterm and final exams, research paper.
No prerequisites, but an introductory art history or anthropology course highly recommended.
FOIAS
ANTH 224(F) Middle East Cultures*
This course provides an introduction to the peoples and cultures of the contemporary Middle East, North
Africa, and Southwest Asia. Topics to be investigated include nomadism as an ecological and political
adaptation; honor and male violence; veiling, sexuality, and the construction of gender; tribes, cities and
states; the role of Islam in social and political life; and the media and civil society. Materials to be used
consist of ethnographies, short stories, and films.
Lecture/discussion.
Requirements: a midterm, final exam, and two short papers.
No prerequisites. Open to first-year students. Enrollment limited to 25.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR D. EDWARDS
ANTH 246(S) Religions of Contemporary South Asia (Same as Religion 246)*
(See under Religion for full description.)
ANTH 273(S) Sacred Geographies (Same as EXPR 273 and Religion 273)*
Bringing together insights from anthropology, art history, and religious studies, this course will explore the
geography of sacred space: the spatial organization of meaning across time and the world as humans have
again and again made a division between sacred and profane. We will attend to this process as expressed in
the geography, social dynamics, and architecture of sacred space, noting patterns of similarity and differ-
ence among and between the "little traditions" of folk and traditional societies as well as the "great tradi-
tions" of universalist and modern societies. Having developed an analytical vocabulary for understanding
sacred space, we will put our model in motion by examining the dynamics of change, redefinition, and
contestation that have so often surrounded the history of sacred spaces.
Requirements: full attendance and participation plus three 4- to 6-page essays.
No prerequisites.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR DARROW and JUST
ANTH 280(F) Myth (Same as Classics 280 and EXPR 280)
What are the stories that we human beings tell ourselves? Why do we tell them and what is accomplished
in the telling? What is the relationship between storytellers and their audiences? What are the politics of
making some stories "official" and others forbidden or subversive? These are some of the questions this
interdisciplinary course will address through a critical reading of myths, legends, narratives and stories
from ancient Greek sources, the Hebrew Bible, the New Testament, and a broad selection of traditional
societies across time and space. Among the types of story to be considered: origins stories and other charter
myths, trickster myths, hero myths, theological myths, apocalyptic myths, and various myths of trans-
formation (e.g., myths of resurrection). While attending to the points of contact between myths of different
societies that make comparison of them possible, we will also examine how in structure and function the
Anthropology and Sociology
­ 65 ­
myths we study are embedded in their own, unique society or culture.
Evaluation will be based on classroom preparation and participation, two short papers, and a performance
exercise.
Lecture/discussion.
Enrollment limited to 30. Open to first-year students.
Satisfies one semester of Division II requirement.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR JUST and HOPPIN
ANTH 312 The Evolution of Culture (Not offered 2000-2001)
The field of anthropology centers on explaining human nature and human culture. Perhaps the greatest
single issue addressed by anthropology is the mystery of human cultural evolution. Why have human soci-
eties over the past 10,000 years changed rapidly from simple, egalitarian hunting-and-gathering bands to
vast, complex, hierarchically organized urban civilizations? The course will be divided into two parts. The
first half will explore explanations of cultural evolution through readings from the major theorists from
Spencer and Morgan to Marx, Engels, Harris, and modern neo-marxists and post-processualists. The sec-
ond half will apply these theories to actual case studies from the earliest civilizations in the New and Old
World. Through critical evaluations of the theories presented and review of the archaeological and histori-
cal evidence from ancient civilizations, the course will provide a context in which students will form their
own explanations of this major transformation in human culture.
Seminar.
Requirements: five short papers; one longer paper.
No prerequisites, but an introductory anthropology course highly recommended. Enrollment limited to 20,
with priority to upperclass students and majors.
FOIAS
ANTH 331(F) Witchcraft, Sorcery, and Magic*
Beliefs in magic, malign and otherwise, have been nearly universal in human experience. This course ex-
amines these beliefs in an attempt to understand their cognitive basis, symbolic effectiveness, and social
consequences. In particular we will approach the question of "magical thinking": is magical thought "mis-
taken science" or a universal non-rational way of seeing the world? What does the fact of presumably
rational people holding apparently irrational beliefs say about the whole idea of rationality? Are witches
self-aware agents who believe in the malign magic they practice, or are they innocent, marginalized vic-
tims of hegemonic powers? To answer these and other questions we will draw on case studies from a broad
range of ethnographic and historic sources, including Aguaruna love magic, Azande oracles, Voodoo in
Brooklyn, and witches in Renaissance Italy and twentieth-century England. Class format: seminar.
Requirements: a midterm, class presentation, and a term paper.
Prerequisite: Anthropology 101 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limited to 19; priority to majors
and upperclassmen.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF JUST
ANTH 336(F) Material Culture: The Social Life of Things
From the odd trinket kept on the family mantelpiece to the offerings left at the Vietnam Memorial (not to
mention the Wall itself), people feel the desire to commemorate and make physical many of the personal
and societal events experienced in their lives. This is just one example of how material culture is a social
creation. By examining the social aspect of material culture in both past and present societies, one gains a
better understanding of what it means to be human in a world in which the importance of material culture
appears to be increasing at an astronomical rate. This course explores the many perspectives from which
anthropologists study material culture to expand our understanding of humanity. Material culture will be
viewed from the perspectives of social anthropology (particularly with regard to issues of social memory,
commoditization, and cultural representation in museums), prehistory and historical archaeology, the
French ethnological school of technology, primatology (with regard to the material culture of non-human
primates), and history of science. Each week a different avenue of investigation will be presented and dis-
cussed in seminar.
Class format: seminar with high level of student participation.
Requirements: weekly 1- to 2-page response papers and one final research paper.
No prerequisites.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF TOSTEVIN
ANTH 341 Culture and Violence (See ANSO 341) (Not offered 2000-2001)*
(See under ANSO for full description.)
ANTH 342 Anthropology of Law: Order and Conflict (Not offered 2000-2001)*
How does a society define the moral life and by what means does it resolve the internal conflicts that in-
evitably arise? These questions are approached through a survey of the anthropology of law in the broad
sense, as concerned not just with codified laws and formal institutions, but with all forms of dispute settle-
ment and conflict resolution, including mediation and arbitration. Taking an ethnographic and cross-cultur-
al perspective, we will examine the cultural construction of dispute, the nature of evidence, and the variety
of processes by which disputes can be resolved. We will further examine the relationship between the scale
of a community and its legal mechanisms, with particular attention to plural legal systems and the tension
Anthropology and Sociology
­ 66 ­
between customary and national law in modernizing nations. Ultimately we will try to come to grips with
the question of justice: its definition and the means by which it may be achieved.
Requirements: a midterm, a research paper, and class participation.
No prerequisites.
JUST
ANTH 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
ANTH 402(S) Senior Seminar: Ritual, Politics, and Power: Understanding Political Action
(See ANSO 402)*
As the capstone seminar, this course is required of all anthropology majors, but open to interested seniors
and juniors in all departments. Each year we will use a single analytical topic to explore in depth the
theoretical and methodological foundations of the discipline. Readings and class discussion will span an-
thropological approaches to the chosen topic throughout the history of the discipline, with particular em-
phasis on recent and experimental contributions.
ANSO 402 Ritual, Politics, and Power: Understanding Political Action is designated the Senior Semi-
nar for 2001-2002.
(See under ANSO for full description.)
ANTH 493(F)-W031-494(S) Senior Thesis
SOCIOLOGY COURSES
Reminder: check the Anthropology/Sociology (ANSO) listings for additional courses.
SOC 101(S) Invitation to Sociology
An introduction to sociological analysis. The course focuses on the relationships of individual men and
women to the social world and introduces students to systematic institutional analysis. Students will ex-
plore the intersection of biography, history, culture, and social structure as seen in the work of classical and
contemporary social thinkers, including Marx, Durkheim, Weber, Freud, Veblen, Simmel, and Goffman.
Special consideration will be given to the social and cultural problems of capitalism, rationality and irratio-
nality in modern institutions and organizations, the psychological dilemmas facing the individual in mod-
ern society, and the problem of social order and conflict.
Requirements: midterm and final exams and a term paper.
No prerequisites. Preference given to first-year students and sophomores.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR First Semester: CRIST
11:00-12:15 MWF Second Semester: NOLAN
SOC 103(F) Behind the Rhetoric of Race: Race, Ethnicity and Public Policy+
As so often in American history, many of the most contentious political issues of the day arise out of this
country's racial and ethnic diversity: affirmative action; racial bias in law enforcement and the courts; the
status of English; immigration reform; multiculturalism in schools and workplaces. Public debate about
these issues often focuses on polarizing claim to moral correctness, or appeals to economic cost/benefit
analyses. The goal of this course is to bring sociological thinking to bear on these issues. We will apply
competing theories of race/ethnicity, the relationship between race and nationality, and patterns of racial
and ethnic socialization to a series of case studies that exemplify race-related policy issues.
As part of the Critical Reasoning and Analytical Skills Initiative this course will lay a foundation for further
studies in the social sciences, stressing students' skills in framing questions, evaluating evidence, and
constructing compelling arguments.
Requirements: four short essays.
Enrollment limited to 20.
(This course is part of the Critical Reasoning and Analytical Skills initiative.)
Hour 1:10-2:25 MR BACON
SOC 206 Religion and the Social Order (Not offered 2000-2001)
Beginning with a review of classical sociological analyses of religion's role in the social order--from
Durkheim's study of primitive religions to Weber's assessment of Protestantism and the rise of capital-
ism--this course considers the way in which religion influences a wide range of social behaviors and insti-
tutional arrangements. In the modern world, religious claims no longer carry the same kind of cultural cap-
ital that they once did in more traditional societies. Though still an important part of many modern lives,
religious belief (and non-belief) systems have become increasingly diverse and privatized. Focusing on
major societal institutions and social processes--including developments in education, law, family, health
care, and the state--this course examines the dynamic and changing interplay between religion and the
secular social order. We will consider, for example, how religious pluralism heightens cultural tension as
multiple and conflicting claims are asserted to have primacy over other claims, resulting in public conflicts
over a range of social issues. The objective of the course is to evaluate religion's historical and contempo-
rary influence on the major institutions of the modern world. The class focuses on the United States but
lays a conceptual foundation for the cross-cultural study of religion and the social order.
Class format: discussion seminar.
Requirements: class participation, midterm exam, research paper.
NOLAN
Anthropology and Sociology
­ 67 ­
SOC 215 Crime in the Streets (Not offered 2000-2001)
A sociological examination of violent crime and crimefighting in America. Topics include: violent urban
youth gangs and crews; ethnically-based organized crime "families"; the recruitment, socialization, argot,
culture, and worldviews of professional criminals; the stages of criminal careers; the ethics of criminal
groups; the violence emerging out of the drug trade; the work worlds and habits of mind of crimefighters,
with a special focus on uniformed police officers, detectives, and prosecutors; the symbolic representations
of criminals and crimefighters in American popular culture; the relationships between law, crime, moral
narratives, and social order; and the current crisis of the criminal justice system. A special section of the
course will be devoted to analyzing the process of criminal investigation.
Requirements: a term paper, a midterm, and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 40.
JACKALL
SOC 218(S) Law and Modern Society
This class is designed to introduce students to the field of law and society. The course begins with an over-
view of the various theoretical perspectives on the subject: both classical (i.e. functionalism, conflict theory,
and Weberian interpretations of legal rationality) and contemporary (i.e. structuralism, critical legal studies,
and cultural perspectives on the law). Among the themes reviewed in this section are sociological under-
standings of deviance, legitimation, and the law's relationship to religion and the economy. Employing the
interpretive frameworks supplied by the theoretical models, the next part of the course reviews empirical
research in criminal and civil law, including investigations into the behavior of police, the criminal courts,
jails and prisons, personal injury tort law, civil disputing, plea bargaining, and other dimensions of civil
litigation. The course concludes with an examination both of the influence of social change on the nature
and direction of law and, conversely, of the effects of legal change on culture. Considered in this part of the
course are the changing cultural and legal understandings of freedom, sexual behavior, family, and educa-
tion.
Class format: lecture and discussion.
Requirements: a short paper and midterm and final exams.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR NOLAN
SOC 225(F) Religion and Popular Culture in America (Same as Religion 225)
(See under Religion for full description.)
SOC 250(S) The Collapse of `Common Sense'
Increasingly in our society, one person's common sense is another person's nonsense. This course analyzes
the social and cultural centrifugality of our times, the resultant collapse of both common meaning systems
and common standards of practical reason in the world of affairs, and what seems to be the growing ineffi-
cacy of our institutions in addressing fundamental social problems. Topics include: the intellectual and
institutional groundwork of the widespread social fragmentation and individual bewilderment of our soci-
ety; the emergence and consequences of the politics of identity, the culture of advocacy, and the prolifera-
tion of salvational ideologies; the accelerating problem of the "perverse" consequences of well-intended
social action, both in the university and in the world of affairs; and the crisis and dilemmas of leadership in
our society.
Requirements: full participation in the class, several short papers, and a final exam.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR JACKALL
SOC 256(F) Self and Society
This course traces the structures and origins of the modern/postmodern self. The course assesses classical
and contemporary theories of the self and explores how men and women experience and construct their
selves through the prisms of gender, technology, work, social class, and sexual relationships. Special atten-
tion to the central political, social, and cultural tragedy of mass society--totalitarianism in its various
forms--and its effect on modern/postmodern selves. Readings include selections from Freud, Arendt,
Goffman, Marcuse, and Haraway.
Requirements: Mid-term and final papers
Class format: seminar
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR CHURCHILL
SOC 265 Drugs and Society (Not offered 2000-2001)
From nineteenth-century opium dens to early-twentieth-century speakeasies to late-twentieth-century
crack houses, this course investigates the important impact of drugs on American society. Focusing on the
social control of drug and alcohol use, particularly legal forms of social control, the course analyzes such
historical developments as the rise and fall of prohibition; the early-twentieth-century illegalization of nar-
cotics; the emergence of Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), Narcotics Anonymous (NA) and other self-help
groups; and the recent advent of drug courts and juvenile boot camps. The analysis will include evaluation
not only of the social influence of drugs typically classified as "illicit," such as cocaine, opium, morphine,
heroine, and marijuana, but also of alcohol, tobacco, and the recent emergence and popularity of psycho-
pharmaceutical drugs like prozac and ritalin. Rooted in a sociological perspective, the course reviews dif-
Anthropology and Sociology
­ 68 ­
ferent theoretical explanations of drug and alcohol consumption and of the different strategies, legal and
otherwise, that have been employed to define and regulate drug use in American society.
Requirements: a research paper, a take-home midterm, and a final exam.
Enrollment limited to 40; preference given to Sociology and Anthropology majors.
NOLAN
SOC 303(F) Race and Ethnicity in America*
In American society, race and ethnicity are simultaneously lightning rods for social conflict and sources of
social cohesion. In this course, we will explore the complex and sometimes contradictory roles of race and
ethnicity in both the public and private lives of contemporary Americans. The course examines a series of
contemporary race-related public issues: transracial adoption, immigration reform, affirmative action, and
cultural rights. In an effort to better understand the nature of these issues, we will be exploring the social
theories and empirical realities of race and ethnicity. Topics covered include: primordial and contextual
theories of the nature of race/ethnicity; the realities of racial/ethnic inequality in America; theories of immi-
grant assimilation, cultural pluralism, and multiculturalism; the role of race in the evolution of an "Ameri-
can" identity; and the nature of personal racial and ethnic identities.
Requirements: two essays and final exam.
Enrollment limited to 25; preference to juniors and seniors, sophomores by permission of the instructor.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR BACON
SOC 309(F) Literature and Society
An examination of the intersection of social structure, culture, and biography as seen by novelists and so-
ciologists. To what extent does fiction illuminate areas of social life and personal experience that are inac-
cessible to sociologists? To what extent does social science temper, qualify, and perhaps extend fictional
understandings of social reality? Readings include Conrad's Heart of Darkness, Auster's New York Trilo-
gy, Wilson's The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit, Tartt's The Secret History, and selections from Faulkner,
matched with sociological accounts of such social worlds.
Requirements: Two short essays and a final paper.
Class format: seminar.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF CHURCHILL
SOC 310(F) Genetics and Society
This course explores the interaction between genetic science and society. We focus on ethical issues and
social ramifications surrounding the genetic revolution. The central topics we will study are: genetic engi-
neering of foods; the human genome project and its controversies; genetic explanations of human behav-
ior; gene therapy and the possibility of genetic enhancement; the prospect of human cloning; the different
kinds of genetic testing and their ethical dilemmas; and concerns about genetic discrimination. Topics will
be studied in historical context, as we trace beginnings to James Watson and Francis Crick's discovery of
the structure of DNA; examine conceptions of risk regarding genetic engineering from the 1970s to the
present; compare and contrast contemporary developments with early twentieth century eugenics; and an-
ticipate futuristic trends.
Format: lecture/discussion.
Requirements: several short papers; one final research paper. Enrollment limited. Priority given to majors.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR CRIST
SOC 341 Senior Seminar (See ANSO 341) (Not offered 2000-2001)*
(See under ANSO for full description.)
SOC 368(S) Technology and Modern Society
With expanding access to and use of the internet, controversial developments in such biotechnical practices
as the cloning of mammals, rapid advances in various forms of telecommunication, and the increasing
sophistication of technological weaponry in the military, the triumph of technology remains a defining fea-
ture of modern life. For the most part, modern humans remain unflinchingly confident in the possibilities
technology holds for continuing to improve the human condition. Indisputably, technology has benefited
human life in innumerable ways. However, as with other features of modernity, technology has also had
significant, albeit largely unanticipated, social consequences. Working within a sociological paradigm, this
course will focus on the less often examined latent functions of technology in modern society. It will con-
sider, for example, the social effects of technology on community life, on privacy, and on how people learn,
think, understand the world, communicate, and organize themselves. The course will also examine the
effects of technology on medicine, business, education, and the military and will consider such countercul-
tural reactions to technology as the Luddite movement in early-nineteenth-century England and the U.S.
agrarian movements of the twentieth century.
Requirements: a short paper, a midterm exam, and a longer research paper.
No prerequisites.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR NOLAN
SOC 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
Anthropology and Sociology, Art
­ 69 ­
SOC 402(S) Senior Seminar: Ritual, Politics, and Power: Understanding Political Action
(See ANSO 402)*
This course is the capstone seminar, required of all sociology majors, but open to interested seniors and
juniors in all departments. The seminar covers topics of contemporary sociological interest. The purpose is
to encourage students to exercise their knowledge of classical and contemporary theory and their skills in
institutional analysis developed in pursuit of the major. Topics for the seminar change with the rotating
leadership of different members of the department.
ANSO 402 Ritual, Politics, and Power: Understanding Political Action is designated the Senior Semi-
nar for 2001-2002.
(See under ANSO for full description.)
SOC 493(F)-W031-494(S) Senior Thesis
ART (Div. I)
Chair, Associate Professor GUY M. HEDREEN
Professors: EDGERTON, EPPING*, FILIPCZAK, HAXTHAUSEN, E. J. JOHNSON, OCKMAN*,
TAKENAGA**. Visiting Clark Professors: MALLGRAVE§, MOXEY§§. Associate
Professors: HEDREEN, JANG, LALEIAN***, LEVIN, MCGOWAN. Assistant Professors:
GLIER, L. JOHNSON, M. LEWIS*, LOW, PODMORE. Visiting Assistant Professors:
ARAUZ, F. JACKSON, PALERMO. Lecturers: CONFORTI§, SATTERTHWAITE, L.
SHEARER§§. Senior Lecturer: E. GRUDIN**. Part-time Lecturers: B. BENEDICT§§,
DIGGS*, H. EDWARDS, M. GOETHALS§§, MATHEWS§§, MCCALLUM§, H.
SHEARER§§. Visiting Part-time Lecturers: GANZ§, HOLLY§.
MAJOR
Three routes are offered: the emphasis of the first is on the history of art, and that of the second is on
creative work in studio. The third route through the major allows students to take courses in both halves of
the department in more or less equal numbers.
Note: The Art History and Art Studio routes are strongly recommended for any prospective Art major
who is contemplating graduate study in Art History or Art Studio.
Art History Route
Sequence courses
ArtH 101-102 Introduction to Western Art History
ArtS 100 Drawing I (or its equivalent as agreed by the department, to be taken by the end of the
junior year)
ArtH 301 Methods of Art History
One Seminar or Graduate Course
Parallel courses
Any five additional semester courses of art history including three concerned with the following: 1)
a period of Western art prior to 1800,
2) a period, Western or non-Western, prior to 1400, and
3) non-Western art.
Art Studio Route
Sequence courses
ArtS 100 or ArtS 103 Drawing I
ArtS 230 Drawing II
ArtH 101-102 Introduction to Western Art History
Any three of the 200-level ArtS (studio) courses in three different media
ArtS 319 Junior Seminar
Any two of the 300-level ArtS courses
or
One of the 300-level ArtS courses and ArtS 418T Senior Tutorial
History and Practice Route
Sequence courses
ArtH 101-102 Introduction to Western Art History
ArtS 100 or ArtS 103 Drawing I
One 200-level ArtS course
ArtH 301 Methods of Art History or ArtS 319 Junior Seminar
One ArtH seminar (400-level) or graduate (500-level) course
One 300-level ArtS tutorial or (with permission) ArtS 418T Senior Tutorial
Parallel courses
Any four additional Art Studio or Art History courses. At least one elective must be taken in each
wing of the department. At least one of the electives must be an Art History course concerned
with a period of Western or non-Western art prior to 1800.
Art
­ 70 ­
Art History Route: The history of art is different from other historical disciplines in that it is founded on
direct visual confrontation with objects that are both concretely present and yet documents of the past. We
concentrate on architecture, painting, sculpture--the richest visual expressions of culture. Since works of
art embody human experience, we use the work of all other disciplines to understand them, such as social
history, perceptual psychology, engineering, psychoanalysis, and archaeology. Because of its concentra-
tion on the visual experience, the Art History major increases one's ability to observe and to use those
observations as the basis for critical thought.
ArtH 101-102 introduces students to a series of critical studies of important works selected from the
history of Western art from antiquity to the present. The critical approach of the introductory course is
maintained in all further courses, especially by assigned study of original works in the Williams College
Museum of Art, Chapin Library, and the Clark Art Institute.
An introductory studio course, ArtS 100, in which no artistic talent or prior experience are assumed,
provides vital training in what is a visual as well as a verbal discipline. The requirement of a course in
non-Western art expands majors' geographic as well as cultural horizons, and the requirement of two
courses in art from periods prior to 1800 provides a necessary concentration on earlier moments in culture.
(As the contemporary architect, Philip Johnson, said, "You cannot not know history".) The junior course
(ArtH 301) develops awareness of the theoretical implications, as well as the possibilities and limitations of
different art-historical methods. The requirement of a seminar or graduate course in the senior year enables
students to apply that knowledge of methodology to their most specialized work in the Art History route.
Art Studio Route: The studio division of the Art major has been structured to foster the development of a
critical understanding of making art; to support creative interests and to develop students' perceptions and
imaginations as they investigate a variety of visual media. Drawing I, ArtS 100 or ArtS 103, serve as
an introduction to the basic drawing and design principles which establish the foundation for the devel-
opment of visual expression. ArtH 101-102, an introduction to the history of Western art, provides part of
the necessary background in the critical analysis of art. The 200-level ArtS courses provide opportunities to
learn the elements of some of the principal visual arts media: architecture, painting, photography, print-
making, sculpture, and video. These courses combine technical foundations in the medium with analysis
of the interrelation of visual form and content. The 300- and 400-level courses place a greater emphasis on
the application of appropriate visual skills and strategies to particular thematic concerns, and to the devel-
opment of the student's individual vision. All studio art seniors exhibit their work in the Williams College
Museum of Art as a part of the requirements for the major.
Production requirements for the major: All Art Studio majors are required to earn two production cred-
its by participating in relevant studio activities. These credits should be planned in consultation with a stu-
dio faculty advisor.
History and Practice Route: This route allows students to study in depth both the history of art and the
making of it. It offers considerable flexibility: students may propose courses of study that emphasize partic-
ular media, themes or methodological issues. To mention just three examples, students may design se-
quences of courses that focus on architecture, gender or narration in both the history of art and contempo-
rary practice. And students may take more courses in one wing of the department than the other, as long as
the minimum requirements in each wing are satisfied. The History and Practice route is especially well-
suited to students interested in arts-related careers outside of higher education, including work in art galler-
ies, art museums, and primary or secondary school education. Courses of study for History and Practice
majors must be approved by two members of the faculty, one from each wing of the department. Any
changes in a History and Practice course of study must also be approved by two advisors.
History and Practice Faculty Advisors: Mike Glier, Ann McCallum, and Ben Benedict in studio; E. J.
Johnson in history.
COURSE NUMBERS
First Digit
The introductory courses in both Art History and Studio have 100-level numbers and are prerequisites for
most other courses in the department. The distinction between 200- and 300-level offerings is either one of
difficulty or of the sequence in which material is best taken. Also, lecture courses with no prerequisite have
a 100- or 200-level number. The 400-level seminars and tutorials are intended for advanced students, usu-
ally senior majors.
Middle Digit
Art History (ArtH)
Middle digit distinguishes courses according to geographical area, or time span covered. 0 = general; 1 =
Ancient; 2 = Medieval; 3 = fifteenth, sixteenth century; 4 = seventeenth, eighteenth century; 5 = nineteenth
century; 6 = twentieth century; 7 = Asian; 8 = African; 9 = independents, honors.
Art Studio (ArtS)
Middle digit distinguishes introductory and general courses from those specialized in different media and
arts. 0 = introductory; 1 = general; 2 = architecture; 3 = drawing; 4 = painting; 5 = photography; 6 = print-
making; 7 = sculpture; 8 = video; 9 = independents, honors.
Art
­ 71 ­
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN ART
Students who wish to become candidates for the degree with honors must show prior evidence of supe-
rior performance in the major as well as research capabilities to carry out the proposed project.
Art History:
In order for a project to be considered, the candidate (1) must have arranged for an advisor, and (in
consultation with the advisor) a second reader to supervise and evaluate the project (2) should normally
have had one course with the advisor. In addition, the topic must be within the advisor's areas of compe-
tence and should normally be related to course work which the student has done previously. In the case of
an interdisciplinary proposal, the second reader should normally come from the other discipline.
The student submits a 2-page proposal including a statement about the preparation for the project, a
description of the topic and a general bibliography. Following approval by the faculty advisor and second
reader, this proposal is reviewed by the entire Art faculty, who have the option to request revisions and to
refuse the proposal. Students should keep in mind that a thesis in Art History is not necessary for admission
to graduate study.
It is the responsibility of the candidate to select one of the following routes and to meet all deadlines.
Students who are not making satisfactory progress on their research and writing will not be allowed to
continue with the thesis. The completion of the requirements, however, will not guarantee a degree with
honors. The degree with honors will be awarded for projects demonstrating a high degree of scholarly
achievement and self-motivation. All proposals must be submitted according to the guidelines set out be-
low. The timetable for submission of work, including specific dates, is available in the Art Department
office.
Students may select one of the following options:
1) Full-Year Thesis: Research and writing will be carried out during both semesters and WSP of the
senior year (students should register for ArtH 493-W031-494). The thesis topic, advisor and se-
cond reader must be determined by April 15 of junior year. Students who are on overseas pro-
grams junior year are advised to make arrangements prior to their departure, but they may submit
a final proposal two weeks before the fall semester of senior year if they have made the necessary
arrangements. After the thesis is submitted, the candidate for honors shall present an oral defense
before faculty and peers.
2) Half-Year Thesis: Research and writing will be carried out during fall term and winter study or dur-
ing winter study and spring term (Students should register for ArtH 493-W031 or W031-ArtH
494). For students who choose to complete the mini-thesis in the fall, proposals must be submitted
by April 15 of the junior year. For those planning to complete the mini-thesis in the spring, propos-
als must be submitted by November 1.
A student's project is judged by two members of the department, the advisor and second reader; in the
case of an interdisciplinary project, a member of the Art Department and a member of the other relevant
department or program function as advisor and second reader. In rare cases, a third reader may be ap-
pointed by the department at the request of the advisor or second reader.
All routes require that one course and one WSP, in addition to the ten required courses for the major, be
dedicated to the honors project.
Art Studio:
The Art Studio division of the Art Department offers a specialization route toward departmental honors.
This route, which requires the completion of a substantial body of independently produced visual work,
consists of two courses constituting a clearly interrelated pattern of study. The first of these must be a WSP
033 in the senior year, followed by ArtS 418T Senior Tutorial.
In the spring of his/her junior year, the student should consult with a prospective faculty advisor and
declare his/her intent to pursue the degree with honors to the department chair. In September of the stu-
dent's senior year, the student will meet with his/her faculty advisor to discuss the writing of the required
honors prospectus. The prospectus should present a coherent proposal, indicating the range of the thesis,
the questions to be investigated, the media which will be utilized, and a selected bibliography. Two weeks
before WSP registration, in the fall of the student's senior year, three copies of this prospectus should be
submitted: one to the faculty advisor, the second to the faculty member teaching ArtS 418T, and the third to
the department chair. The studio faculty will review the prospectuses and the department chair will inform
students of their decisions. Should a student's honors prospectus be approved, the student must enroll in
WSP 033 and devote the winter study period to realizing a substantial amount of work toward the project.
Members of the studio faculty will review this work in February and determine whether progress is suffi-
ciently substantial to allow a student to continue to pursue the degree with honors.
To be considered for honors a student must successfully complete all requirements for the major. Each
honors candidate will be expected to have demonstrated the ability to work independently and the under-
standing of what is required to develop a body of work that investigates a thesis. The project will culminate
in a presentation agreed upon by the student, the faculty advisor, and the faculty tutor teaching ArtS 418T.
All candidates will be required to present the department with a set of no fewer than twenty slides that
Art
­ 72 ­
document the work completed during the project. This documentation will be accompanied by a written
description of the project.
The awarding of honors will be decided by the studio faculty of the department, on the recommendation
of the student's advisor and the faculty member teaching ArtS 418T, based on performance in the two
related courses. Highest honors are normally awarded only to students whose performance in both the hon-
ors program and other courses in the major has been exceptional.
History and Practice:
The route to honors is a combination of the Art Studio and Art History honors routes. At the beginning
of senior year, a candidate for honors in History and Practice makes a proposal to two faculty members,
one faculty advisor from each wing of the department. If both advisors agree to supervise the project, the
candidate enrolls in independent study and works through the fall semester and winter study. The progress
of the project is assessed by both advisors at the end of winter study; if the project is not well enough devel-
oped, the advisors may end it at that time. If the project is allowed to move forward, the student enrolls
either in ArtS 418T Senior Tutorial, if the project is primarily a matter of making art, or in an Honors
Independent Study, if it is primarily a writing project. The final project is submitted to the two advisors,
who will determine whether or not it will receive honors.
ART HISTORY COURSES
ARTH 101(F)-102(S) Introduction to Western Art History
An historical survey of Western architecture, sculpture, and painting, concentrating on a limited number of
major works from key periods. Training in visual analysis is emphasized, so that the student can learn to
understand the ideas conveyed in works of art. Architecture and sculpture studied in the first semester,
painting in the second semester.
Class format: lectures and one weekly conference hour in small groups.
Requirements: one or two 2- to 3-page papers each semester, each analyzing a college building or one or
two original works of art from the collections of the Williams College Museum of Art and the Clark Art
Institute; six short quizzes; participation in conference discussions; hour test; and a final exam.
ArtH 101-102 cannot be taken on a pass/fail basis; however, the course may be audited.Students who have
audited ArtH 101-102 (lectures and conferences) on a registered basis may enroll in any Art History
course at the 200 or 300 level.
Open to first-year students. Enrollment limited to 285, with priority given to underclass students.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF, 12:00-12:50 MWF First Semester: E. J. JOHNSON
10:00-10:50 MWF, 12:00-12:50 MWF Second Semester: E. GRUDIN
Conferences: See Classroom Directory Assisted by Members of the Department
ARTH 172(S) Introduction to Asian Art: From the Land of the Buddha to the World of the
Geisha*
This course surveys the great artistic traditions of Asia, concentrating on a limited number of major art
works from India, China, and Japan. Through visual analysis, students learn the aesthetic, religious, and
political ideas and cultural meanings conveyed in the art works.
A weekly conference section required.
Evaluation will be based on five quizzes and three short essays.
No prerequisites. Open to first year students.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR Conference: 10-10:50 W, 11-11:50 W, 2:10-3 W JANG
ARTH 200(F) Art of Mesoamerica*
This course surveys the painting, sculpture, and architectural of the ancient, pre-Colombian Olmecs, Ma-
yans, Zapotecs, and Aztecs of Mexico, Guatemala, Honduras, and Belize from ca. 1000 B.C. to the Span-
ish conquest beginning in 1521 A.D. Emphasis will be upon the cultural context of this native-American
art in light of recent archaeological discoveries and new anthropological and historical methodologies.
Class format: lecture.
Requirements: two hour exams and a term paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 20.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR EDGERTON
ARTH 201(F) American Landscape History (Same as Environmental Studies 201)
This is a survey course stressing the description and historical geography of regional, vernacular American
settings, with the goal of discerning a national style of spatial or landscape organization. Among the hu-
man-altered environments to be studied are: forestlands, rangelands, croplands, outdoor recreational sites,
mines and quarries; small towns, milltowns, central business districts, and suburbs; power and utilities;
housing, industry, commerce, and institutional uses such as the American college campus; water, road, and
rail corridors as examples of circulation nets. Primary evidence will be visual.
Afternoon meetings provide discussion and field or site-visit opportunities, and enable classmembers to
obtain a first-hand familiarity with a rural-urban gradient of representative land-uses and occupants of the
Hoosic-Hudson watershed and Taconic upland region surrounding Williamstown, as well as experience
with interviewing and field study methodologies.
Requirements: several mini-tests, four term paper installments on the documentation of an evolving land-
Art
­ 73 ­
scape site or behavior, short class presentation on research, as its "landscape" or type comes up for class or
lecture consideration, and obligatory all-day field trip.
No prerequisites. Open to first-year students.
This course is conceived as an introduction to ArtH/Environmental Studies 305, 306, and 307.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Conference: 1:10-3:50 T, W SATTERTHWAITE
ARTH 209 The Art and Archaeology of Maya Civilization: A Marriage Made in Xibalba
(Same as Anthropology 219 and EXPR 209) (Not offered 2000-2001)*
The ancient Maya civilization was one of the most sophisticated and complex cultures of prehispanic Cen-
tral America. Its complex calendrics, astronomy, mathematics and hieroglyphic writing system are well
known worldwide. The course will examine the trajectory and nature of ancient Maya civilization from the
combined perspectives of art history and archaeology. The evolution of the Maya state during the Pre-
classsic period (1000 B.C.-A.D. 250) will be evaluated by looking at the rich archaeological evidence and
at the Preclassic art styles. The Classic Maya civilization (A.D. 250-1000) will then be presented through a
detailed survey of the archaeology and art of this period. Finally, the collapse of Classic Maya civilization
and its transformation and endurance during the Postclassic period and under Spanish rule (A.D.
1000-1600) will be critically evaluated through a detailed review of the archaeological and iconographic
evidence. Class format: lecture and discussion.
Requirements: midterm and final exams, research paper.
No prerequisites, but an introductory art history or anthropology course highly recommended.
FOIAS
ARTH 213 Greek Art and Myth (Same as Classics 213) (Not offered 2000-2001; to be
offered 2002-2003)
At no other time in the history of art is myth represented with as much immediacy and sophistication as in
Greek art. In this course, we will become familiar with the representation of the figures and the stories of
the gods, goddesses, heroes, and heroines in painting and sculpture of the seventh through first centuries
B.C. Of special interest will be: the various techniques developed by Greek artists for representing narra-
tives visually; the historical, social, and conceptual issues that underlie mythology, such as war, marriage,
sacrifice, and the nature of men, women, and the gods; and the various modern approaches to the inter-
pretation of Greek myths, including the myth-and-ritual school, psychoanalysis, and structuralism. Read-
ing will include selections from ancient authors in translation, such as Homer, Hesiod, Pindar, Aischylos,
Sophocles, and Euripides, as well as from modern scholarship on Greek art, myth, and narrative.
Class format: lectures, illustrated with slides.
Requirements: six 15-minute quizzes, one short paper, and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 50. Not open to students who have taken Classics 104 without per-
mission of the instructor.
MCGOWAN
ARTH 216(S) Body of Evidence: Greek Sculpture and the Human Figure (Same as Classics
216)
From the beginnings of Greek sculpture in the eighth century B.C.E. until the end of the Hellenistic period
in the first century B.C.E., the human figure remained the most prominent choice of subject for Greek
artists. This course is a survey of Greek sculpture in the first millennium B.C.E. with emphasis on ancient
Greek attitudes toward the body. We will consider the use of male and female figures, both human and
divine, from athletic, religious and funerary contexts, and from the dedications of individual figures to the
complex mythological narratives found on Greek temples. Reading material includes ancient literature in
translation as well as contemporary critical essays.
Class format: lecture.
Requirements: midterm and final exams and two short papers.
No prerequisites.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR MCGOWAN
ARTH 220(S) The Mosque
The mosque (masjid) is the site of communal prayer rituals and other activities of Isalm. By definition, it
must simply be a clean space oriented towards Mecca. In actuality, mosques have taken diverse architec-
tural forms ranging from simple hypostyle halls of mud-brick to elaborate complexes of reinforced con-
crete and plate glass. This course will address the stylistic and regional differences from the seventh to
twentieth century, including the columned halls of the central Arab lands, the centralized domed structures
such as monumental calligraphy, glazed tilework and stucco. The course will culminate in a consideration
of modern mosque architecture in which tradition and modernism combine to generate new forms of
sacred space.
Lecture and discussion.
Requirements: paper; midterm and final exams. Enrollment limited to 40.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR H. EDWARDS
ARTH 223(F) Early Medieval Art and Architecture
A survey of the major works of architecture, sculpture, book illumination, monumental mural decoration
(mosaic and fresco) and the minor arts (ivory carving, metalwork, etc.) produced from Dura Europos to
Art
­ 74 ­
Toledo and from the Fayum to the Isle of Iona between approximately 200 and 1050. Lectures will focus
on questions of style, content, function, patronage and audience in an attempt to convey not only the re-
markable diversity and inventiveness of early medieval artistic practice, but also the central role that build-
ings, images and fashioned objects played in articulating and even shaping early medieval life. Aiming to
situate these works within their larger social, political, devotional, intellectual as well as art-historical con-
texts, the course also hopes to demonstrate the unique power of the visual arts to provide access into an
emerging European world whose values and concerns were radically different from, and yet fundamental
to, those of the modern West.
Requirements: midterm, final exam, three to four short papers.
No prerequisites.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR LOW
ARTH 224(S) Romanesque and Gothic Art and Architecture: The Medieval Church in
Context
The goal of this course is to survey the major works of ecclesiastical architecture, sculpture and stained
glass produced in France between approximately 1050 and 1400. These works were not created in isola-
tion from their surroundings, thus we will attempt to understand them not only stylistically, but also in their
original functional, social, and sometimes even political settings. The course will emphasize the abbey
church and the cathedral, the two major ecclesiastical buildings of this period, as heterogeneous entities
that used architecture, sculpture, stained glass and other media, in conjunction with church ritual, to render
their sacred spaces distinct from, and elevated above, the world outside. We will furthermore try to appreci-
ate the special centrality of the abbey church and the cathedral in high medieval society. Sites for contact
with God and for the development of advanced learning, they could also serve as critical determinants of
local economic and political life, and as focuses of pilgrimage, trade, and international cultural exchange.
Requirements: midterm, final, three to four short papers.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR LOW
ARTH 235 Architecture 1400-1700 (Not offered 2000-2001)
Shortly after 1400 architects in Italy, such as Brunelleschi and Alberti, consciously revived the architectural
forms of the Greco-Roman past and adapted them to contemporary needs. This course will investigate this
revival and its subsequent spread throughout Europe in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Architects
studied will include Bramante, Palladio, Michelangelo, Vignola, Juan de Herrera, Borromini, Guarini, Fra-
nçois Mansart, Jones, Wren. Attention will be paid to the development of the illustrated architectural book
as a means of conveying architectural information.
Requirements: three quizzes and a 10-page research paper.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102.
E. J. JOHNSON
ARTH 241(S) Dutch Art of the 1600s: Hals to Vermeer
Rembrandt van Rijn, Frans Hals, Jan Vermeer are only the best-known of the many artists who were active
in the northern Netherlands during the seventeenth century. The variety of their subjects was unprecedent-
ed, but the degree of symbolic content in their work is disputed: to what extent was Dutch painting an art of
description or of hidden allegory? We will consider this problem and also give special attention to the on-
going reinterpretations of Rembrandt's oeuvre and life.
Class format: lecture.
Requirements: a midterm, short paper, and a final exam.
No prerequisites.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR FILIPCZAK
ARTH 246 Baroque Art: Images of Men and Women (Not offered 2000-2001)
Although still life and landscapes became popular during the seventeenth century, the human figure re-
mained not only the most esteemed but also the most depicted subject throughout Western Europe. This
lecture course will first examine the biological view of sexual difference current at the time (the theory of
humors). With this as a basis, we will compare seventeenth-century images of men and women to those
from other periods. We will also compare differences between individual artists, including Caravaggio,
Artemesia Gentileschi, Bernini, Rubens, Rembrandt, Vermeer, Velazquez, and Poussin.
Evaluation based on midterm and 2 papers, one 5 pages, the other (due the last day of class) 10 pages.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102.
FILIPCZAK
ARTH 247 Flemish Art: Bruegel to Rubens (Not offered 2000-2001)
The most admired art in northern Europe during the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries was pro-
duced in Antwerp (in present day Belgium). This city was home to the best known Flemish artists, such as
Pieter Bruegel and his son Jan, Rubens and Van Dyck. In studying their art in this lecture course, we will
also examine their studio practices, especially the collaboration of artists on a single work, their different
narrative approaches, and their religious, political, and social messages conveyed by their works. We will
Art
­ 75 ­
also discuss official and popular religious practices and the images produced for different locations, includ-
ing pilgrimage sites associated with miracle-working images.
Evaluation based on midterm, 5-page paper, and final (with a prepared essay).
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102.
FILIPCZAK
ARTH 251(F) French Art in the Age of Salon
A lecture course in the history of French art, beginning with Greuze and Chardin and continuing through
Post-Impressionism. The Course will focus on the tradition of French Art and criticism and will consider
major figures from the mid-eighteenth century through the end of the nineteenth century including David,
Gros, Gericault, Delacroix, Ingres, Courbet, Daumier, Manet, Degas, Monet, Cezanne, van Gogh and
Gauguin. Important questions arising from competing interpretive approaches (social art history, psycho-
analysis, formalism) will supplement the survey.
Course requirements will include readings, a midterm and a final, conferences at the Clark and may also
include a field trip to New York.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limited to 40.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR PALERMO
ARTH 252 Campuses (Same as Environmental Studies 252) (Not offered 2000-2001; to be
offered 2001-2002)
An historical study of the North-American campus, primarily its educational or institutional guise, but also
as found in some office and industrial "parks," concentrating upon aspects of site design, such as the fit
between physiography and building location. Applying such Lynchian precepts as edge, path and node,
our inquiry will be both diachronic and comparative. What happens when campuses grow, or diminish?
What happens when their surrounding change, or deteriorate: What uses of space are located where, and to
what extent is their spatial layout an hierarchical one? Why have some campuses few imitators (even if, as
in the instance of Thomas Jefferson's "academical village," their plan has been much extolled)? Among
other topics to be considered are: issues of integration within or separation from towns, accommodations to
the automobile and to field sports as spatially consumptive uses (leading to increasingly spread-out plans);
design as a reflection of pedagogical agenda (or even monastic tradition?); successional uses of the same
building or space, especially as increasing enrollments may bring increasing specialization (of building
functions); traffic as a function of buildings; campuses pretty much created all at once and campuses more
polyglot, with generational changes in design and even purpose; "dead," or vestigial spaces, or buildings,
such as through the demise of required chapel attendance. Major attention will be given to seminal designs
and designers. Regional examples of a wide variety of campuses will be visited during field sessions.
Requirements: term paper to be submitted in three segments and preferably considering a campus (and its
institution through one century). Biweekly attendance at ten weekly field sessions.
No prerequisites.
SATTERTHWAITE
ARTH 253 Art in the Age of Revolution, 1760-1860 (Not offered 2000-2001)
A social history beginning with art of the prerevolutionary period and ending with Realism. Major topics
include changing definitions of neoclassicism and romanticism, the impact of the revolutions of 1789,
1830, and 1848, the Napoleonic presence abroad, the shift from history painting to scenes of everyday life,
landscape painting as an autonomous art form and attitudes toward race and sexuality. The course stresses
French artists such as Greuze, Vigée-Lebrun, David, Ingres, Delacroix, Géricault, Corot, and Courbet, but
also includes Goya, Constable, Turner, and Friedrich.
Class format: lecture.
Requirements: two quizzes, hour test, and final exam or research paper; a conference at the Clark Art Insti-
tute and a field trip to New York may also be required.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102 or permission of the instructor.
OCKMAN
ARTH 257 Architecture 1700-1900 (Not offered 2000-2001)
In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries a new conception of architecture arose, based on archaeological
discoveries, the development of new building materials, and convulsive social changes. This course looks
at the major architectural movements of this period, and the theoretical ideas that shaped them. Topics in-
clude Neoclassicism, new building types, Victorian Architecture, the development of the architectural pro-
fession, and Art Nouveau. Major architects to be discussed include Piranesi, John Soane, Schinkel, Pugin,
and H.H. Richardson. When possible, primary sources will be used. Students will be given experience in
reading plans and writing about buildings.
Requirements: four short writing assignments, midterm, final, and a field trip.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102 or permission of instructor.
M. LEWIS
ARTH 259(F) History of American Photography (Same as American Studies 259)
This course will survey the history of photography from its invention in 1839 to the present by focusing
primarily on its role in American art and society. Within this chronologically organized survey, specific
historical events and artistic movements will illuminate important themes in American photography. Top-
Art
­ 76 ­
ics will include photography and the Civil War, O'Sullivan's photographs of the American West, South-
worth & Hawes' Boston portraiture studio, Stieglitz's Photo-Secession and the battle for photography as a
fine art, documentary photography, the Museum of Modern Art's institutionalization of the history of the
medium, Life magazine photojournalism, photo-essays on American society by Robert Frank and Walker
Evans, fashion photography, and contemporary photographic investigations of the landscape, the human
body, and racial, sexual, and gender identity. Visits to both the Clark and WCMA printrooms will supple-
ment the lectures.
Requirements: writing assignments, midterm, final exam, and class participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 40. Preference given to majors.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR Conference: 9-9:50 M, 8:30-9:45 R, 11-11:50 F ARAUZ
ARTH 260(S) Twentieth-Century Art, A Survey
A lecture course in the history of major figures and movements of twentieth-century European and Ameri-
can art. The course begins with the revolutionary experiments of early twentieth-century French art and
shifts at mid-century to the U.S., and especially to New York. Featured artists will include Matisse, Braque,
Picasso, Kandinsky, Mondrian, Miro, Pollock, de Kooning, Newman, Johns, Rauschenberg, Stella, Morris
and Smithson. The aim of the course is to develop the students' literacy in the canonical art of the century,
but will offer occasions to question the canon, as well.
Requirements will include readings, a mid-term and a final, and may also include a field trip to New York.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limited to 40.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF PALERMO
ARTH 262(S) Twentieth-Century Architecture
This course explores the major developments in Western architecture from 1900 to the present, including
the relationship of modern architecture to contemporary developments in other artistic fields, particularly
painting and sculpture, and the social concerns of modern architects. Concentration will be on major fig-
ures such as Wright, Gropius, Mies van der Rohe, Le Corbusier, Aalto, Kahn, Venturi, Gehry.
Class format: lecture.
Requirements: biweekly quizzes, a final exam, and an architectural design project for which no previous
training is expected.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102. Enrollment limited to 60.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR E. J. JOHNSON
ARTH 263 European Painting and Sculpture, 1900-1945 (Not offered 2000-2001)
A survey of the major artists and tendencies, including Fauvism, Expressionism, Cubism, Futurism, Dada,
Surrealism, the Bauhaus, and the Russian avant-garde. Lectures will focus on selected artists, with others to
be covered through readings. Issues will include theoretical rationales for abstraction, varieties of avant-
gardism, and relations between art, criticism and the art market.
Class format: lecture.
Requirements: one quiz, a midterm, a short paper, a field trip to New York, and a final.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102.
HAXTHAUSEN
ARTH 264 American Art and Architecture, 1600 to Present (Not offered 2000-2001)
American art is often looked at as a provincial version of the real thing--i.e., European art--and found
wanting. This course examines American architecture, painting, and sculpture on its own terms, in the light
of the social, ideological and economic forces that shaped it. Special attention will be paid to such themes
as the Puritan legacy and attitudes toward art; the making of art in a commercial society; and the tension
between the ideal and the real in American works of art.
Requirements: three 5-page papers, midterm, final, and a field trip.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102 or permission of instructor.
M. LEWIS
ARTH 265 Survey of Contemporary Art: I Love My Time (Not offered 2000-2001; to be
offered 2001-2002)
A lecture and discussion class about the art and spectacle of our time. Beginning with a brief introduction
to modernism in New York in the 1950's, the course quickly moves into the art of the 70s, 80s and 90s.
Lectures most often focus on living artists, both American and European. To see contemporary art in the
fullness of its context, we will consider recent theory as well as current events and daily life. Topics will
include minimalism, conceptualism, feminism, postmodernism, African-American art, public art, and gay
and lesbian art. Slide lectures will be complemented by artists' videos, visiting artists, and reenactments of
performance art, as well as frequent use of the WCMA contemporary collection.
Evaluation will be based on short papers, a midterm and a final.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102. Enrollment limited to 25.
GLIER
ARTH 266(F) History of Russian Art (Same as Russian 208)
This course offers a survey of Russian art from the first to the third millennium, from religious icons to
commercial ones. We will look at early broadsides, society portraits, landscapes, and genre paintings, as
well as a wide range of Russian handicrafts. Special emphasis will be placed on the halcyon period from
Art
­ 77 ­
1910 to 1930, when Russian Cubo-Futurists, Suprematists, and Constructivists profoundly influenced the
development of art throughout the Western world. After examining the Socialist Realism of the Stalin era,
we will progress through Moscow conceptualism to the current appropriation of Western style into a post-
Soviet aesthetic.
Requirements: active class participation, two 3- to 5-page papers, one class presentation, and a final 10-15
page paper or final exam.
No prerequisites.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF GOLDSTEIN
ARTH 267 Art in Germany: 1960 to the Present (Not offered 2000-2001)
An examination of the extraordinary ferment in the visual arts in Germany from 1960 to the present. Be-
ginning with the work of Joseph Beuys, the course will explore, through lecture and discussion, develop-
ments in painting, sculpture, and photography, including the work of such artists as Georg Baselitz, Bernd
and Hilla Becher, Bernhard and Anna Blume, Rebecca Horn, Anselm Kiefer, Sigmar Polke, Gerhard
Richter, and Rosemarie Trockel. Among the issues to be examined will be German art and historical
memory; "Neo-Expressionism"; the reaffirmation of painting as a medium; the rediscovery of alchemy;
and the German reception of Pop Art.
Requirements: a quiz, a midterm, a short research paper, and a final.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102.
HAXTHAUSEN
ARTH 268(F) Cyberscapes (Same as ArtS 212, EXPR 242 and Religion 289)
(See under Interdepartmental Program for Experimental and Cross-Disciplinary Studies for full descrip-
tion--EXPR 242.) Satisfies one semester of Division II requirement.
ARTH 270(F) Japanese Art and Culture*
A survey of traditional painting, sculpture, architecture, wood block prints, and decorative arts of Japan.
Special attention will be paid to the developments in artistic style and subject matter in the context of con-
temporary cultural phenomena. Through visual analysis students learn the aesthetic, religious, and political
ideals and cultural meanings conveyed in the works of art. This course offers students a solid grasp of the
social, cultural, and art histories of Japan.
Evaluation will be based on five quizzes and three short essays.
No prerequisites.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR JANG
ARTH 274(S) Chinese Calligraphy: Theory and Practice*
This course offers students an opportunity to acquire an understanding of the theoretical and aesthetic prin-
ciples of Chinese calligraphy, one of the highest art forms in China practiced by the literati. This class also
offers students a hands-on experience. The semester is evenly divided between technical instruction and
the art history part of the course.
Evaluation will be based on class attendance and participation, a midterm exam, and a final calligraphy
project.
No prerequisites. Students do not need to know Chinese. No prior artistic experience is necessary. Permis-
sion of the instructor required. Enrollment limited to 15.
Cost to students: approximately $150 to cover cost of calligraphy brushes, inks and paper.
Hour: 9:00-11:50 F JANG
ARTH 276 Islamic Art of India (Not offered 2000-2001)*
This course will be divided into two parts, the first devoted to the architecture, the second to painting. We
will begin with the genesis of Islamic architectural form in two key areas, the Indus Valley (in present day
Pakistan) and the region around Delhi, in India. Thereafter, we will trace major stylistic trends in these two
regions, emphasizing the role of different patrons, including the Ghurid sultans, the Tughlugs and the sufi
saints of the Punjab. This will provide the basis for examining the architectural patronage of the Mughal
dynasty, and for considering such masterworks as the Taj Mahal in some detail. Understanding the param-
eters of architectural development will serve, in turn, to contextualize the tradition of painting and manu-
script production in the region. Here we will begin with indigenous forms of bookmaking, and assess the
role of immigrant Persian artists in re-orienting the art form. Primary attention will be paid to the spectacu-
lar manuscripts created for Mughal patrons. Students will also have the opportunity to examine Indian
paintings in local museum collections.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, a short paper, a midterm and a final.
No prerequisites.
H. EDWARDS
ARTH 278 The Golden Road to Samarqand (Not offered 2000-2001)*
The region comprising present day Iran, Afghanistan, Central Asia, Pakistan and India has a rich and com-
plex history. Home to Genghis Khan and Tamerlane, Akbar the Great and Shah Jahan, it has generated
some of the most spectacular monuments (e.g. the Taj Mahal and the blue tiled mosques of Isfahan) and
refined manuscript painting ever known. We will look at these art forms from the tenth to the seventeenth
centuries, highlighting the patronage of key dynasties, including the Timurids of Samarqand and the Mug-
Art
­ 78 ­
hals of India. An important issue throughout the course will be the impact that Islam has had on the artistic
traditions of this region.
Class format: lecture and discussion.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, a short paper, a midterm and a final.
No prerequisites.
H. EDWARDS
ARTH 301(F) Methods of Art History+
A survey of the discipline of art history. Special emphasis is placed on the development of formal analysis,
iconography, social history, and postmodernism. Additional topics include perspective, visual narration,
film theory, and the feminist critique of art history. The goal of the course is to become familiar with the
development of the discipline of art history and its theoretical underpinnings.
Class format: lecture and discussion.
Requirements: short papers, one presentation, and class participation.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102. Limited to majors in Art History and required of them. Art History majors
may take ArtH 448 in lieu of ArtH 301.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR HEDREEN
ARTH 305 North-American Suburbs (Same as Environmental Studies 305) (Not offered
2000-2001; to be offered 2002-2003)
This course details the intentions, built forms, and historical unfolding of that environment which now
houses more Americans than either city or countryside. Among the topics to be discussed will be: seminal
suburban communities in various regions of Canada and the United States; the quest for a rural ideal and
the celebration of a tamed outdoors; the extent to which suburbs are peculiarly environments for child-rais-
ing, with the attendant purport given in the modern age to youth; the successional patterns as farmlands or
estates are subdivided and later even become part of a central business district; the kaleidoscope of archi-
tectural styles and revivals; the manner in which these communities may be products of their various link-
age systems to a central place, or city; the degree to which they are increasingly centers in their own right,
with attendant automobile-induced horizontality; and the unfolding historiography of the North-American
suburb. For that historiography the seminar will scrutinize comparatively the work of such scholars or
commentators as Binford, Gans, Kenneth Jackson, Mumford, Sies, Stilgoe, and Venturi.
Evaluation: Each classmember will conduct field studies on a suburb or suburban element of his or her
choosing; this research will be used in three papers. Upon them and class discussion the grade will be
based.
No prerequisites. Open to sophomores.
SATTERTHWAITE
ARTH 306(S) North-American Dwellings (Same as Environmental Studies 326)
A study of the historical and spatial evolution of North-American housing which concentrates upon those
single- or multi-family dwelling types which exhibit diachronic or geographical pervasiveness, such as the
farmhouse, rowhouse, apartment house, tract house and mobile home. These dwelling places are seen in a
context of life and family cycles, of initial builders and successive occupants, of neighborhood and commu-
nity formation or change, of building materials and technologies, of architectural and socio-economic styles,
as well as of American work patterns and daily-rounds. There will be emphasis throughout the course on the
visual impressofthisresidential"fabric."Thelabsection isto beusedforoccasionalsitevisits.
Requirements: four essay installments on a pervasive element throughout American homes; a class presen-
tation; participationinclassesandweeklyafternoonfieldsessions.
Open tosophomores.Enrollmentlimited to 15.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF SATTERTHWAITE
ARTH 307 The North-American Park Idea (Same as Environmental Studies 327) (Not
offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2002-2003)
This research seminar considers those sites whose nature may be displayed in an idealized form, for rea-
sons of stewardship, curiosity, delectation, or some other intention. Among the "open-spaces" to be stu-
died, both in terms of design intent and design execution, are: commons and squares; groves and pleasure
grounds; cemeteries; exposition grounds; playgrounds; a few "landmark" subdivisions; and those large
natural areas of reservations generally subsumed, in common usage, by the wording "national park." Many
of these "parks" are sites of leisure activities, and the design and furnishing of outdoor recreation will be a
major concomitant theme. One kind of primary evidence, in the form of texts, will be contemporary re-
ports, letters, and journals from the period of these sites' creation. Secondary evidence will lie in accounts
of the behavior induced by the scouting, wilderness, ecological and naturalist-explorer movements. Fred-
erick Law Olmsted, Steven Mather, Robert Moses, and Walt Disney are among the seminal figures whose
careers in park creation will be scrutinized.
Evaluation will be based on four essays and a class presentation. (This course includes an obligatory all-
day field trip to the Boston environs, beginning with the new Financial District park at Post Office Square,
the seventeenth-century Old Granary Burying Grounds and the Boston Common, continuing by foot out
Art
­ 79 ­
the Emerald Necklace some ten miles to the Arnold Arboretum's living collections, and to Franklin Park.)
No prerequisites. Open to sophomores.
SATTERTHWAITE
ARTH 310(S) American Agricultural History (Same as Environmental Studies 310)
An exploration, in seminar format, of the historical aspects of the production of food and fibre, concentrat-
ing on the North American experience but preceded by anthropological and other evidence from both the
New and Old Worlds. The evolution of rural settlements; the development of forest, range, and crop land
used; the relationship of technology to rural societies; and the nurturing of rurality. Particular emphasis on
the visual and spatial attributes of different agricultural regimes as well as their depiction in the visual arts.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR SATTERTHWAITE
ARTH 312T Tutorial in Architectural Theory of the Nineteenth Century (Not offered
2000-2001)+
Most contemporary ideas in architecture can be traced to the debates of the nineteenth century: the idea that
there should be a modern style appropriate to the present, that the form of a building should express its
construction, and that architecture has a social dimension. In this tutorial students will closely read some of
the period's principal theoretical manifestos, including works by Pugin, Heinrich Huebsch, Viollet-le-Duc
and Eidlitz. Regular writing assignments will stress close reading of texts, the problem of translating
theoretical ideas into built architecture, and larger issues of how one writes about architecture.
Knowledge of German or French helpful, but not necessary. Consent of the instructor required.
M. LEWIS
ARTH 320 Picturing God in the Middle Ages (Not offered 2000-2001)
How did Christians come to depict their God? How did they visualize the deity described in Scripture as
well as such theological subtleties as the Incarnation and the Trinity? And what purposes did pictures of
God serve? This lecture and discussion course will examine chronologically the sources and evolution of
Christian images of God during the Middle Ages, in both Byzantium and Western Europe, and the prob-
lems that these images often generated. Among other issues, the course will track the importance of the
imperial cult, images of the dead and the cult of relics to the original development of the Christian sacred
image, the ramification of theological debates over materiality on the form and use of pictures, and the
visual exploration of the sexuality of Christ. The ultimate goal of the course will be to make sense of a wide
variety of medieval images of God within their larger cultural and functional contexts.
Requirements: participation in class discussions of readings, one-hour midterm, final exam, and a research
paper.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102; ArtH 223 recommended.
LOW
ARTH 330(S) Power and Piety in Early Netherlands Painting
This course will examine the construction of a pictorial discourse of piety in the Netherlands in the fifteen
century. What were the component ingredients of this visual devotion and what cultural and social interests
did they serve? To what extent should the "naturalism" of the art of this period be understood as the forma-
tion of a "reality effect"? If "naturalism" has more to do with the creation of cultural meaning than the
imitation of nature, then whose agendas did this style serve? Is "naturalism" only to be associated with the
power of the elite or can it also be understood as a means by which the subordinate classes could mold and
manipulate their social circumstances?
Requirements: one short (5 pages) paper and one longer (8 pages) paper, midterm and a final. A concerted
effort will be made to make class visits to the Boston Museum of Fine Arts and the Metropolitan Museum
of Art.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR MOXEY
ARTH 350(S) American Dreams
Seldom has a new nation been so quickly and grandly synthesized as the United States of America. In a
relatively short time, an American history and culture have been created to suit the political and popular
needs of an emerging world power. In this course we will try to construct a new history of American art by
emphasizing works from the Williams College Museum of Art that range from "high art" (Copley, Eakins,
O'Keeffe) to prints, posters, photography, and folk art (including Native American). Our studies will con-
sider the interaction of national myths, such as The American Dream, with the multicultural aspirations of
artists and their audiences under changing global circumstances.
Requirements: class participation, midterm, final, two short research papers.
Prerequisite: ArtH 101-102 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limited to 20.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF MATHEWS
ARTH 351 The Modern Art World: The Challenge of Leadership in the Midst of Chaos (Not
offered 2000-2001)
Since the mid-nineteenth century, the international art world has operated without the previously powerful
institutions of Church, State, and Academy. In the chaos that has ensued, artists, dealers, collectors, mu-
seum directors and curators, critics, and academic art historians have struggled to affect the course of mod-
ern art. At stake is leadership in the form of "influence"--a term of peculiar significance to the art world.
This class will take an historical overview of changing patterns of influence from Manet and the Impres-
Art
­ 80 ­
sionists to the leading artists and art world figures of the present day. In the face of changing demographics
and a postmodern sensibility, the concept of artistic leadership today is undergoing continuous re-defini-
tion. Through specific case studies from 1870 to the present, we will examine how and why only certain
art--not all--has gained visual authority through the interaction of creativity, exhibitions, marketing, and
persuasive theory. Such diverse writers as Janet Wolff and Tom Wolfe, Leo Steinberg and Clement Green-
berg, Michel Foucault and Walter Benjamin and Roland Barthes will be studied; and many current art
world figures will be interviewed.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, two tests, two 5-page papers and one virtual exhibition.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102 or permission of the instructors.
MATHEWS and L. SHEARER
ARTH 353(F) Neoclassical and Nineteenth-Century Architecture, 1750-1900
Modern architecture is often taken to be synonymous with twentieth-century events, but the project of
modernism in its practical and theoretical development is more deeply rooted. This course will consider the
grand narrative of Western architectural thinking in its built and written form from the revolutionary in-
novations of the French Enlightenment to the maturation of modern ideals. It will focus in depth on critical
junctures of this discourse, that is, periods and places where design discussions were especially animate
and alternative ideologies were ambitiously put forward. Some readings of primary course material will be
required, and every effort will be made to integrate the topical issues of theory with the architectural cre-
ations that arose from or around them. Among the principal architects and theorists to be considered are
Marc-Antoine Laugier, Jacques-German Soufflot, Giovanni Battista Piranesi, Claude Nicolas Ledoux,
J.N.L. Durand, Henri Labrouste, Eugene Emmanual Viollet-le-Duc, John Soane, Augustus Welby Pugin,
John Ruskin, Thomas Jefferson, A.J. Downing, A.J. Davis, H.H. Richardson, Louis Sullivan, Karl Frie-
drich Schinkel, Gottfried Semper, and Otto Wagner.
Requirements: four "take-home" essays and participation in class discussions.
Prerequisite: ArtH 101-102.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR MALLGRAVE
ARTH 363 The Holocaust Visualized (Not offered 2000-2001)
This course will examine how memories of the Holocaust have been conveyed through visual means and
consider what historical, cultural and political circumstances have caused various nations to remember the
Holocaust differently. We will discuss the issues prompted by public memorials, exhibitions and, as one
writer puts it, the "museumification" of concentration camps. How should we define the Holocaust?
Whose memory should take precedence? What is lost or gained by the inclusion of texts with images?
How might memory be misrepresented by the exhibition of visual materials such as video testimony,
photographs and artifacts? In addition, we will study art about the Holocaust, including Art Spiegelman's
non-comic "comic book" Maus and non-fiction films such as Night and Fog, Shoah and Schindler's List,
to ask whether constructed or simulated images can convey the experience of the Holocaust as well as
documentary ones.
Requirements: active participation in class discussion and regular participation in a class listserver discus-
sion group, class trip to the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, one oral presenta-
tion, and one research paper; no exams.
No prerequisites, but course not open to auditors or first-year students.
(This course is part of the Jewish Studies cluster.)
E. GRUDIN
ARTH 365 Non-Fiction and Experimental Film (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered
2001-2002)
This course examines the evolution--from the Lumiére brothers in 1895--of non-fiction filmmaking by
historical period and national school, with emphasis on the work of such masters as Flaherty, Ivens, Grier-
son, and Wiseman, and on such "schools" as the National Film Board of Canada. Special attention to the
documentary mode, its relationship to still photography, the analysis of cinematic form, and the influence
of anthropology, war, propaganda, and television upon the medium of film as an art form. Secondary con-
sideration of experimental, avant-garde, or independent film, especially the work of Canadian animators
like Norman McLaren.
Class format: screenings in addition to class meetings.
Requirements: lectures, discussions, choice of afternoon or evening screening session, obligatory over-
night field trip to Film Board in Montreal, oral reports, occasional formal exercises and essays.
Open to sophomores.
SATTERTHWAITE
SEMINARS
ARTH 352 Topics in American Art: The Crisis of Victorian Painting (Not offered 2000-2001)
During the years before the Civil War, American painting overcame its provincial limitations to develop a
vigorous tradition, with its own characteristic subjects and treatments, popular patronage, and network of
supporting institutions. The painters of the National Academy of Design collectively enjoyed wealth and
fame to a degree never again reached by American artists. All this changed in the two decades after the
Art
­ 81 ­
Civil War, when European-trained painters and Europe-oriented collectors caused the collapse of the mar-
ket for American art. This course will look at American painting in this turbulent period, and the response
of artists to this crisis in patronage and popular support. Local collections of American paintings, including
WCMA and the Berkshire Athenaeum, will provide an opportunity for fresh and original study.
Requirements: one class presentation and a 20-page research paper.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102 or permission of the instructor; Enrollment limited to 15.
M. LEWIS
ARTH 376(F) Images and Anti-Images: Zen Art in China and Japan*
This seminar studies a variety of art forms (painting, ceramics, tea ceremony, and garden) in the context of
Zen in China and Japan. We will investigate the Zen aesthetic ideals and religious meanings conveyed by
these art forms. Special attention will be paid to the study of Zen painting from the twelfth century to the
fifteenth century, the golden age of Zen painting in both countries. Issues of interest include, for example,
the meanings and functions of Zen painting, iconography and its evolution, different patronage systems in
China and Japan, and to what extent Japanese artists tried to break away from their Chinese counterparts,
while working with highly derivative material, both thematically and artistically.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 9. Permission of instructor.
(This course is part of the Critical Reasoning and Analytical Skills initiative.)
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W JANG
ARTH 403 The American House (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
The American house is one of the principal achievements of American architecture. Shaped by many fac-
tors, including extremes of climate, the availability of materials and a culture which placed value on both
individual and community, the American house had achieved a distinctive identity by the seventeenth cen-
tury. This course examines the American house in history, looking at it from the standpoint if architectural,
social, and cultural history. Major domestic architects will also be examined, including Bruce Price, Frank
Lloyd Wright, H. H. Richardson, Greene & Greene, and Wilson Eyre. The readings will cover primary
sources on the American house (Andrew Jackson Downing and Samuel Sloan) as well as recent scholar-
ship on domestic architecture (Gwendolyn Wright and Henry Glassie). Possible research topics might in-
clude: regionalism and the American house; floor plans and changing social structure; style, symbolism
and identity; the city house and the country house; the vernacular house; formality and informality.
Students will prepare a research paper during the semester, reporting on their progress regularly in class
discussions.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102. No prerequisites for American Studies majors.
M. LEWIS
ARTH 408(S) Art and Conservation: An Inquiry into History, Methods, and Materials (Same
as ArtH 508)
(See under ArtH 508 for full description.)
ARTH 412 Monsters and Narratives: Greek Architectural Sculpture (Not offered 2000-2001)
Even the earliest ancient Greek temples in stone supported sculptural ornament, though the best-known
architectural sculptures in Greece are the great narrative compositions of the Temple of Zeus at Olympia
and the Parthenon at Athens. This seminar will trace the development of sculpture as architectural orna-
ment in Greece from the seventh through the third centuries B.C. We will consider Near-Eastern sources
for architectural sculptures and explore the original meaning and guardian function of putting sculpture in
high places before turning to the mythological and civic narratives associated with buildings of the Classi-
cal and Hellenistic Periods.
Requirements: class discussions, class presentations, and a final paper of 15-18 pages.
MCGOWAN
ARTH 422(S) Making the Stones Speak: The Emergence and Development Of the
Romanesque Sculpted Portal
Beginning around the year 1000, European Christendom experienced a great ecclesiastical building boom.
According to a contemporary chronicler, "it was as if the whole earth, having cast off the old by shaking
itself, were clothing itself everywhere in the white robe of the church." During the course of the eleventh
century, the designers of these structures fashioned a new architectural language that we now label "Ro-
manesque." One of the most innovative and dramatic aspects of this new language was its assimilation of
monumental sculpture, absent in Europe since the fifth century. The focus of attention in this regard was
the portal, which marked the threshold between the profane realm of the outside world and the sacred
space of the church. This seminar will investigate the antecedents and origins of the Romanesque sculpted
portal and examine in detail its greatest manifestations. Emphasis will be placed on understanding these
often complex sculptural schemes within their original functional and physical contexts. What role did this
imagery play in structuring the medieval visitor's overall experience of the church? And what did it mean
to have this imagery carved into the very fabric of "God's temple"?
Requirements: class discussion, class presentation, 15- to 20-page research paper.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102. Enrollment limited to 15. Preference given to majors.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W LOW
Art
­ 82 ­
ARTH 448(S) Art about Art: 1400-2000
This thematic seminar will focus on depictions through which artists referred to their own profession and
its products. Images to be discussed include legends of the origin of art, self-portraits and other portraits of
artists, scenes of contemporary and historical artists in their studios, as well as finished art on display. While
tracking the major changes in imagery from the end of the Middle Ages through the twentieth century
(with some reference to earlier developments) we will analyze specific images, comparing their implica-
tions with both the social conditions and the theoretical positions then current.
Requirements: two 12-page or one 25-page paper.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limited to 15. This course may be
taken in lieu of ARTH 301, Methods of Art History.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 T FILIPCZAK
ARTH 449(F) The Meanings of Poses in Baroque Art
Art of the 1600s (e.g., Rembrandt, Rubens, Caravaggio, Bernini, Poussin) represents a highpoint in artists'
ability and interest in conveying "the passions of the soul" through the actions of the body. The range of
feelings represented had never been broader than at this time. We will distinguish the individual from the
conventional poses (e.g., for melancholy or admiration), track how long the conventional poses had been
in use, and consider which poses, if any, were favored by individual artists (e.g., Caravaggio's repeated use
of a pointing gesture).
Requirements: 5-minute oral report, 30- to 40-minute oral report on the same material as the 25-page paper
(half due mid-way through the semester, the whole paper at the end).
Enrollment limited to 12. Preference given to majors.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 T FILIPCZAK
ARTH 460(S) Miro and Company
The path-breaking Catalan artist Joan Miro attained maturity in Paris in the early 1920's. At the time, he
was in close contact with the artists Pablo Picasso and Andre Masson and with the writers Michael Leiris
and Max Jacob. The extended circle to which these figures belonged included some of the most exciting
visual and literary artists of the time. Through readings in primary and secondary sources, this course will
examine Miro's work and the contexts that nurtured it.
Course requirements include advanced readings and a 20- to 25-page writing assignment.
Enrollment limited to 15.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W PALERMO
ARTH 461(F) American Modernism, 1900-1930
The term "American modernism" has come to define a time period in American art history, yet it refuses
any easy interpretation in reference to a specific artistic movement or medium or to a clearly prescribed
group of artists. Thriving in New York City during the early decades of the twentieth century, American
modernism encompassed movements such as Dada, abstraction, and straight photography, and made art
through media such as magazines and collage as well as photography and painting. Parisian war emigrés
mingled with native New Yorkers at the salons of the Stettheimers and the Arensbergs and saw new art at
Stieglitz's gallery "291." This seminar will explore the complex brew of images, ideas, and individuals in
New York during the First World War that gave rise to modern art in the United States, and will include
artists such as Paul Strand, Georgia O'Keeffe, Stuart Davis, Alfred Stieglitz, Arthur Dove, Florine Stet-
theimer, Marsden Hartley, Marius De Zayas, Marcel Duchamp, and Charles Demuth. The extensive visual
and textual primary resources from this era will provide an opportunity to consider the ways in which
American artists sought to distinguish themselves from their European contemporaries, even as they inter-
acted with them through exhibitions and social events.
Requirements: one or two oral reports, a research paper of 15-20 pages, and class participation.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102. Enrollment limited to 15. Preference given to majors.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 F ARAUZ
ARTH 462(S) The Subject of the Representation: Contemporary Art and Film
Nowhere are "postmodern" narratives of identity and difference more vividly staged than in the contempo-
rary art world. In order to place in context the forces that revitalized representation in the art of the 1980s,
this course will examine the formal and critical framework within which artists deconstruct and reconstruct
conceptions of gender and identity. Specifically, we will consider film and video, new electronic technolo-
gies, and some of the many theoretical discourses which influence the production and experience of art.
Recent films to be viewed on tape will include Aliens, Blade Runner, Blue Velvet, Piano, Terminator 2, and
Videodrome, among others. There will be particular emphasis on films by Godard, Hitchcock, Fuller and
Ford. Selected background readings will include texts by Baudrillard, Derrida, Freud, Haraway, Kristeva,
Lacan and Mulvey, in conjunction with readings from Art After Modernism: Rethinking Representation. A
wide range of contemporary visual and video artists will be discussed, concentrating on Fischl, Hill, Hol-
zer, Kelley, Kruger, Longo, Rosler, Salle, Sherman, Kiki Smith, and Trockel. The art of the 1960s and
1970s (e.g. Acconci, Hesse and Warhol) will be discussed in relation to the art of the 1980s and 1990s.
Evaluation will be based on two short papers and a final class project to be determined and developed in a
Art
­ 83 ­
series of conferences with the instructors. One to two field trips to New York City to artists' studios, galler-
ies and museums will be made.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 15.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 R H. SHEARER and L. SHEARER
ARTH 463(F) Post-War U.S. Art and Criticism
Beginning well before World War II, art and criticism in the United States aspired to and attained a remark-
able level of intensity and quality. This seminar course will use the criticism of this period--beginning with
Meyer Schapiro and Clement Greenberg and continuing through the present moment--as a way of orga-
nizing a view of the art and the issues at stake. Rather than a survey of contemporary art, this course aims to
supply the skills needed for a critical engagement with the discourse that surrounds the arts today. We will
read such critics as Leo Steinberg, Michael Fried, Rosalind Krauss, Thierry de Duve, Hal Foster, Benjamin
Buchloh and Thomas Crow and consider artists including Pollock, de Kooning, Stella, Morris, Warhol,
Smithson and Sherman.
Course requirements will include advanced readings, a 20- to 25-page writing assignment and a field trip to
New York. Enrollment limited to 15.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W PALERMO
ARTH 464(S) Modern Portraiture
Portraiture has taunted scholars with its tradition of legibility, and it often masquerades as a highly codified
artistic genre. Yet many artists have exploded its parameters and redefined its function. What makes an
image a "portrait"? Does it need a face? a human body? Does it need to "look like" someone? In the mod-
ern era, representations of words, body parts, shoes, and machines have all claimed designation as "por-
traits." How does a portrait refer to its subject? Why has this seemingly traditional genre appealed to artists
otherwise eager to break with tradition? What kind of impact did photography have on painted portraiture?
This seminar will consider portraiture by artists such as Gustave Caillebotte, John Peto, Julia Margaret
Cameron, Thomas Eakins, Pablo Picasso, Alfred Stieglitz, Frieda Kahlo, James Van Der Zee, Archibald
Motley, Andy Warhol, and Diane Arbus in order to investigate the ways in which artists reformulated and
"modernized" the genre to serve national, racial, artistic, or sexual identity, as well as individual, group and
self identity.
Requirements: one or two oral reports, a research paper of 15-20 pages, and class participation.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102. Enrollment limited to 15. Preference given to majors.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 M ARAUZ
ARTH 493(F)-W031, W031-494(S) Senior Thesis
(See general description of the Degree with Honors in Art, Art History Route.)
ARTH W033 Honors Independent Project
ARTH 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
ART STUDIO COURSES
ARTS 100(F,S) Drawing I
The process of drawing develops a heightened awareness of the visual world. Your subjective experiences
and your objective experiences combine to form a larger perceptual understanding of the environment in
which you live. Drawing allows you an alternative use of these processes and provides a format for stating
what you know about the world. Drawing is an excellent means for improving your skills in observing,
seeing distinctions, and creating new meanings from your perceptions. This is an introductory course
which will investigate the properties of making an image on the two-dimensional page. While drawing is
an essential basis for much of the artmaking process, its use is not limited to artists. Design, illustration,
engineering, and science are among the many fields which incorporate drawing.
Evaluation will be based primarily on the quality and quantity of work produced as well as some attention
to the student's progress. Lab fee.
There are three to five sections of ArtS 100 offered each semester. Although individual faculty members
teaching beginning drawing do not follow a common syllabus, they share common goals. Syllabi for each
section are available either from the secretary's office in the W. L. S. Spencer Art Building or can be ob-
tained on the Hector file server: Departments, Art, and then ArtS 100.
No prerequisites. Preference given to Art majors and first-year students. Enrollment limited to 20.
Hour: 8:30-11:10 TR, 1:10-3:50 MR, 1:10-3:50 W First Semester: GLIER, F. JACKSON, PODMORE
1:10-3:50 M, 7:00-9:30 p.m. T, 1:10-3:50 T Second Semester: F. JACKSON, LEVIN, TAKENAGA
ARTS 103 Accelerated Drawing I (Not offered 2000-2001)
This course is essentially the same as ArtS 100 but for students with previous drawing experience who
would like a more accelerated pace, whether they are potential studio majors or not. Students will work
primarily in black and white media, largely drawing from life. Improvement in compositional skills in con-
junction with content is a focus of the course. Students are expected to have some familiarity with line,
value, scale, composition, surface, and basic drawing materials. There will be more self-directed projects
than in the ArtS 100 class, and more emphasis placed on discussing work. Please see the description above
for ArtS 100. (Note: This course is an alternative to ArtS 100 and cannot be taken for extra credit.)
Art
­ 84 ­
Evaluation will be based on evidence of each student's progress as shown in a portfolio of drawings made
in class and as homework. The portfolio is presented for evaluation at midterm and at the end of the course.
Attendance and participation in class discussions are also considered as part of the course evaluation. Lab
fee.
No prerequisites. Limited to one section with preference given to Art majors and first-year students. Enroll-
ment limited 20.
ARTS 212(F) Cyberscapes (Same as ArtH 268, EXPR 242 and Religion 289)
(See under Interdepartmental Program for Experimental and Cross-Disciplinary Studies for full descrip-
tion--EXPR 242.) Satisfies one semester of Division II requirement. Does not fulfill the requirement for
studio art.
ARTS 220(S) Architectural Design I
Instruction in design techniques and drafting with an introduction to architectural theory. Simple design
problems will be used to help the student explore form and meaning in architecture.
There will be five design projects requiring drawings and models.
Evaluation will be based on quality of design, with improvement taken into account. Lab fee.
Prerequisite: ArtS 100 or ArtS 103. ArtH 101-102 strongly suggested. Enrollment is limited; permission of
the instructor is required. Registration does not guarantee admission to the course.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 F B. BENEDICT
ARTS 230(F,S) Drawing II
This drawing course will continue to investigate the techniques, principles of organization, and ideas which
were introduced in the Drawing I course. Having become more familiar with the drawing process, students
will be encouraged, through selected problems, to expand and challenge the conventions of markmaking.
As with any discipline, familiarity with the rules allows the users to seek alternatives and develop defini-
tions of how the drawing process can best be suited to their own visual vocabulary. The range of exercises
could include traditional materials on paper as well as combinations of materials more commonly
associated with non-art disciplines, i.e., computers, industrial materials, literature, etc.
Evaluation will be based on evidence of each student's progress, as shown in a portfolio of drawings made
in class and as homework. Attendance and participation in class discussions are also considered as part of
the course evaluation. Lab fee.
Prerequisite: ArtS 100 or ArtS 103. Enrollment limited to 20.
Hour: 10:00-12:15 MW First Semester: F. JACKSON
10:00-12:15 MW Second Semester: GLIER
ARTS 241(F) Painting
A survey of painting in Western culture demonstrates that contributions to this visual catalogue include a
rich, diverse selection of subjects, and a comparable range of their representation. Painters have
constructed realistic depictions of the identifiable subject, rendered abstractions that question the very
means of identity, and developed an ever-expanding vocabulary of what can be represented. The human
body, the landscape, and architectural form have consistently posed as subject, but the nonmaterial subject
has also been re-presented on the canvas. To familiarize the student with the languages of painting, this
course will explore a range of technical means and issues of content. Using oil paints as the vehicle, the
course will develop foundation skills in the manipulation and control of color, value, and surface. While
specific assignments focus on particular issues, experimentation is encouraged.
Evaluation will be based on fulfillment of assignment objectives, technical execution/craftsmanship, con-
ceptual and physical investment of time, participation in critiques, and attendance. Lab fee.
Prerequisite: ArtS 100 or ArtS 103. Recommended that students also complete ArtS 230. Enrollment lim-
ited to 16.
Hour: 9:55-12:35 R and 7:00-9:30 p.m. T F. JACKSON
ARTS 242(S) Oil Painting
During the fifteenth century in Europe, some painters began to make a small alteration in the formulation
of their paints. Instead of binding their pigments with egg yolk, they ground those same pigments in drying
oils. This seems a very minor change, but it is possible that no other development in the visual arts pro-
duced a more dramatic revolution. This course will serve as an introduction to representational painting in
oils. A primary focus will be the development of sound basic working methods. We will consider both
direct, "alla prima" painting, and indirect painting in glazes. In particular we will develop skills in: prepar-
ing supports, underpainting in monochrome, broad modeling of form, color mixing, and textural applica-
tions. At the same time, we will study the interrelation of method and expressive content in the painting.
Every formal and technical choice can enhance or alter the character of the painting,
sometimes in quite profound ways.
Evaluation will be based primarily on the fulfillment of assignment objectives and participation in class
activities. Lab fee.
Prerequisite: ArtS 100 or ArtS 103. It is recommended that students also complete ArtS 230. Enrollment
limited to 16.
Hour: 9:55-12:35 R and 7:00-9:30 p.m. T F. JACKSON
Art
­ 85 ­
ARTS 257(F) Photography
Photography is a course in the basics of photographic theory, technique and composition within a fine art
context. Students learn to operate a 35mm camera (provided by the department), to process black and
white film, and print black and white photographs. In addition to the basics of silver-based photography,
students will receive an introduction to digital imaging. This course is based on a series of photographic
assignments which demand the application of skills learned in class. A substantial amount of time outside
of class is necessary to complete these assignments. The work is evaluated individually and in class cri-
tiques throughout the term.
Evaluation will be based on the level of formal and technical competence of the portfolio as well as the
conceptual strength of the work. Lab fee.
Prerequisite: ArtS 100 or ArtS 103. Enrollment limited to 15.
Hour: 10:00-12:15 MWF LALEIAN
ARTS 263 Printmaking: Intaglio and Relief (Not offered 2000-2001)
An introduction to printmaking through the process of intaglio and relief. Techniques will include drypoint,
etching, and collagraphy. Monotypes, some color work, collage, and hand tinting will also be covered.
Both technical skill and a strong conceptual basis will be emphasized in order to create finished fine art
prints. Experimentation is encouraged. Class time will consist of studio work, demonstrations, lectures,
critiques, and field trips.
Evaluation will be based on attendance, participation in class, and the quality of work produced. Lab fee.
Prerequisite: ArtS 100 or ArtS 103. Enrollment limited to 15.
TAKENAGA
ARTS 264(S) Printmaking: Lithography
An introduction to printmaking through the process of lithography. Students will work on both stones and
aluminum plates. Techniques will include traditional lithographic processes as well as monotyping, multi-
ple plates, collage, and hand tinting. Both technical skill and a strong conceptual basis will be emphasized
in order to create good, finished, fine art prints.
Class format: studio work, demonstrations, lectures, critiques, and field trips.
Evaluation will be based on attendance, participation in class, and quality of work produced. Lab fee.
Prerequisite: ArtS 100 or ArtS 103. Enrollment limited to 15.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W TAKENAGA
ARTS 275(F) Sculpture: Cardboard and Wood Plus
This course is an introduction to the media and processes of sculpture. The focus will be on the interplay of
form, concept, and material. A variety of materials will be explored, particularly cardboard and wood.
There will be an emphasis on learning the techniques and processes of woodworking as they relate to
sculpture. This course is based on a series of sculpture projects which will have you investigating both the
formal and the conceptual aspects involved in creating personal statements in a visual format. A substantial
amount of time outside of class is necessary to complete these projects.
Evaluation will be based on the quality of work produced, depth and quality of investigative process, par-
ticipation in critiques, and attendance. Lab fee.
Prerequisite: ArtS 100 or ArtS 103. Enrollment limited to 12.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 TR PODMORE
ARTS 276(S) Sculpture: Metal and Plaster Plus
This course is an introduction to the media and processes of sculpture. The focus will be on the interplay of
form, concept, and material. A variety of materials will be explored, however, the emphasis will be on
techniques and processes associated with metal and plaster and how they relate to sculpture. Metal tech-
niques will include gas welding, arc welding, and MIG welding. Plaster processes will include modeling
and casting. This course is based on a series of sculpture projects which will investigate both the formal and
the conceptual aspects involved in creating personal statements in a visual format. A substantial amount of
time outside class is necessary to complete these projects.
Evaluation will be based on the quality of work produced, depth and quality of investigative process, par-
ticipation in critiques, and attendance. Lab fee.
Prerequisite: ArtS 100 or ArtS 103. Enrollment limited to 12.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 TR PODMORE
ARTS 288(F) Video
Video is an introduction to the moving image as a fine arts medium. The course will involve hands-on
production as well as contemporary screenings and readings that demonstrate elements of the medium.
The course will look specifically at performance, sound, exhibition context, documentary, high and low
production values, appropriation, writing, and analysis. The course will introduce shooting and editing
skills, including preproduction skills such as storyboarding and scripting, production skills such as direct-
ing, shot composition, lighting, and sound recording, and postproduction editing skills in a range of styles.
Evaluation will be based on the technical and conceptual strength of the tapes, with consideration given to
individual development. Lab fee.
Prerequisite: ArtS 100 or ArtS 103. Enrollment limited to 10.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 T L. JOHNSON
Art
­ 86 ­
ARTS 317T(F) The Miniature
This course will involve the critical analysis and production of works of art done on a small scale. If art on
the largest scale is inherently public in nature, what is the nature of the miniature? The miniature has ful-
filled many functions: images of remembrance, the portrait of a beloved, devotional objects, art made as an
object of contemplation and wonder. The language of the miniature is intimate, private, and bears the au-
thority of understatement. Our involvement with many works of art is likely to be distanced, in time and in
space. Our involvement with the miniature is close, highly personal, and frequent. Course assignments will
examine the inherent qualities of the work in miniature, and ask students to create work to fulfill historical-
ly defined and innovative functions. The assigned work can be executed in any medium in which the stu-
dent has completed an introductory course. Students will meet in pairs, together with the instructor, and the
students will present critical responses to the works in progress and upon completion. Readings will be
assigned to focus this critical analysis. In addition to the production of miniatures, each student will re-
search and deliver critical presentations on related contemporary or historical works.
Evaluation will be based on the quality of the assigned work, the engagement in the critique process, and
quality of presentations.
Prerequisite: any ArtS 200-level course. Enrollment limited to 10. Preference given to majors.
Hour: 7:00-9:30 p.m. T LEVIN
ARTS 319(F) Junior Seminar: Museum, Street, Living Room
The junior seminar addresses the interplay between artmaking practices and art theory and criticism. This
year the course will focus on three spaces of encounter for modern and contemporary art: the museum, the
street, and the living room. Students will engage critical materials and art historical examples related to
these spaces, raising questions about public and private spaces, art and everyday life, and twentieth-century
shifts in practices of display and looking. The course will also address how these sites have in turn served
as actual source material for artists' productions. For example, how has the space of the museum inspired
work by Mark Dion, Joseph Cornell, Ann Hamilton, the Museum of Jurassic Technology, Andrea Fraser,
or Fred Wilson? How does the street figure as a space of appearance and/or as a topic of inquiry in the work
of Eduard Manet, Asco, Allan Kaprow, Adrian Piper, or Doug Aitken? How does the living room become
the subject of work by Andrea Zittel, Louise Lawler, Pippilotti Rist, or Inigo Manglano-Ovalle, as well as
the site of broadcast radio, tv, and internet fine arts projects? Critical works may include writings that ad-
dress these spaces by Lippard, Kirshenblatt-Gimblett, Holston, Delaney, Chavoya, Baudelaire, Benjamin,
Debord, Spiegel, Lefevbre, Corbusier, Marguiles, and others.
A substantial amount of critical reading and viewing will be required, as well as regular journal entries, and
three studio production assignments which correspond to each topic.
The course is limited to art majors and is required of junior studio art majors.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W L. JOHNSON
ARTS 329(F) Architectural Design II
A continuation and expansion of ideas and skills learned in Architectural Design I. There will be six to
eight design projects requiring drawings and models, each of which will emphasize particular aspects of
architectural theory and design. Visiting critics will discuss student work. The course is useful for students
thinking of applying to graduate school in architecture.
Evaluation will be based on quality of designs during the term. Lab fee.
Prerequisite: ArtS 220; ArtH 262 highly recommended.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 F MCCALLUM
ARTS 343T The Portrait (Not offered 2000-2001)
This tutorial will investigate late-twentieth-century ways of describing the self and others. We will begin
with self-portraits, then move out into the community (perhaps to the Sweetwood nursing home) to inter-
view and record. Assignments may be fulfilled in any media in which the student has completed an
introductory class, i.e., a student wishing to paint must have completed or be currently enrolled in ArtS
241, Painting. Besides visual assignments, each student will prepare a half-hour slide talk on an assigned
artist.
Students will meet in pairs with the instructor for fifty minutes a week to present and discuss projects. The
entire class will meet once a week for reading discussion, museum visits (WCMA, Clark, and the Norman
Rockwell Museum) and student slide presentations.
Evaluation will be based on the conceptual and technical quality of visual assignments, the slide presenta-
tion, and class participation.
Prerequisites: ArtS 230 and any one of the ArtS 200-level courses. Enrollment limited to 10.
GLIER
ARTS 364T Artists' Books (Not offered 2000-2001)
This coursewillinvestigatethe processes and ideas associated with the making of artists' books, works that
are fine art objects primarily using visual images and/or text. For example, individual projects could in-
cludeliterarytext/visualimagecombinations,visual diaries, three-dimensional pop-up books, solely visual
narratives, autobiographies, animated "flip" books, or sculptural books. Limited-editioned as well asone-
of-a-kindwork will be encouraged. Media options include etching, lithography, relief printing, hand paint-
ing, drawing, some photo processes and bookbinding techniques (from boxes to hard binding). As a tuto-
rial, this course is designed to meet individual needs, stress student participation and responsibility for
Art
­ 87 ­
learning, and to examine differing points of view. Students will meet in groups of two for discussion and
critique of individual projects in the tutorial format: i.e., students are expected to give a half hour presenta-
tion weekly regarding their projects and selected readings, and to respond to criticism and questions by the
peer student and the instructor. Students will also meet once a week as a group for demonstrations, slide
presentations, meetings with visiting artists, and discussion of readings.
Evaluation will be based on student participation and conceptual and technical quality of the work. There
will be one required field trip during the semester. Lab fee.
Prerequisite: any one of the following: ArtS 230, 241, 242, 257, 263, or 264.
TAKENAGA
ARTS 371T(F) Addressing Identity--The Non-Traditional Figure
Images of the human form have long been used to describe, classify, and give context to the human experi-
ence. This tutorial is designed as a way of exploring how non-traditional uses of the figure can describe our
contemporary and personal experiences. Designed for students who have completed a 200-level introduc-
tory course, this class will be an opportunity to further explore, through a variety of media, how the figure
can be used to create resonate art. Contemporary artists who work in various media such as: Lucien Freud,
Cindy Sherman, Tracy Moffat, Charles Ray, Jenny Saville, Antonio Gormley, and Juan Munoz will be
used to illustrate particular aspects of identity as it relates to the figure.
This course is structured so that the professor meets with each tutorial pair once a week for one hour. Dur-
ing this weekly meeting art projects are discussed and critiqued, and presentations are given. This course
will also include several sessions where the entire class meets to accommodate slide presentations, field
trips, critiques, and exhibitions.
Evaluation will be based on the quality of work produced, the depth and quality of the investigative pro-
cess, as well as participation and attendance.
Prerequisite: ArtS 100 plus any one of the 200-level courses. Enrollment limited to 10. Preference given to
majors.
Lab fee.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W PODMORE
ARTS 381(F) Old New Technologies (Same as American Studies 381)
This video production course will address the emergence of technologies that are no longer emerging and
in some cases obsolete, which have affected vision, the perception of time and space, and representation.
Readings by Wolfgang Schivelbusch on gas lighting, Lisa Cartwright on x-ray, Mark Seltzer on the type-
writer, Lynn Kirby on the train, C.W. Ceram on primitive motion picture technologies, and various works
on early wireless broadcasting, as well as visual works by inventors, scientists, and visual artists, will serve
as source materials for students' own production work. Do these technologies possess their own agency?
How do they affect vision, representation, and social contexts, and how do social contexts also affect the
development and emergence of these technologies? What are the cultural dreams and fantasies that circu-
late around their emergence? How were visual arts and arts movements imbricated in these emerging
technologies? Specific production assignments will address these questions, both in terms of content and
aesthetic strategies.
Priority given to art and American Studies majors. Enrollment limited to 12.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 M L JOHNSON
ARTS 382T(S) The Moving Image and Performance Style (Same as Theatre 326)
One perspective for understanding performance in relation to the moving image derives from theatrical
convention. Another takes the camera as the fundamental point of departure. This course is based upon the
belief that a combination of these viewpoints can produce a richer understanding of performance style in
the moving image. Students will examine film and video styles that draw from physical, psychological,
and metaphorical dramatic conventions. At the same time, they will learn basic video production skills
with an emphasis upon understanding the shot as the principal unit of meaning that frames performance.
This course is conceived primarily as a workshop permitting students to test theoretical principles against
the practical necessity of rehearsing and producing 3-5 short video projects. The workshop will include
exercises in acting, directing, and design; the discussion of assigned readings; responses to the required
weekly screenings of illustrative films and videos; and critiques of students' ongoing video projects.
Evaluation of students will be based upon their committed participation in class and the quality of their
production exercises.
Prerequisites: a 200-level course in studio art, theatre, dance, or the equivalent, and permission of the
instructors. Enrollment limited to 12.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 R L. JOHNSON and BUCKY
ARTS 384(S) Documentary Technologies (Same as English 376)
(See under English for full description.)
ARTS 418T(S) Senior Tutorial
The primary emphasis of the senior tutorial is on strengthening the student's skill and sensitivity in using
critical analysis for the creation of visual objects and/or events. At the beginning of the term, studio art
majors, in consultation with the tutor, will determine the individual projects that will serve as the focus of
their work for the semester. During the course, students are expected to refine their creative directions in a
Art
­ 88 ­
coherent and structured body of work which will be exhibited at the Williams College Museum of Art.
Students are responsible for buying their own materials.
Prerequisites: completion of all other studio courses required for the art studio route. Open to senior art
majors only.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W PODMORE
ARTS W033 Honors Independent Project
ARTS 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
With current staffing limitations, it is difficult for studio faculty to supervise more than a very few indepen-
dent studies projects. We feel our curriculum includes rich and varied offerings and believe that the need
for most independent work can be met through those regular offerings.
Prerequisites: no student will be accepted into an independent study project unless he/she has completed
two 200-level ArtS courses and one 300-level ArtS tutorial. Permission of the instructor is still required.
GRADUATE COURSES IN ART HISTORY
Requirements for the Degree of Master of Arts in Art History
The degree is normally awarded upon successful completion of two years of resident graduate study. To
earn the degree the student must earn a grade of at least B- in each of ten courses, at least six of which must
be graduate seminars (including ArtH 504). In connection with the preparation of a paper for the Graduate
Symposium, students will register for an eleventh course (ArtH 509), to be graded pass/fail, in their fourth
semester.
In addition to completing the required courses, students must participate in a group study trip to Europe
during winter study period in the first year, complete a Qualifying Paper in January of the second year, and
satisfy the language requirement in the manner described below (see "Language Courses").
Senior art majors may enroll in graduate seminars, space permitting, with the permission of the
instructor.
ARTH 501(S) Museums: History and Practice
This course will examine the history of museums in Europe and America, focusing on historical traditions
and current expectations affecting institutional operations today. Historical tradition and current practice as
it relates to museum governance and administration, architecture and installation, acquisitions and collec-
tions, cultural property issues as well as the many roles of exhibitions in museum programming will be
addressed along with museums' social responsibility and scholarly and public institutions in an increasing-
ly market-driven, non-profit environment.
Evaluation will be based on oral presentations as well as two term papers.
Hour: 2:30-5:00 T CONFORTI
ARTH 503 Studies in Decorative Arts, Material Culture, Design History, 1700-2000 (Not
offered 2000-2001)
The course will explore the methods, goals and theoretical framework in which three dimensional, func-
tional objects have been and are interpreted. Class discussion will include distinction between "fine arts,"
"decorative arts" and "design"; role and limitation of connoisseurship; the current relationship of object
study to aesthetics, social history, history of technology, anthropology, sociology, gender and ethnic stud-
ies; the effect of the market on history and scholarship; and current theories on the role of objects in human
life.
CONFORTI
ARTH 504(F) Methods of Art History and Criticism
This course on art-historical method is designed to offer students an historiographic overview of the disci-
pline of art history, with a focus on developments of the present century. The course will survey the most
influential concepts of the discipline, the evolving tasks it has set itself, and the methods it has adopted for
executing them. Works of art will inevitably enter into our discussions, but the main objects of study will be
texts about art, particularly texts about methods for a historical study of art. Topics include: concepts of the
discipline; style and periodization; iconography, semiotics, and deconstruction; the social functions of im-
ages and the social history of art; gender and sexuality; and art history as representation.
Each student will be responsible for several short papers on selected readings and a longer final paper.
This course is restricted to and required of first-year students in the Graduate Program in the History of
Art.
Hour: 7:00-9:30 p.m. T HAXTHAUSEN
ARTH 505(F) Topics in Early Photography
Participants in this seminar will consider selected topics in European and American photography between
1839 and 1920. We will embrace historical, technical, iconographic and theoretical methodologies, and
will address such issues as instantaneity, art photography and reproduction, pictorialism, vernacular pho-
tography, and crosscurrents between photography, painting and the graphic arts.
Class meets in the study room of the Department of Prints, Drawings and Photographs at the Clark Art
Institute.
Enrollment limited to 11.
Hour: 2:30-5:00 M GANZ
Art
­ 89 ­
ARTH 506 The Print: History, Theory and Practice (Not offered 2000-2001)
Centered around the Clark Art Institute's print collection, this seminar will introduce its participants to the
study of Western prints from the Renaissance to the nineteenth century. We will review the various meth-
ods of printmaking as well as the primary elements of print connoisseurship. Through a series of close
readings of historical texts, we will explore aspects of artistic practice, theory, and collecting. Each partici-
pant will lead discussions of several reading assignments and turn in short written reports, in addition to a
final project of a mock exhibition.
Enrollment is limited to 10-12 students, with a preference given to second-year students in the Graduate
Program in the History of Art.
GANZ
ARTH 508(S) Art and Conservation: An Inquiry into History, Methods, and Materials (Same
as ArtH 408)
This course is taught by the professional staff of the Williamstown Art Conservation Center and guest lec-
turers. It will acquaint the graduate students with examination techniques for works of art, give them an
understanding of the history of artists' materials and methods, and familiarize them with the ethics and
procedures of conservation. This course, while not providing expertise in conservation, should assist future
curators and art historians in assessing the physical condition and needs of museum collections in their
care, including storage, handling and environment, and give them enough knowledge to discuss problems
with conservators.
Evaluation will be based, in part, on a midterm and a final exam.
Enrollment strictly limited to 12. Some understanding of science and of studio art helpful. Priority is given
to graduate students; undergraduates will be admitted if space is available but must consult the Director of
the Graduate Program before pre-registering.
Hour: 6:00-8:00 p.m. TR Lab Staff
ARTH 509(S) Graduate Student Symposium
This course is designed to assist qualified fourth-semester graduate students in preparing a scholarly paper
to be presented at the graduate program's annual spring symposium held in late May. Working closely with
a student/faculty ad hoc advisory committee, each student will prepare a twenty-minute presentation based
on the Qualifying Paper. Special emphasis is placed on the development of effective oral presentation
skills.
Each student is required to present three dry runs and a final oral presentation at the symposium.
Prerequisite: successful completion and acceptance of the Qualifying Paper.
Hour: TBA HAXTHAUSEN
ARTH 510 Topics in Fin-de-Siècle Printmaking (Not offered 2000-2001)
Participants in this seminar will consider selected topics in late-nineteenth-century printmaking, with an
emphasis on artists represented in the print collection of the Clark Art Institute (Degas, Gauguin, Toulouse-
Lautrec, Bonnard, Vuillard, Denis, Munch, Klinger). Topics to be considered will include technical issues,
collaboration, print publishing and collecting.
Students will prepare several short presentations, in addition to a final term paper.
Enrollment limited to 12. Class meets in the print study room of the Clark Art Institute.
GANZ
ARTH 530(S) Art in the Age of the Reformation
This course will discuss the historical interpretation of the artistic production of Germany and the Nether-
lands in the late fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. Educated elites responded quickly to the revival of hu-
manist culture that accompanied the Renaissance in Italy, for the new learning was disseminated throug-
hout Europe by means of the new vehicle of the printing press. The consequence was the development, not
only of new artistic styles, but the introduction of a new spectrum of ideas into the iconographic repertoire
of artistic reproduction. In addition, all classes were traumatized by the social and religious upheavals of
the Reformation. Centuries of established ecclesiastical ritual along with many popular beliefs were chal-
lenged by the radical agenda of the reformers. The faith was robbed of many of the qualities that made it
accessible and popular among ordinary people in order to enhance the religious authority of the educated.
Aware of the ways in which the very possibility of historical interpretation has been questioned by post-
structuralist theory, the course will try to articulate a concept of history that is viable and relevant to the
historical moment in which we live. Recognizing that the present must always inform our view of the past,
the course will try to make manifest the theoretical agendas of historical writing both in the past and the
present.
Grading will be based, in part, on one paper (approx. 15 pages).
Hour: 2:30-5:00 W MOXEY
ARTH 532(S) Italian Renaissance Theater
This course will investigate the development of the theater as an architectural form in Italy from the fif-
teenth through the seventeenth centuries--from its beginnings in the residences of rulers and prelates to the
flowering of the Italian public opera house in the seventeenth century. The development of scene design
during the same period will also be considered. The material lends itself to interdisciplinary work, combin-
ing, for instance, art history with music, theater and/or social history.
Art
­ 90 ­
Evaluation will be based on class participation, an oral presentation and a final paper.
Some reading knowledge of Italian is desirable, but not required.
Enrollment limited to 15.
Hour: 2:30-5:00 M E.J. JOHNSON
ARTH 541(S) Studies in Eighteenth-Century French Painting from the Goncourts to the
Present
This seminar explores French painting of the Ancien Régime (from the foundation of the Royal Academy
in 1648 to the French Revolution) through an examination of the principal secondary texts that have been
written since the middle of the nineteenth century. Beginning with the celebrated essays by Edmond and
Jules de Goncourts through Locquin to recent synthetic accounts by Fried, Bryson, Crow, and others, the
course will explore the various strategies through which critics have sought to explain the art of Watteau,
Boucher, Chardin, Vernet, Fragonard, Greuze, David, and others.
Student work will be evaluated on the basis of weekly presentations, a seminar report, and final papers.
Reading knowledge of French required. Enrollment limited to 12.
Hour: 2:30-5:00 R RAND
ARTH 543 Jacques-Louis David: Art and Revolution (Not offered 2000-2001)
This seminar explores the art and career of Jacques-Louis David (1748-1825)--the pre-eminent Neoclass-
icist painter in France--in all their complexity and controversy. Themes and issues to be covered include:
David's relationship to the wider European context of Neoclassicism; the pre-Revolutionary "radicalism"
of his art; the various roles David played in the French Revolution; the work he produced for Napoleon; his
innovative approach to portraiture; the intricate artistic-psycho-sexual dynamics of his studio environment;
his legacy in French painting.
Enrollment limited to 12. Reading knowledge of French required.
RAND
ARTH 551 Issues in Nineteenth-Century American Painting (Not offered 2000-2001)
This course considers the major figures in the context of the period's great social, political, and economic
upheavals, among them the collapse of the old Federalist order, the emergence of a market-oriented indus-
trial economy, the Civil War, the settlement of the West, and the development of new class structures. Con-
temporary gender and national identity theories especially provide new perspectives to explore and to con-
nect art and epoch. Core artists include Charles Willson Peale, Thomas Cole, Washington Allston, George
Caleb Bingham, Frederic Church, Winslow Homer, Thomas Eakins, Mary Cassatt, William Harnett, John
Singer Sargent, and J. A. M. Whistler.
Requirements include extensive and informed class participation, a seminar paper of no less than twenty
pages, and a presentation of that paper's contents at the end of the semester.
Enrollment limited.
ALLEN
ARTH 553(F) Thomas Eakins
In this seminar we will survey the life and work of Thomas Eakins, examining the shape of his career (as
student, art teacher, and exhibiting artist) and the range of investigative pursuits he considered essential to
his achievement (among them anatomy, sculpture, and still and motion photography). A close view of
individual works will invite consideration of such topics as the influence on Eakins of European and
American art; the era's proliferation of exhibition opportunities and outlets for art criticism; his ties to Phil-
adelphia's scientific, cultural, and religious communities; issues of gender and sexuality in late nineteenth-
century America; and the professionalization and effectiveness of art education in the United States. Stu-
dents' responsibilities will include a seminar presentation and a final paper. Visits to public collections in
Philadelphia and New York are likely.
Hour: 1:00-3:30 F SIMPSON
ARTH 561(S) Ambiguous Icons: Problems of Meaning in Twentieth-Century Imagery
"Our time is indifferent to the content of artistic representations as no time has ever been before. For
today's artist form itself is the content." These remarks of the German critic Paul Westheim, published in
1919, sound strange today, yet they express an attitude that dominated critical and historical writing on
modern art for most of the twentieth century. Although the question of meaning has become more central
to the writing of the last four decades, often eclipsing questions of form, there remains in the current phase
of intense historiographical self-reflection a surprising dearth of methodological discussion on this issue.
No compelling models, comparable to that offered by Panofsky in his classic introduction to Studies in
Iconology, have established themselves for modern art, and many interpretations proceed on the basis of
anachronistic methodological assumptions. Moreover, the semiotics of twentieth-century imagery--i. e.,
the examination of how meaning is generated--still remains relatively little studied. This seminar will ex-
plore the problem of "meaning" in twentieth century art and examine various models for dealing with the
issue, including iconography, semiotics, deconstruction, and reception theory. The first half of the seminar
will be devoted to selected readings on the issue as well as to case studies of individual artists-e.g. Picasso,
Höch, Johns, Kiefer. During the second half of the semester students will present case studies on topics of
their own choosing.
Students will be responsible for leading class discussion on one set of readings, an oral report, to be pre-
Art
­ 91 ­
sented in revised, written form at semester's end, and a 10-minute critical commentary on another student's
oral report.
Hour: TBA HAXTHAUSEN
ARTH 563(F) Modern and Postmodern: Theories of Art and Architecture
The purpose of this seminar will be to examine the main intellectual currents of the twentieth century. The
goal is to present an encompassing and balanced panorama of the terrain of artistic theory: its premises as
well as the various approaches that have been adopted, discarded, or assimilated into contemporary discus-
sion. One-half of the seminar will consider the genesis and development of modernism as an ideological
concept. The other half will consider the postmodern critique of this paradigm. Works and writings of ar-
chitecture will be used as an illustration of how theory affects practice and vice versa. Thus we will consid-
er the lines of criticism found in theories of the Avant-Garde, Hermeneutics, Semiotics, Structuralism,
Poststructuralism, Feminism, and Deconstruction then view these ideas translated into built form. Read-
ings will be extensive and include writings of Friedrich Nietzsche, Georg Simmel, Adolf Loos, Walter
Benjamin, Sigfried Giedion, Theodor Adorno, Martin Heidegger, Francois Lyotard, Jacques Derrida, Ber-
nard Tschumi, Beatriz Colomina, Manfredo Tafuri, Peter Burger and Jurgen Habermas.
Requirements include extensive and informed seminar discussions and a paper of twenty pages on one
area of specialization.
Hour: 2:30-5:00 W MALLGRAVE
ARTH 564 Art in the Weimar Republic (Not offered 2000-2001)
The short-lived, ill-fated Weimar Republic (1919-1933) was a moment of unusual ferment in visual cul-
ture: Paul Klee, Max Beckmann, Hannah Höch, Max Ernst, Kurt Schwitters, Walter Gropius, August
Sander, F. W. Murnau, Fritz Lang--these are but a few of the names associated with it. Among suggested
areas for papers are "the new woman"; modern art, the art museum, and the art market; relations between
painting, printmaking, photography, and cinema; strategies of viewer address in theory and practice. The
first five or six meetings will be in lecture format.
Requirements and basis for evaluation: a 30- to 40-minute oral report, to be presented in revised, written
form at the end of the semester and a 10-minute commentary on another student's oral report.
Prerequisite: permission of the instructor. A reading knowledge of German is highly recommended.
HAXTHAUSEN
ARTH 565(F) Art History, Aesthetics, and Visual Studies
This course will explore the role of aesthetics in the study of art history and visual culture. Beginning with
Kant, it will trace the route of aesthetic theory through the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Its primary
focus, however, will be on challenges to the notion of the aesthetic in late twentieth century visual studies,
such as those found in deconstruction and gender studies. At the same time, it will consider questions
posed by traditional aesthetics to the development of this new field. Individual works of art will play a
major part in these deliberations. Readings and reports will prepare us for the third annual Clark Confer-
ence (next April) by the same name.
Requirements: seminar reports, final essay.
Hour: 2:30-5:00 T HOLLY
ARTH 570(F) American Orientalism, 1875-1930
"Orientalism" has become a ubiquitous term in academic discourse but relatively little has been done to
explore the manifestations of this phenomenon in the realm of the visual arts, or to establish the distinctive
character of American Orientalism. Instead, the works of nineteenth-century-French painters such as Ger-
ome are often used to epitomize the visual evidence. This course will address this reductionism critically,
beginning with the American students of Gerome and proceeding chronologically and comparatively. In
the process, we will utilize both established and emerging art forms (e.g., advertising) to trace the effloures-
cence of orientalist imagery in the context of emerging mass culture in America. Students will be expected
to undertake a major research project.
Hour: 2:30-5:00 R H. EDWARDS
ARTH 573 Images and Anti-images: Zen Art in China and Japan (Not offered
2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)*
This seminar studies a variety of art forms (painting, ceramics, tea ceremony, and garden) in the context of
Zen Buddhism in China and Japan. We will investigate the Zen aesthetic ideals and religious meanings
conveyed by these art forms. Special attention will be paid to the study of Zen painting from the twelfth
century to the fifteenth century, the golden age of Zen painting in both countries. Issues of interest include,
for example, the meanings and functions of Zen painting, iconography and its evolution, different patron-
age systems in China and Japan, and to what extent Japanese artists tried to break away from their Chinese
counterparts, while working with highly derivative material, both thematically and artistically.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, 3 oral presentations, and 1 final paper.
Open to undergraduate students with the instructor's permission.
JANG
LANGUAGE COURSES
Reading proficiency in two European languages is required for the M.A. degree in Art History at Wil-
liams, and provision for attainment of this qualification is an integral part of the program of study. Of these
Art, Asian Studies
­ 92 ­
two, German is required, and French is recommended. Elementary and intermediate undergraduate
courses offered by the language departments are open to graduate students, and the graduate program of-
fers advanced, one-semester courses in French and German art-history readings. A student who begins
elementary language study after enrollment in the program should expect to take a sequence of courses.
Details may be obtained from the graduate program office. Entering students with some previous language
background will be asked to take a standard reading examination for purposes of placement. A score of
500 is required for admission to the advanced course. Students with scores below 500 will be enrolled in
elementary language courses. Students should aim to complete all language work no later than the end of
the third semester.
To satisfy the requirement in each of the two required languages, a student must: (a) score 700 or better
on the SAT II reading examination upon enrollment in the program or, (b) complete satisfactorily (B- or
better) and punctually all assignments and tests in the advanced courses. The same standards and expecta-
tions apply to language courses as to other courses and seminars.
Second-year students who have successfully completed German 501-502 and have independently de-
veloped their German language skills during the summer may, before the commencement of their third
semester of study, arrange to take a two-hour translation examination administered by the graduate pro-
gram. Students who pass the examination are exempted from German 509.
If appropriate to his or her course of study, a student may petition to substitute another language for
French. Instruction in Spanish, Russian, Latin, and Greek is regularly offered in the undergraduate curricu-
lum, whereas independent arrangements must be made for Italian, Dutch, and other languages.
GERM 501(F)-502(S) (101-102) Elementary German
This course is for students who have had no previous study of German. It consists of the regular undergrad-
uate introductory course.
GERM 509(F) Readings in German Art History and Criticism
Texts are selected from characteristic works of art history and criticism and from the specialized literature
required in concurrent seminars.
Prerequisites: German 501-502 or the equivalent with a final grade of B- or above.
RLFR 511(F) Intensive Grammar and Translation
An intensive grammar course for students interested either in developing or in improving their basic read-
ing skills in French. Emphasis will be on a general review of grammar and sentence structure as well as on
developing a wide range of vocabulary centered around art history.
RLFR 512(S) Readings in French Art History and Criticism
An advanced translation course specializing in art history. Texts will be selected from fundamental works of
art history and criticism and from the specialized literature required in concurrent art seminars in the Gradu-
ate Program in Art History.
RLIT 509(F,S) Italian Readings in Art History
Students read and discuss their interpretations of assigned readings in art historical texts drawn from con-
temporary critical works, with occasional consideration of translation/discussion sessions interwoven with
strategic review of grammar and brief theoretical exploration of techniques for reading comprehension.
This course will be offered subject to sufficient demand.
ASIAN STUDIES (Div. I)
Chair, Associate Professor GEORGE T. CRANE
Professor: C. KUBLER. Associate Professor: YAMADA*. Assistant Professors: KAGAYA, SILBER*,
YAMAMOTO. Lecturer: C. CHANG. Visiting Lecturer: FUJIMOTO, HO. Visiting Assistant
Professor: KOSHIRO. Adjunct Faculty for the Major: Professor: FROST. Associate Professors:
CRANE, DREYFUS*, JANG, JUST, WONG. Assistant Professors: BACON, FRANKL,
REEVES**, A. SHEPPARD.
The Department of Asian Studies offers courses in English in the field of Asian Studies as well as
courses in Chinese and Japanese language and literature. Three distinct majors are offered: a major in Chi-
nese; a major in Japanese; and an interdisciplinary Asian Studies major which allows students to choose
from a wide range of courses in the anthropology, art, economy, history, languages, literatures, music, poli-
tics, religion, and sociology of China, Japan, and other Asian countries. Students with questions about the
Asian Studies majors or about Asian Studies course offerings should consult the chair.
THE MAJOR
All students wishing to major in the Department of Asian Studies are required to take and pass a total of
eleven courses, as follows:
1) four semesters of Chinese or Japanese language
2) Asian Studies 201
Asian Studies
­ 93 ­
In addition to completing (1) and (2) above, all majors choose either an Area Studies track, leading to a
degree in Asian Studies; or a Language Studies track, leading to a degree in Chinese or Japanese. The
requirements for each of these tracks are indicated below:
3A) Area Studies track
a. a three-course qualification in one of the disciplines represented within Asian Studies (anthropology/
sociology, art history, economics, history, literature, music, political science, religion). The qualifica-
tion, to be determined through consultation between students and their advisor, normally includes an
introductory course, a more advanced methodological or comparative course, and a course on Asia.
b. three approved electives, which may include further language work
3B) Language Studies track
a. four additional semesters of Chinese or Japanese language
b. two approved electives with a substantial focus on the country or countries whose language the stu-
dent is studying
Electives
Anthropology 213 Center and Periphery: State, Society and the Individual in Southeast Asia
ArtH 172 Introduction to Asian Art: From the Land of the Buddha to the World of the Geisha
ArtH 270 Japanese Art and Culture
ArtH 274 Chinese Calligraphy: Theory and Practice
ArtH 376 Image and Anti-images: Zen Art in China and Japan
Chinese 131 Basic Cantonese
Chinese 152 Basic Taiwanese
Chinese/Literary Studies 234 Post-Mao Literature and Culture
Chinese 243 Gender Issues in Traditional Chinese Literature
Chinese 244 Writer and Society in Twentieth-Century China
Chinese/Literary Studies 275 China's Greatest Novel
Chinese 412 Introduction to Classical Chinese
Chinese/Linguistics 431 Introduction to Chinese Linguistics
Economics/Environmental Studies 218 Population Economics
Economics/Environmental Studies/Women's and Gender Studies 223 Gender and Economic
Development
History 114 (formerly 110) The Mao Cult
History/American Studies 111 Topics in Asian-American History (Deleted 2000-2001)
History 212 (formerly 283) Barbarians in the Middle Kingdom: China to 1850
History 213 (formerly 284) Modern China, 1850-Present: Continuity and Change
History 216 (formerly 285) Modern Japan
History 313 (formerly 345) Women in Chinese History
History 384 (formerly 331) Comparative Asian-American History, 1850-1965
History 385(formerly332) ContemporaryIssuesinRecentAsian-AmericanHistory,1965-Present
History 395 (formerly 322) Vietnam
History 470 (formerly 358) The Chinese-American Experience
History 473 (formerly 362) Stuff
Japanese 276 Premodern Japanese Literature and Performance
Music 126 Musics of Asia
Political Science 247 Political Power in Contemporary China
Political Science 265 The International Politics of East Asia
Political Science 341 The Politics of the Global Economy: Wealth and Power in East Asia
Religion 241 Hinduism: Construction of a Tradition
Religion 242 Buddhism: Concepts and Practices
Religion 245 Tibetan Civilization
Religion 304 From Hermeneutics to Post-coloniality
STUDY ABROAD
Students intending to major in Asian Studies are encouraged to study in Asia during one or both semes-
ters of their junior year. Williams sponsors study abroad programs in China and Japan. Opportunities to
study in India, Indonesia, Korea, Thailand, and other Asian countries are also available. Prospective Asian
Studies majors who are planning to study abroad should discuss their plans with their advisor as far in
advance as possible. Up to eight courses taken overseas can count toward graduation, and up to four
courses taken overseas may be counted toward the major.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS
Students interested in writing an honors thesis in Asian Studies, Chinese, or Japanese should submit a
proposal to the department chair when they register for courses in the spring of their junior year. The pro-
posal should include a statement of the topic, a general description of the types of materials available for
study and how the study will be carried out, and the name of the faculty member who will serve as advisor.
Asian Studies
­ 94 ­
Admission to the honors thesis program will normally be limited to students who have maintained at least a
B+ average in their courses for the major.
Students admitted to the program should register for ASST 493-W031-494, CHIN 493-W031-494, or
JAPN 493-W031-494. They will be expected to turn in the final draft of their thesis shortly after spring
break and to discuss their results formally with their faculty graders. Their final grades in the three courses
listed above and the award of Honors, Highest Honors, or no honors will be determined by the quality of
the thesis and the student's performance in the oral defense.
THE ASIAN STUDIES ENDOWMENT
The Linen summer grants for study abroad, the Linen visiting professorships, and several other pro-
grammatic activities in the department are supported by an endowment for Asian Studies established by
family and friends in memory of James A. Linen III, Class of 1934, Trustee of the College from 1948 to
1953 and from 1963 to 1982.
COURSES IN ASIAN STUDIES
ASST 201(F) Asia and the World (Same as Political Science 100F)*
(See under Political Science for full description.)
ASST 211(F) Japan Before Perry: De-Mythicizing Land and Culture*
This course surveys the development of Japanese culture and society from earliest times to the early nine-
teenth century and discusses myths, stereotypes and realities about Japan's so-called traditions and charac-
teristics, with occasional questions of how and why the misperceptions of the past persist today. Topics to
examine include: the emperor's institution; samurai (warrior) culture; women's place in society; feudalism
vs. anti-authoritarian tradition; cosmopolitanism vs. isolationism; and towns and villages, all in a compara-
tive framework of world history. Reading primary sources (literary works as well as of political, ethical and
religious documents) and regular in-class review of videotaped segments of traditional arts, crafts, festivals,
historic places and even computer-graphically re-created historic events, will encourage a balanced sense
of a living past in today's Japan.
Lecture/discussion.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, two 5-page papers and a midterm and a final exam (both
take-home).
Enrollment limited to 30.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR KOSHIRO
ASST 212(S) Japan's World After 1945: What Price Peace and Prosperity?*
This course surveys the birth and growth of Japan after defeat in World War II, and examines dilemmas
and struggles, both internal and external, of the people living up to the postwar national creed manifest in
the new Japanese constitution--of being pacifist, democratic, capitalist, cosmopolitan, and welfare-orien-
ted. The class begins with an examination of Japan before and during World War II and an appraisal of
reforms introduced by the U.S. Occupation (1945-1951), and moves on to discussions of issues and prob-
lems arising since Japan regained sovereignty in 1952 up until today. How has Japan' survived and ex-
celled in the ever-changing postwar world? How has Japanese society defined and redefined its identity
and nationalistic expression? How do Japanese people fight for "peace, happiness, prosperity, equality and
freedom" in their society in the light of Japanese-style conservatism and liberalism? Through readings of
primary and secondary sources and regular in-class review of videotaped Japanese TV programs, class
participants are especially encouraged to discuss American perspectives of "Japanese problems" and think
about what Japan would be a desirable American partner in the twenty-first century.
Lecture/discussion.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, two 5-page papers and a midterm and a final (both take-
home).
Enrollment limited to 30.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR KOSHIRO
ASST 403(F) Trans-Pacific Racisms and U.S.--Japanese Relations*
This seminar examines the pattern of conflicts and cooperation between the United States and Japan
through the lens of their mutual racisms (against the white, yellow, black, brown and other peoples) and
evaluates the nature of their somewhat unstable yet "unique" relations across the Pacific. After common
reading and discussion to familiarize seminar participants with historic race-related issues in US-Japan di-
plomacy, students conduct independent research and write a seminar paper. Among possible research top-
ics are: Japan's dualistic racial identity; African-American relations with Japan; Japan's "Pan Asianism"
and Washington's Asian policy; Okinawan people in US-Japanese relations; American Jews and the Pacif-
ic War; the so-called racially mixed (half-American half-Japanese) people; race-charged trade disputes in
the 80s and other current issues.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, two 5-page papers, and a research paper of about 25 to 30
pages.
Enrollment limited to 15.
Advanced Seminar
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR KOSHIRO
Asian Studies
­ 95 ­
ASST 404(S) Re-examining Memories of the Atomic Bombs: Searching for a Common Global
Past*
This seminar examines and compares American and Japanese public memories of the atomic bombs of
Hiroshima and Nagasaki and discusses how our generation can move on to internationalize one nation's
memory as a common asset for the global community. As the recent controversy over the Enola Gay ex-
hibit at the Smithsonian Institute suggests, public memory of the atomic bombs as necessary, useful, and
good, is slow to change. However, a growing body of new scholarly findings on situations surrounding the
use of the atomic bombs as well as on conditions of atomic bomb victims challenges such a myth. Through
readings of the latest investigations, seminar participants are encouraged to conduct interdisciplinary inqui-
ries and evaluate the events of Hiroshima and Nagasaki within not only an American and Japanese but also
a larger international framework. Topics for independent research include: analysis of military and socio-
economic conditions of Japan; international diplomatic intrigues in the final phase of the war; Japan's
readiness to (and negotiations for) surrender; American efforts to diplomatically end the war; socio-cultural
and physical traumas on Japanese, American and other Asian victims.
Seminar.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, two 5-page papers and a research paper of about 25 and 30
pages.
Enrollment limited to 15.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR KOSHIRO
ASST 493(F)-W031-494(S) Senior Thesis*
Satisfies one semester of Division II distribution requirement.
ASST 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study*
Satisfies one semester of Division II distribution requirement.
COURSES IN CHINESE
The department regularly offers four levels of instruction in Modern Standard Chinese (Mandarin), de-
signed to enable the student to become proficient in aural comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing,
as well as introductory courses in Cantonese and Classical Chinese. The course numbering system for Chi-
nese is sequential. Students move from Chinese 101-102 to 201, 202, 301, 302, 401, and 402. Independent
study (Chinese 497, 498) may be offered depending on student needs and available resources. Those stu-
dents entering with previous proficiency in Chinese should see Professor Chang concerning placement.
The department also offers courses on Chinese literature in translation for those students who have no
knowledge of the language but who wish to become acquainted with the major achievements in Chinese
literary and intellectual history. Students having questions concerning these courses should also see Profes-
sor Crane. For the purpose of the distribution requirement, all courses in Chinese are considered Division I.
CHIN 101(F)-W088-102(S) Basic Chinese*
An introduction to Mandarin, the language with the largest number of native speakers in the world, which
is the official language of mainland China and Taiwan, and one of the official languages of Singapore.
Course objectives are for the student to develop simple, practical conversational skills and acquire a basic
proficiency in reading and writing in both the traditional and the simplified script at about the 500-character
level. This course, which assumes no prior background in Chinese, will consist of approximately 60%
training in speaking and listening with the other 40% spent on reading and writing. Classes consist of a
combination of "act" classes, conducted exclusively in Mandarin, where students use the language in vari-
ous types of drills and communicative activities; and "fact" classes, conducted in Mandarin and English,
where students learn about the language and culture. Both audiotapes and videotapes will be employed
extensively.
Evaluation will be based on daily classroom performance, homework, quizzes, weekly tests, and a final
exam.
Credit granted only if both semesters and the winter study sustaining program are taken.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MTWRF, 12:00-12:50 MTWRF First Semester: C. KUBLER
9:00-9:50 MTWRF, 12:00-12:50 MTWRF Second Semester: C. CHANG
CHIN 131 Basic Cantonese (Not offered 2000-2001)*
An introduction to Standard Cantonese, a major regional language of southern China which is spoken by
over 50 million people in Hong Kong, Macao, Guangdong, and Guangxi as well as by many overseas
Chinese in Southeast Asia, Hawaii, and North America. Due to the pervasive influence of Hong Kong as
well as the economic transformation of Guangdong Province, the prestige of Cantonese within China has
been rising steadily over the past two decades. Our focus in this course will be on developing basic listen-
ing and speaking skills, though we will also study some of the special characters which have been used for
centuries to write colloquial Cantonese. Since students will ordinarily possess prior proficiency in Manda-
rin, a closely related language, we should be able to cover in one semester about as much as is covered in
the first two to three semesters of Mandarin.
Evaluation will be based on classroom performance, quizzes, tests, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Chinese 202 or permission of the instructor.
C. KUBLER
Asian Studies
­ 96 ­
CHIN 152(S) Basic Taiwanese*
An introduction to Taiwanese, the majority language of Taiwan. Different varieties of this language, which
is also known as Amoy, Southern Min, Hokkien, and Fukienese, are spoken by over 40 million people in
Taiwan, southern Fujian, the Philippines, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Singapore. Suppressed by the Japanese
from 1895-1945 and by the KMT Chinese government from 1945 through the 1970s, Taiwanese--in both
its spoken and written forms--has been experiencing a fascinating revival in recent years. This language,
which is the most divergent of all the major Chinese "dialects," is of special linguistic interest because it has
preserved a number of features of Old Chinese. Our focus will be on developing basic listening and speak-
ing skills, though we will also study some of the special characters used to write Taiwanese. Since students
in the course will ordinarily possess prior proficiency in Mandarin, a related language, we should be able to
cover in one semester about as much as is covered in the first two semesters of Mandarin.
Evaluation will be based on classroom performance, quizzes, tests, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Chinese 202 or permission of the instructor.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR C. KUBLER
CHIN 201(F), 202(S) Intermediate Chinese*
This course is designed to consolidate the foundations built in Basic Chinese and continue developing stu-
dents' skills in aural comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing. Upon completion of the course, stu-
dents should be able to speak Chinese with some fluency on everyday topics, achieve a level of reading
competence within a vocabulary of about 1,200 simplified and traditional characters plus common com-
pounds, and be able to write short compositions. Conducted in Mandarin.
Classes format: a combination of drill, discussion, and reading.
Evaluation will be based on classroom performance, homework, weekly tests, a midterm, and a final
exam.
Prerequisite: Chinese 102 or permission of the instructor.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MTWRF, 11:00-11:50 MTWRF HO
CHIN 234 Post-Mao Literature and Culture (Same as Literary Studies 234) (Not offered
2000-2001)*
With the end of the Cultural Revolution and the death of Mao in 1976, China's social and cultural scene
began to loosen, and by the mid-1980s exploded with new venues, methods, and material. Writers, artists,
and filmmakers, often influenced by the West, flexed the bounds of state control by experimenting with
new forms and treating new or previously taboo themes. In this course we will trace developments in Chi-
nese culture from 1978 to the present, treating fiction (including works by Wang Meng and Mo Yan),
poetry (e.g., Bei Dao), reportage, essays, film (e.g., Zhang Yimou and Chen Kaige), and popular culture
from a variety of literary and cultural studies perspectives.
Class format: discussion with some informal lecture.
Evaluation will be based upon several short writing assignments, one longer one, and a final exam.
No prerequisites. All readings, screenings, and discussions will be in English.
SILBER
CHIN 243 Gender Issues in Traditional Chinese Literature (Not offered 2000-2001)*
An introduction to Standard Cantonese, a major regional language of southern China which is spoken by
over 50 million people in Hong Kong, Macao, Guangdong, and Guangxi as well as by many overseas
Chinese in Southeast Asia, Hawaii, and North America. Due to the pervasive influence of Hong Kong as
well as the economic transformation of Guangdong Province, the prestige of Cantonese within China has
been rising steadily over the past two decades. Our focus in this course will be on developing basic listen-
ing and speaking skills, though we will also study some of the special characters which have been used for
centuries to write colloquial Cantonese. Since students will ordinarily possess prior proficiency in Manda-
rin, a closely related language, we should be able to cover in one semester about as much as is covered in
the first two to three semesters of Mandarin.
Evaluation will be based on classroom performance, quizzes, tests, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Chinese 202 or permission of the instructor.
SILBER
CHIN 244 Writer and Society in Twentieth-Century China (Not offered 2000-2001)*
The tumultuous social and political changes of China in this century have been inseparable from equally
dramatic developments in literature. Writers and intellectuals grappling with their own roles in these events
have raised in their work searching questions about the role of writers and literature in building a nation and
reshaping society. Through selections of twentieth-century Chinese fiction, prose, and film, we will ex-
plore the questions that writers were asking themselves. How do writers cast their mission? Can writing
change the world? How does literature "reflect" society, and how does it affect it? As we consider these
questions, we will also be reading each work closely to explore and develop various approaches and meth-
ods of literary and cultural analysis.
Class format: primarily discussion, with some informal lecture.
Evaluation will be based upon class participation, a few short writing assignments, and a final paper.
Asian Studies
­ 97 ­
No prerequisites. All readings and class sessions will be in English, but students with sufficient Chinese
ability will be encouraged to do some of the readings in Chinese.
SILBER
CHIN 275 China's Greatest Novel (Same as Literary Studies 275) (Not offered 2000-2001)*
China's greatest novel,The Story of the Stone (also known asThe Dream of the Red Chamber) was written in
the mid-eighteenth century, when China was the largest and richest state in the world. Achieving breadth and
nuance only found in the Western tradition a century later, this novel offers what seems to bearealistic de-
scription of a wealthy extended family--with all its generational, gender, and class conflicts, power
struggles, love stories, and economic and entertainment activities. Yet the novel also challenges the relation-
ship between truth and fiction, reality and illusion, for the stone is magical, given life byaBuddhist and a
Daoist priest. We will read the novel through the perspectives of literary studies, cultural studies, and social
history, drawing upon secondary sources in these fields to understand not only the story that most Chinese
know butalsoasubstantialamountabouttraditionalChinesecultureandsociety.
Classformat: discussionwithsomeinformallecture.
Evaluationwill bebased uponclassroomperformance,afewshortwritingassignments,and onelonger one.
No prerequisites.Allreadingsand discussionswill bein English.Enrollment limited to 18.
SILBER
CHIN 301(F), 302(S) Upper-Intermediate Chinese*
Although the oral skills will continue to receive attention, there is at this level increased emphasis on read-
ing and writing. A major goal of the course will be developing students' reading proficiency in standard
written Chinese, the grammar and vocabulary of which differ considerably from the colloquial written
Chinese which was introduced during the first two years of instruction. About half of the course will be
devoted to newspaper reading, with the remainder consisting of several modules that may include short
selections from modern Chinese fiction, films, or other types of performance literature. Both simplified and
traditional character texts will be used. Conducted in Mandarin.
Class format: two 75-minute classes plus a 50-minute conversation session; primarily reading and discus-
sion, with students being required to write a short essay every other week.
Evaluation will be based on classroom performance, homework, quizzes, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Chinese 202 or permission of instructor.
Hour: 12:00-12:50 MWF First Semester: C. CHANG
12:00-12:50 MWF Second Semester: HO
CHIN 401(F), 402(S) Advanced Chinese*
This course is designed to enhance the Chinese language proficiency of students who are already at rela-
tively advanced levels. A wide assortment of materials is used including (for speaking/comprehension)
audiotapes, videotapes, and films featuring Chinese speakers from various segments of society; and (for
reading) newspaper and magazine articles dealing with Chinese politics and economics as well as selec-
tions from modern Chinese literature. Conducted in Mandarin.
Class format: two 75-minute classes plus a 50-minute conversation session; primarily reading and discus-
sion; students are required to write a short essay every other week.
Evaluation will be based on classroom performance, homework, quizzes, tests, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Chinese 302 or permission of instructor.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF C. CHANG
CHIN 412(S) Introduction to Classical Chinese*
Also termed Literary Chinese in English and Wenyan or Gudai Hanyu in Chinese, Classical Chinese was
the standard written language of China from around the fifth century BC until the 1920s and served for
many centuries as the written lingua franca of China, Japan, Korea, and Vietnam. Moreover, remnants of
Classical Chinese are still used frequently in Modern Chinese, in both writing (e.g., newspaper and road
signs) and speech (e.g., proverbs and aphorisms). After several weeks of study of basic grammar and vo-
cabulary, we will read short texts in literature, history, and philosophy from the works of authors such as
Confucius, Mencius, Laozi, Zhuangzi, Sima Qian, and the Tang poets Li Bai and Du Fu. While the main
objective is to develop reading proficiency in Classical Chinese, the course also serves to enhance profi-
ciency in Modern Chinese through classroom discussion in Mandarin, translation of Classical Chinese into
Modern Chinese, and comparison of Classical Chinese and Modern Chinese vocabulary and grammar.
Conducted in Mandarin.
Evaluation will be based on classroom performance, homework, tests, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Chinese 202 or permission of the instructor.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF C. KUBLER
CHIN 431 Introduction to Chinese Linguistics (Same as Linguistics 431) (Not offered
2000-2001)*
Is Chinese--whose nouns "lack" number and whose verbs have no tense--a monosyllabic, "primitive"
language? Are the Chinese characters a system of logical symbols or "idiographs," which indicate mean-
ing directly without regard to sound? Should (and could) the characters be done away with and alphabet-
ized? Are Cantonese, Hakka, and Taiwanese dialects or languages? And what is the relationship between
Chinese, Japanese, Korean, and Vietnamese? These are some of the questions we will be taking up in this
one-semester introduction to the scientific study of the Chinese language. Topics to be covered include: the
Asian Studies
­ 98 ­
phonological, syntactical, and lexical structure of Modern Standard Chinese; the Chinese writing system;
the modern Chinese dialects; the history of the Chinese language; sociolinguistic aspects of Chinese; lan-
guage and politics in the Chinese-speaking countries; and current trends. Readings in English and Chinese,
with class discussion conducted primarily in Mandarin.
Evaluation will be based on classroom performance, homework, two short papers, and one longer paper.
Prerequisite: Chinese 301 or permission of the instructor.
C. KUBLER
CHIN 493(F)-W031-494(S) Senior Thesis*
Satisfies one semester of Division I distribution requirement.
CHIN 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study*
Consult Professor Chang before registering for this course.
COURSES IN JAPANESE
The department regularly offers four levels of language instruction in Modern Japanese, designed to
enable the student to become proficient in aural comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing. The
course numbering system for Japanese is sequential. Students move from Japanese 101-102 to 201, 202,
301, 302, 401, and 402. Independent Study (Japanese 497, 498) is offered for students who have com-
pleted 402 or the equivalent. Those students entering with previous proficiency in Japanese should see
Professor Yamada concerning placement. For the purpose of the distribution requirement, all courses in
Japanese are considered Division I.
JAPN 101(F)-W088-102(S) First-Year Japanese*
An introduction to modern spoken and written Japanese, the course will emphasize oral skills in the fall se-
mester, withsomewhatmorereadingandwriting in thespring. Therelationship between language andcul-
ture and the sociolinguistically appropriate use of language will be stressed throughout. Both videotapes and
audiotapes will be used extensively. Classes consist of a combination of "act" classes, conducted exclusively
in Japanese,wherestudents usethe languagein varioustypes ofdrills andcommunicative activities,and
"fact"classes,conductedinJapaneseandEnglish,wherestudentslearnaboutthelanguageandculture.
Evaluationwill bebased on dailyclassroomperformance, homework, quizzes,amidterm,andafinalexam.
Creditgranted onlyifbothsemestersand thewinterstudysustaining programaretaken.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR Conference: 9-9:50 MWF, 10-10:50 MWF
First Semester: YAMAMOTO (lectures) FUJIMOTO (conferences)
9:55-11:10 TR Conference: 9-9:50 MWF, 10-10:50 MWF
Second Semester: KAGAYA (lectures) and YAMAMOTO (conferences)
JAPN 201(F), 202(S) Second-Year Japanese*
This course is a continuation of Elementary Japanese 101-102, further developing the four skills of speak-
ing, listening, reading, and writing. The same general methodology will be used. Upon completing the
course, students will have been introduced to most of the major structural patterns of contemporary Japa-
nese and will be able to read simple expository prose.
Evaluation will be based on daily performance, homework, quizzes, a midterm, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Japanese 101-102 or permission of instructor.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR Conference: 11-11:50 MWF, 12-12:50 MWF
First Semester: KAGAYA (lectures) FUJIMOTO (conferences)
11:20-12:35 TR Conference: 11-11:50 MWF, 12-12:50 MWF
Second Semester: FUJIMOTO (lectures) YAMAMOTO (conferences)
JAPN 276(S) Premodern Japanese Literature and Performance*
Some of Japan's performance traditions, which developed in different historical settings, have survived to
this day and continue to coexist and compete for the attention of audiences, both domestically and abroad.
This course examines the Japanese literature of three major periods in Japan's history, focusing on how
literary works reflect the social and cultural contexts of specific historical periods. We will begin by look-
ing into the Heian period (794-1185), when the work of female authors occupied center stage and some of
the canonical texts of the Japanese literary and cultural tradition were born; next we will consider the Medi-
eval period (1185-1600), which saw the rise of the samurai class and the expansion of the domain of artistic
creation beyond the confinement of the lavish court culture; and then we will look at the Edo period
(1600-1867), when a new bourgeois culture flourished and audiences were greatly transformed. Through-
out the course, we will explore how literary and performance traditions have been interrelated in the un-
folding of Japanese literary history. We will also explore how the presence of premodern literary traditions
continues to be felt today.
Class format: primarily of discussions; there will also be some lecture as well as student presentations on
assigned topics.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, presentations, two short papers, and one longer paper.
No prerequisites. All readings and discussions will be in English.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR KAGAYA
JAPN 301(F), 302(S) Third-Year Japanese*
This course isacontinuation of Japanese 201, 202, further developing the four skills of speaking, listening,
reading, and writing. The same general methodology will be used. Upon completing the course, students
Asian Studies, Astronomy, Astrophysics
­ 99 ­
will have been introduced to all the major structural patterns of contemporary Japanese and will have begun
emphasis on vocabulary building through the study of situationally oriented materials stressing communica-
tive competence.Thereading ofexpository proseofintermediatedifficultywillalso receivesomeattention.
Evaluationwill bebased on daily performance, homework, quizzes,amidterm,andafinalexam.
Prerequisite:Japanese202or permission ofinstructor.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR Conference: 1:10-2:25 TF
First Semester: YAMAMOTO (lectures) and KAGAYA (conferences)
1:10-2:25 MR Conference: 1:10-2:25 TF
Second Semester: YAMAMOTO (lectures) and FUJIMOTO (conferences)
JAPN 401(F), 402(S) Fourth-Year Japanese*
A continuation of Japanese 302, developing speaking, listening, reading, and writing skills in the discus-
sion of social issues in current Japan. Topics may vary according to the level of the students.
Evaluation will be based on daily performance, homework, quizzes, a midterm, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Japanese 302 or permission of instructor.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF First Semester: KAGAYA
9:00-9:50 MWF Second Semester: FUJIMOTO
JAPN 493(F)-W031-494(S) Senior Thesis*
Satisfies one semester of Division I distribution requirement.
JAPN 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study*
This course is for those students who have completed Japanese 402 or the equivalent.
ASTRONOMY (Div. III)
Chair, Professor JAY M. PASACHOFF
Professors: KWITTER***, PASACHOFF. Visiting Professor: DEMIANSKI §§. Observatory Supervisor/
Instructor: MARTIN.
Why is the sky dark at night? What are those mysterious twinkling lights that dot the nighttime sky?
What is Earth's place in the Universe? Astronomy is the science that asks and tries to answer questions like
these. We have come a long way toward understanding what makes the sky appear as it does and how the
Universe is fashioned. The Astronomy Department offers courses for anyone who is interested in learning
about the Universe, and who would like to be able to follow new astronomical discoveries as they are
made. All courses in Astronomy satisfy the Division III requirement. The Astrophysics major, adminis-
tered jointly with the Physics Department, and the Astronomy major, are described below.
The beginning astronomy courses are offered on two levels. Astronomy 101, 102, 104, and 330-type
courses are intended primarily for non-science majors, and have no prerequisite. Astronomy 111 is de-
signed for students with some exposure to or interest in physics. It has a prerequisite of one year of high
school physics or permission of the instructor, and a corequisite of Mathematics 103 or equivalent back-
ground in calculus.
Most of the astronomy courses take advantage of our observational and computational facilities: a 24"
computer-controlled telescope with sensitive electronic detectors, and our own network of computer
workstations for image processing. The Astronomy Department homepage can be accessed on the World
Wide Web at http://www.williams.edu/Astronomy.
ASTROPHYSICS MAJOR
The Astrophysics major is designed for students who want a rigorous introduction to the field, and in-
cludes not only those who plan graduate study in astronomy, astrophysics, or a closely related field, but
also those interested in a wide variety of careers. Alumni are not only astronomers but also computer scien-
tists, geologists, teachers, doctors, lawyers, business school professors, and so on. In recent years, many
astrophysics majors have had a second major in fields as wide ranging as mathematics, geosciences, eco-
nomics, and art history. This major emphasizes the description of the Universe and its constituents in terms
of physical processes. Potential Astrophysics majors should consult early with members of the Astronomy
and Physics Departments to determine their most appropriate route to and through the major. An essential
ingredient in such students' undergraduate training is experience in physics and mathematics. Therefore,
the major normally will begin in the first year a student is at Williams with Physics 131 or 141 and Mathe-
matics 104 in the fall, and continue with Physics 142 and Mathematics 105 in the spring. Students with
very good background placing them out of Physics 142 and out of Mathematics 104 may choose to take
Physics 201 and Mathematics 105 instead. Astronomy 111 will often be taken in the fall of the sophomore
year; however, many students take it in the fall of their first year at Williams, along with physics and math.
Students who might place out of physics courses should read the section on placement under Physics. Stu-
dents who place out of Physics 131 or 141 into Physics 142 should particularly consider taking Astronomy
111 in the fall of their first year.
In addition to the major courses described below, other courses in geosciences, mathematics, and
computer science may also be appropriate.
Astronomy, Astrophysics
­ 100 ­
MAJOR REQUIREMENTS FOR ASTROPHYSICS
Astronomy 111 Introduction to Astrophysics
or Astronomy 101 Stars: From Suns to Black Holes
and either Astronomy 102 The Solar System--Our Planetary Home
or Astronomy 104 The Milky Way Galaxy and the Universe Beyond
Two 400-level Astronomy courses
Physics 131 Particles and Waves
or Physics 141 Particles and Waves--Enriched
or equivalent placement
Physics 142 Physics Today
Physics 201 Electricity and Magnetism
Physics 202 Waves and Optics
Physics 210 Mathematical Methods for Scientists
or Mathematics 210 Differential Equations and Vector Calculus
Physics 301 Introductory Quantum Physics
Mathematics 104 Calculus II
Mathematics 105 Multivariable Calculus
The total number of courses required for the Astrophysics major, an interdisciplinary major, is eleven.
Students entering with Advanced Placement in physics and/or mathematics may obtain credit toward the
major for the equivalent of Physics 141 and/or Mathematics 104 and/or 105 taken elsewhere, but at least 8
courses in astronomy, physics, and mathematics must be taken at Williams. There are some aspects of
astrophysics that are closely related to chemistry or geosciences. In recognition of this relation, certain ad-
vanced courses in those departments can be accepted for credit toward the Astrophysics major on a two-
for-one basis. It is not possible to double major in Astrophysics and Physics.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN ASTROPHYSICS
The honors degree in Astrophysics will be awarded on the basis of a senior thesis presenting the results
of an original observational, experimental, or theoretical investigation carried out by the student under the
direction of a faculty member in Astronomy or Physics. There are no specific grade requirements (other
than College-wide requirements for remaining in good academic standing) for entry into the thesis research
program; however, a student wishing to do a thesis should have demonstrated both ability and motivation
for independent work in previous courses and in any earlier research involvement. Students doing theses
will normally choose a topic and an advisor early in the second semester of their junior year. During the
senior year, those students whose proposals have been approved will elect two courses and a winter study
project in addition to the minimum requirements for the major. Preparation for the thesis will occupy at
least one course (Astrophysics 493) and the winter study project (Astrophysics 031). At the end of the
winter study period, the departments will decide, in consultation with each student, whether to admit that
student to honors candidacy. Both a written thesis and an oral presentation to faculty and fellow students
are required. The degree with honors will be awarded to those who meet these requirements with distinc-
tion. The degree with highest honors will be awarded to those who fulfill the requirements with unusually
high distinction.
The departments will be flexible with regard to the number and timing of courses devoted to thesis re-
search within the general guidelines of two courses and a winter study project over and above the mini-
mum major requirements and the written and oral presentations, especially in cases of students with ad-
vanced standing and/or summer research experience. Students considering unusual requests are urged to
consult with potential advisors or the department chairs as early as possible.
ASTRONOMY MAJOR
The Astronomy major is designed for students with an interest in learning about many aspects of mod-
ern astronomy, but who do not choose to take the advanced physics courses of the astrophysics major. It is
also appropriate as a second major for students concentrating in another field. The Astronomy major em-
phasizes understanding the observed properties of the physical systems that comprise the known Universe,
from the Sun and solar system, to the evolution of stars and star clusters, to the Milky Way Galaxy, to
external galaxies and clusters of galaxies. Because some knowledge of physics and calculus is necessary to
understand many astronomical phenomena, the Astronomy major requires the first two semesters each of
the physics and calculus that are also required of Physics majors and Astrophysics majors.
There are several possible routes through the Astronomy major, depending on preparation and interest.
Students considering a major in Astronomy should consult with members of the department early and
often. A first-year student, unsure about choosing between Astronomy and Astrophysics, may wish to take
not only Astronomy 111 but also Physics 131 or 141 and Mathematics 104 (if necessary) in the fall. Stu-
dents who might place out of physics courses should read the section on placement under Physics.
Astronomy, Astrophysics
­ 101 ­
MAJOR REQUIREMENTS FOR ASTRONOMY
Astronomy 111 Introduction to Astrophysics
or Astronomy 101 Stars: From Suns to Black Holes
and either Astronomy 102 The Solar System--Our Planetary Home
or Astronomy 104 The Milky Way Galaxy and the Universe Beyond
Two 200-level Astronomy courses or equivalent
Two 400-level Astronomy courses
Physics 131 Particles and Waves
or Physics 141 Particles and Waves--Enriched
or equivalent placement
Physics 142 Physics Today
Mathematics 104 Calculus II
Mathematics 105 Multivariable Calculus
or equivalent placement
The total number of courses required for the Astronomy major is nine. Students entering with Advanced
Placement in physics and/or math may obtain credit toward the major for the equivalent of Physics 142
and/or Mathematics 105 taken elsewhere. There are some aspects of astronomy that are closely related to
chemistry or geosciences. In recognition of this, certain advanced courses in those departments can be ac-
cepted for credit toward the Astronomy major.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN ASTRONOMY
The honors degree in Astronomy will be awarded on the basis of a senior thesis presenting the results of
an original observational, experimental, or theoretical investigation carried out by the student under the
direction of a faculty member in Astronomy. There are no specific grade requirements (other than College-
wide requirements for remaining in good academic standing) for entry into the thesis research program;
however, a student wishing to do a thesis should have demonstrated both ability and motivation for inde-
pendent work in previous courses and in any earlier research involvement. Students doing theses will nor-
mally choose a topic and an advisor early in the second semester of their junior year. During the senior
year, those students whose proposals have been approved will elect two courses and a winter study project
in addition to the minimum requirements for the major. Preparation for the thesis will occupy at least one
course (Astronomy 493) and the winter study project (Astronomy 031). At the end of the winter study
period, the department will decide, in consultation with each student, whether to admit that student to hon-
ors candidacy. Both a written thesis and an oral presentation to faculty and fellow students are required.
The degree with honors will be awarded to those who meet these requirements with distinction. The degree
with highest honors will be awarded to those who fulfill the requirements with unusually high distinction.
The department will be flexible with regard to the number and timing of courses devoted to thesis re-
search within the general guidelines of two courses and a winter study project over and above the mini-
mum major requirements and the written and oral presentations, especially in cases of students with ad-
vanced standing and/or summer research experience. Students considering unusual requests are urged to
consult with potential advisors or the department chair as early as possible.
ASTRONOMY COURSES
COURSES FOR NON-MAJORS WITH NO PREREQUISITES
ASTR 101(F) Stars: From Suns to Black Holes
What makes a star shine? For how long will the Sun keep shining? What are black holes and how can they
form? Astronomy 101, a non-major, general introduction to the part of contemporary astronomy that in-
cludes how stars form and how they end their existence, will provide answers to these questions and more.
The course gives special attention to the exciting discoveries of the past few years. Topics include modern
astronomical instruments such as the Hubble Space Telescope, the Chandra X-ray Observatory, the
10-meter Keck Telescopes, and the Very Large Telescope in Chile, and results from them; how astrono-
mers interpret the light received from distant celestial objects, the Sun as a typical star (and how its future
will affect ours); and our modern understanding of how stars work and how they change with time. We will
also discuss how pulsars and black holes result from the evolution of normal, massive stars and how giant
black holes are at the center of galaxies and quasars. We will evaluate the evidence for planets around stars
other than the Sun. This course is independent of and on the same level as Astronomy 102 and 104.
Evening observing sessions include use of the 24 and other telescopes to observe stars, nebulae, planets,
and galaxies; daytime observation of the Sun will also be possible. In addition, students will have the op-
portunity to learn the constellations and to find their way around the sky.
In labs, students will be able to explore concepts discussed in class; students will also have the opportunity
to use the department's multimedia facilities to learn more about the astronomical objects they study and
observe and to explore astronomy on the World Wide Web.
Astronomy, Astrophysics
­ 102 ­
Class format: lectures, three hours a week; observing sessions; and 4 labs per semester.
Evaluation will be based on two hour tests, a final exam, an observing portfolio, and laboratory reports.
No prerequisites. Non-major course.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR Lab: 1-2:30 T, W; 2:30-4 T, W; 7-9:30 p.m. T PASACHOFF
ASTR 102 The Solar System--Our Planetary Home (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered
2001-2002)
What makes Earth different from all the other planets? Did Mars ever have running water? What is Pluto?
Will asteroids or comets collide with the Earth? What is a solar eclipse like? Astronomy 102, a non-major,
general introduction to the part of contemporary astronomy that comprises the study of the solar system,
will provide answers to these questions and more. We will cover the historical development of humanity's
understanding of the solar system, examining contributions by Aristotle, Ptolemy, Copernicus, Galileo,
Newton, and others. The course gives special attention to exciting discoveries of the past few years by
space probes and by the Hubble Space Telescope. This course is independent of, and on the same level as
Astronomy 101 and 104.
Evening observing sessions include use of the 24 and other telescopes to observe stars, nebulae, planets,
and galaxies; daytime observation of the Sun will also be possible. In addition, students will have the op-
portunity to learn the constellations and to find their way around the sky.
In labs, students will be able to explore concepts discussed in class; students will also have the opportunity
to use the department's multimedia facilities to learn more about the astronomical objects they study and
observe and to explore astronomy on the World Wide Web.
Class format: lectures, three hours a week; observing sessions; and 4 labs per semester.
Evaluation will be based on two hour tests, a final exam, an observing portfolio, and laboratory reports.
No prerequisites. Non-major course.
PASACHOFF
ASTR 104(S) The Milky Way Galaxy and the Universe Beyond
It has been only 85 years since the Sun was discovered not to be at the center of the Milky Way Galaxy, and
only 75 years since our Milky Way Galaxy was determined to be only one of countless "island Universes"
in space. The new millennium is bringing a host of technological advances that are enabling us to under-
stand ever more clearly our place in the Universe and how the Universe began. For example, the Hubble
Space Telescope brings clearer images of celestial objects than have ever been obtainable before, and is
allowing progress on determining the past and future of the Universe. The Chandra X-ray Observatory,
launched in 1999, is giving us unprecidentedly detailed views of violent objects like supernova remnants
and galaxies containing giant black holes. In addition, observations of the early Universe are giving clues
into how its currently observed structure arose, and is confirming and enlarging our understanding of the
Big Bang. Astronomy 104, a non-major, general introduction to part of contemporary astronomy compris-
ing the study of galaxies and the Universe, will explore the answers to questions like: What is the Milky
Way?; Why are quasars so luminous?; Is the Universe made largely of "dark matter"?; What determines
the ultimate fate of the Universe? This course is independent of, and on the same level as Astronomy 101
and 102. Observing sessions will include use of the 24" telescope and other telescopes for observations of
stars, star clusters, planets and their moons, nebulae, and galaxies, as well as daytime observations of the
Sun.
In labs, students will be able to explore concepts discussed in class; students will also have the opportunity
to use the department's multimedia facilities to learn more about the astronomical objects they study and
observe and to explore astronomy on the World Wide Web.
Class format: lectures, three hours a week; observing sessions; and 4 labs per semester.
Evaluation will be based on two hour tests, a final exam, an observing portfolio, and laboratory reports.
No prerequisites. Non-major course.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR Lab: 1-2:30 T, W; 2:30-4 T, W; 7-9:30 p.m. T PASACHOFF
ASTR 106(S) Observing the Sun and Stars
This hands-on first-year/sophomore seminar course is centered on using the solar and nighttime telescopes
to observe not only sunspots and other solar activity in the daytime but also stars, nebulae, and galaxies at
night, and on computer studies of astronomical data. Special equipment includes the 24 telescope and an
electronic detector with computer control to sensitively image celestial sources in a short amount of ob-
serving time. Other equipment includes workstations with special image-reduction software to analyze and
display the data. For solar observations, we will use telescopes with hydrogen-alpha filters and other filters
and devices. We will access online current observations from telescopes on the ground and in space using
the World Wide Web. We will use CD-ROM "planetarium" programs to duplicate the skies. Reading will
include new books and articles about the Sun and stars. We will meet for the equivalent of two observing
sessions plus a seminar session per week.
Evaluation will be based on student participation, observing reports, data analysis, an hour exam, and a
final paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 12 first-year students and sophomores. Admission will be based on
experience and/or interest in astronomy. This course does not substitute for Astronomy 111 as the main
entrance into the Astronomy or Astrophysics majors.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W Lab: TBA PASACHOFF
Astronomy, Astrophysics
­ 103 ­
ASTR 330(S) The Nature of the Universe
A journey through space and time from the first millionth of a second to the ultimate fate of the Universe
billions of years in the future. Topics include conditions during the first three minutes, creation of the ele-
ments, stellar and giant black holes, the Big Bang and its remnant radiation, relativity, galaxies and quasars,
the large scale structure of the Universe, and current ideas about the future of the Universe and the end of
time.
Class format: lecture and discussion, three hours a week.
Evaluation will be based on hour tests, a final exam, and a term paper.
No prerequisites. Courses in the 330-sequence are meant as general-education courses for students of all
majors. Enrollment limited to 40. Not open to first-year students and sophomores. Non-major course.
Closed to Astronomy, Astrophysics, and Physics majors.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR DEMIANSKI
ASTR 334 The Universe Explored with the Hubble Space Telescope (Not offered 2000-2001)
The Hubble Space Telescope, with its ability to image astronomical objects 10 times more clearly than
with ground-based telescopes, is revolutionizing all aspects of astronomy. Its additional ability to see ob-
jects fainter than ever before possible, added to its high resolution, is enabling astronomers to observe the
Universe in its earliest stages, over 10 billion years ago. We will consider the contributions of the Hubble
Space Telescope to understanding objects ranging from the nearest--such as planets and comets in our
solar system--to stars to galaxies and to quasars and other exotica in the distant past. We will consider the
flow of new information about the Universe, and how the Next Generation Space Telescope planned in the
next decade may be useful in the detection of planets around other stars.
Evaluation will be based on a first paper, an hour exam, and a final paper.
No prerequisites. Courses in the 330-sequence are meant as general-education courses for students of all
majors. Not open to first-year students and sophomores. Non-major course. Closed to Astronomy, Astro-
physics, and Physics majors.
PASACHOFF
COURSES WITH PREREQUISITES
ASTR 111(F) Introduction to Astrophysics
A survey of some of the main ideas in modern astrophysics, with an emphasis on the observed properties
and evolution of stars, this course is the first in the Astrophysics and Astronomy major sequences. It is also
appropriate for students planning to major in one of the other sciences or mathematics, and for others who
would like a quantitative introduction that emphasizes the relationship of contemporary physics to astrono-
my. Topics include astronomical instrumentation, radiation laws and stellar spectra, physical characteristics
of the Sun and other stars, stellar formation and evolution, nucleosynthesis, white dwarfs, pulsars and neu-
tron stars, and black holes. Some students will take this course concurrently with Physics 131 or 141. Stu-
dents who take this course after having taken Physics 142 or 144 will have the opportunity to carry out
more advanced assignments or projects.
Evening observing sessions include use of the 24" and other telescopes to observe stars, nebulae, planets
and galaxies; daytime observation of the Sun will also be possible. In addition, students will have the op-
portunity to learn the constellations and to find their way around the sky and to explore astronomy on the
World Wide Web.
Course format: lectures, three hours a week; laboratory and observing sessions.
Evaluation will be based on problem sets, two hour tests, a final exam, lab reports, and observing portfolio.
Prerequisites: a year of high school physics or college physics taken concurrently, or permission of the
instructor. In addition, students taking Astronomy 111 must have had or be taking Mathematics 104 or
equivalent.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR Lab: 1-4 M, R; 7-9:30 p.m. T KWITTER
ASTR 203T Solar System Astrophysics (Not offered 2000-2001)+
An examination of the solar system and its constituents, from a cosmological as well as a local viewpoint.
We will examine astronomical and geological aspects of the planets, their moons, minor planets, and com-
ets, as we understand them today, and as they have been considered historically. Special attention will be
given to results from recent spacecraft encounters. We will also discuss planets discovered in recent years
in solar systems other than our own.
Observing to be arranged. Tutorial sessions to be arranged.
Evaluation will be based on tutorial presentations and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Astronomy 111 (or Astronomy 101 and either 102 or 104 with permission) and Physics 142,
or permission of the instructor.
PASACHOFF
ASTR 207T(F) Extraterrestrial Life in the Galaxy: A Sure Thing, or a Snowball's Chance?+
A focused investigation of the possibility of life arising elsewhere in our Galaxy, and the chances of our
detecting it. In this course, pairs of students will explore the astronomical and biochemical requirements for
the development of Earth-like life. We will consider the conditions on other planets within our solar system
as well as on newly-discovered planets circling other stars. We will also analyze the famous "Drake Equa-
tion," which calculates the expected number of extraterrestrial civilizations, and attempt to evaluate its
Astronomy, Astrophysics
­ 104 ­
components. Finally, we will examine current efforts to detect signals from intelligent alien civilizations
and contemplate humanity's reactions to a positive detection.
Pairs of students will meet weekly with the instructor. Evaluation will be based on the student's papers,
responses to the partner's papers, and evidence of growth in understanding over the semester.
Prerequisites: Astronomy 111 or Biology 101-102 or Chemistry 101-102, or equivalent science prepara-
tion. Enrollment limited to 10. Preference given to students who have had Astronomy 111. Instructor's per-
mission required.
Hour: TBA KWITTER
ASTR 211 Observation and Data Reduction Techniques in Astronomy (Not offered
2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
Astronomical observations have undergone a tremendous transformation as a result of the digital computer
revolution. Images and spectra that routinely required photographic exposures of many hours are now pos-
sible in minutes, if not seconds, with modern electronic detectors. Along with this colossal growth in the
rate at which data can be acquired comes a concomitant increase in the complexity of the effort required to
extract useful information from that data. This course will introduce techniques of obtaining and analyzing
astronomical data. Regardless of the telescope or detector, however, observing still requires knowledge of
the sky; we will begin by learning about celestial coordinates, basic spherical trigonometry, and time. The
course will then move on to discussion of CCD detectors, signal statistics, and the data reduction process,
making use of data we obtain with our 24" telescope and CCD, as well as data from telescopes at the
National Optical Astronomy Observatories. Students will analyze images and spectra on department
workstations using data reduction techniques standard among astronomers.
Evaluation will be based on problem sets, an hour test and a final project.
Prerequisites: Astronomy 111 (or Astronomy 101 and either 102 or 104 with permission) and Mathematics
104, or permission of the instructor. Prior experience with UNIX is helpful, but not required.
KWITTER
ASTR 215 Cosmology (Not offered 2000-2001)
The overall structure of the Universe is the subject of much current research, and involves many interesting
parts of astronomy. We discuss the expansion of the Universe and what that tells us about the first fraction
of a second after the Big Bang. We analyze the formation of the elements in the Universe and how we
study those elements. We discuss disparities that exist in different ways of measuring the age of the Uni-
verse, with the main measurements indicating, impossibly, that the Universe is younger than its constitu-
ents. We discuss current measurements of Hubble's constant, the measure of the Universe's expansion, and
how observations with the Hubble Space Telescope and with the new generation of large Earth-based tele-
scopes may resolve the uncertainties within a few years. We investigate how detailed measurements of the
Cosmic Background Radiation may be revealing the seeds out of which galaxies formed. We consider
studies of cold dark matter and hot dark matter (such as neutrinos), and how most of the Universe can be of
a form not yet discovered. Finally, we discuss evidence for large-scale structure in the Universe.
Class format: lecture and discussion, three hours a week; plus opportunity to observe with our telescopes
and explore astronomical data available on the World Wide Web.
Evaluation will be based on problem sets, an hour test, a term paper and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Astronomy 111 (or Astronomy 101 and either 102 or 104 with permission) and Physics 142,
or permission of the instructor. Open to sophomores, juniors and seniors.
ASTR 408T The Solar Corona (Not offered 2000-2001)+
The solar corona has recently been revealed as the connection between the Sun and the Earth. Observa-
tions from the 10 instruments on the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) now aloft are showing
the flow of material from the Sun to the earth in unprecedented detail. Further, data from the total solar
eclipses of 26 February 1998 and 11 August 1999 will be used to study the cause of the heating of the solar
corona and will be linked to space observations from SOHO and from the Yohkoh x-ray solar satellite. We
discuss theoretical aspects and observational techniques, and will make solar observations. Students will
meet weekly with the professor in groups of two or three to discuss readings, solve problems, present short
papers, and/or make observations.
Evaluation will be based on the submitted material and on tutorial participation, as well as on a final paper.
Prerequisites: Astronomy 111 (or Astronomy 101 and either 102 or 104 with permission) and a 200-level
Physics or Astronomy course.
PASACHOFF
ASTR 410(S) General Relativity and Cosmology (Offered 2000-2001; not to be offered
2001-2002)
This course will introduce students to the basic concepts of Einstein'sGeneral Theory of Relativity. Several
observational tests of general relativity will be discussed. Both special and general relativity will be applied
to the study of neutron stars, black holes, gravitational waves, gravitational lenses, and time machines. The
second half of the course will be devoted to cosmology, covering topics such as the Big Bang, the very
early evolution of the universe, including the inflationary scenario and nucleosynthesis, and formation of
galaxies and large-scale structure of the universe. Observational results from satellites, including the Cos-
mic Background Explorer, the Hubble Space Telescope and the Chandra X-ray Observatory, will be dis-
cussed, as well as future plans for mapping the primordial background radiation in even more detail than
Astronomy, Astrophysics, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
­ 105 ­
current knowledge. This course will not be heavily mathematical; the required mathematics will be devel-
oped as needed.
Lecture and discussion, three hours per week.
Evaluation will be based on homework assignments, two hour exams, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: a 200-level Physics course; or permission of the instructor.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF DEMIANSKI
ASTR 412T Solar Physics (Not offered 2000-2001)+
We study all aspects of the Sun, our nearest star, as we approach the maximum of the sunspot cycle. We
discuss the interior, including the neutrino experiment and helioseismology, the photosphere, the chromo-
sphere, the corona, and the solar wind. We discuss the Sun as an example of stars in general. We discuss
both theoretical aspects and observational techniques, including work at the recent total solar eclipses. We
discuss results from current spacecraft, including the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) and the
Transition Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE).
Students will meet weekly with the professor in groups of two or three to discuss readings, solve problems,
and present short papers.
Evaluation will be based on one hour exam, discussions, problem sets, presentations, and a final exam or
paper.
Prerequisites: Astronomy 111 (or Astronomy 101 and either 102 or 104 with permission) and a 200-level
Physics or Astronomy course. Open to juniors and seniors.
PASACHOFF
ASTR 418 Astrophysics of The Milky Way and Other Galaxies (Not offered 2000-2001)
Galaxies are the building blocks of the Universe. They create the environment in which stellar evolution
takes place; yet galaxies themselves yield information about their stellar and non-stellar content, as well as
their own environments. Some galaxies exhibit regular and beautiful morphology, while others have
shapes that testify to the intense activity at their cores and to the power of gravitational interactions. We will
study our own Milky Way Galaxy and then move out to galaxies and clusters beyond.
Class format: lecture/seminar.
Writing assignments will include homework and a 15-page final paper.
Evaluation will be based on problem sets, a midterm, and a final paper.
Prerequisites: Astronomy 111 (or Astronomy 101 and either 102 or 104 with permission), and a 200-level
Physics or Astronomy course. Open to juniors and seniors, and to sophomores with permission.
KWITTER
ASTR 493(F)-W031, W031-494(S) Senior Research in Astronomy
An original experimental or theoretical investigation is carried out under the direction of a faculty member
in Astronomy, as discussed under the heading of the degree with honors in Astronomy below.
Prerequisite: permission of the department.
Members of the Astronomy Department
ASPH 493(F)-W031, W031-494(S) Senior Research in Astrophysics
An original experimental or theoretical investigation is carried out under the direction of a faculty member
in Astronomy or Physics, as discussed under the heading of the degree with honors in Astrophysics below.
Prerequisite: permission of the department.
Members of the Astronomy and Physics Departments
ASTR 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study in Astronomy
ASPH 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study in Astrophysics
BIOCHEMISTRY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY (Div. III)
Chair, Associate Professor MARSHA ALTSCHULER
Advisory Committee: Professors: DEWITT, L. KAPLAN, LOVETT*, D. LYNCH. Associate Professors:
ALTSCHULER, ROSEMAN. Assistant Professors: ADLER, CHIHADE, LASKOWSKI,
RAYMOND, SAVAGE*, SWOAP**, WEISS**.
Biochemistry and molecular biology are dynamic fields which lie at the forefront of science. They have
provided important insights and advances in the elucidation of the relationship between the structure and
function of proteins, the molecules and cells of the immune system, enzyme structure and action, mem-
brane assembly and structure, DNA and RNA structure, the nature of the genetic code, and the molecular
basis of gene regulation. Recombinant DNA and other biotechnologies have provided new and powerful
tools which have exciting applications. Current applications range from the diagnosis and treatment of dis-
ease to enzyme chemistry, developmental biology, and the engineering of new crop plants.
The Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Program is designed to provide students with an opportunity
to explore living systems in molecular terms. Biochemistry and molecular biology are at the interface be-
tween the chemical and biological methods of looking at nature, therefore, the program draws heavily from
these disciplines. While chemistry is concerned with the relationship between molecular structure and
reactions, and biology focuses on cells and organisms, biochemistry and molecular biology probe the de-
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
­ 106 ­
tails of the structures and interactions of molecules in living systems in order to provide the foundation for a
better understanding of biological molecules both individually and as members of more complex struc-
tures.
PROGRAM
While aspects of biochemistry and molecular biology can be very diverse, a common set of chemical
and biological principles underlie the more advanced topics. With this in mind, the program has been struc-
tured to provide the necessary background in chemistry and biology and the opportunity to study the many
facets of the modern areas of the biochemical sciences. Students interested in the Biochemistry and Molec-
ular Biology Program should plan their course selection carefully. Since it is expected that Biochemistry
321 and 322 would be taken in the junior year, students are advised to take the prerequisites for those
courses in both chemistry and biology during their first two years at Williams. While the program is open
to all students, it is expected that it will appeal primarily to majors in biology and chemistry because of the
number of courses required in those fields. In addition to taking the required courses, students planning to
complete the Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Program are strongly encouraged to elect courses in
mathematics and physics.
THE FOLLOWING INTERDEPARTMENTAL SEQUENCE COURSES SERVE AS THE CORE
OF THE BIOCHEMISTRY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY PROGRAM
Biochemistry 321 and 322 provide a comprehensive introduction to biochemistry. These courses taken
in conjunction with Biology 202 Genetics and Biology 306 Advanced Molecular Genetics provide a thor-
ough background in essentially all of the areas of modern biochemistry and molecular biology.
BIMO 321(F) Biochemistry I--Structure and Function of Biological Molecules (Same as
Biology 321 and Chemistry 321)
This course introduces the basic concepts of biochemistry with an emphasis on the structure and function
of biological macromolecules. Specifically, the structure of proteins and nucleic acids are examined in de-
tail in order to determine how their chemical properties and their biological behavior result from those
structures. Other topics covered include enzyme kinetics, mechanism and catalysis and regulation; the
molecular organization of biomembranes and membrane transport; and the principles of recombinant
DNA technologies. In addition, the principles and applications of the methods used to characterize macro-
molecules in solution and the interactions between macromolecules are discussed.
The laboratory provides an opportunity to study the structure of macromolecules and to learn the funda-
mental experimental techniques of biochemistry including electrophoresis and chromatography.
Evaluation will be based on two short exams, a final exam, problem sets and performance in the laborato-
ries including lab reports.
Lectures, three hours a week; laboratory, four hours a week.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 202 and Biology 101.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-5 W L. KAPLAN
BIMO 322(S) Biochemistry II--Metabolism (Same as Biology 322 and Chemistry 322)
This course provides an in-depth discussion of the complex metabolic reactions which are central to life.
Emphasis is placed on the biological flow of energy including alternative modes of energy generation (aer-
obic, anaerobic, photosynthetic); the regulation and integration of the metabolic pathways including com-
partmentalization and the transport of metabolites; and biochemical reaction mechanisms including the
structures and mechanisms of coenzymes. This comprehensive study also includes the biosynthesis of
small molecules (carbohydrates, lipids, amino acids, and nucleotides).
Laboratory experiments introduce the principles and procedures used to study enzymatic reactions, bioen-
ergetics, and metabolic pathways.
Evaluation is based on quizzes, an hour exam, a final exam, and performance in the laboratories including
lab reports.
Lectures: three hours a week; laboratory: four hours a week.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 202 and Biology 101.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR Lab: 1-5 W, R D. LYNCH
To complete the concentration in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, a student must complete all of the
required courses:
Required Courses
Biology 101 The Cell
and Biology 102 The Organism
Chemistry 101, 102/106 or 103-104/108 Concepts of Chemistry
Chemistry 201-202 Organic Chemistry
Biology 202 Genetics
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 321 Biochemistry I--Structure and Function of Biological
Molecules
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 322 Biochemistry II--Metabolism
one 400-level biology course (from Elective Courses listed below)
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Biology
­ 107 ­
and two of the following elective courses; one from the Chemistry Department and one from the Biol-
ogy Department offerings:
Elective Courses
Biology 301 Developmental Biology
Biology 304 Neurobiology
Biology 306 Advanced Molecular Genetics
Biology 308 Plant Growth and Development
Biology 309 Mammalian Molecular Physiology
Biology 313 Immunology
Biology 314 Virology
Biology 410 Topics in Cell, Molecular and Developmental Biology
Biology 412 Biochemical Regulatory Mechanisms
Biology 413 Molecular Basis of Biological Clocks
Chemistry 301 Physical Chemistry: Thermodynamics
Chemistry 303 Synthetic Organic Chemistry
Chemistry/Environmental Studies 304 Instrumental Methods of Analysis
Chemistry 306 Physical Chemistry: A Biochemical Approach
Chemistry 308/Environmental Studies 328 Toxicology and Cancer
Chemistry 310 Enzyme Kinetics and Reaction Mechanisms
Chemistry 314T A Theoretical Approach to Biological Phenomena
Chemistry 316T Bioinorganic Chemistry
Chemistry 406 Topics in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
Since the Chemistry Department counts two biology courses and the Biology Department counts two
chemistry courses toward the majors (each of which can be completed with only eight other courses), a
student majoring in either chemistry or biology would have to take only three additional courses to com-
plete the program.
BIOLOGY (Div. III)
Chair, Professor WILLIAM DEWITT
Professors: ART, DEWITT, J. EDWARDS*, D. LYNCH, H. WILLIAMS**, ZOTTOLI. Associate
Professors: ALTSCHULER, ROSEMAN. Visiting Associate Professor: BANTA. Senior
Lecturer: D. C. SMITH**. Assistant Professors: ADLER, LASKOWSKI, RAYMOND,
SAVAGE*, SWOAP**. Visiting Assistant Professor: SCHMIDT. Associate Professor of Marine Sci-
ence for the Williams-Mystic Program: CARLTON. Visiting Assistant Professor of Marine Science for
the Williams-Mystic Program: MCKENNA. Part-time Lecturer: HEINS. Part-time Instructor:
MACINTIRE.
The Biology curriculum has been designed to provide students a broad base for understanding prin-
ciples governing life processes at all levels, from biochemistry and cell biology to physiology to environ-
mental biology and behavior. Courses emphasize fundamentals common to all subdisciplines including the
coupling of structure to function, the transfer of energy in living systems, communication, and the molding
of diversity by the evolutionary process. In upper-level courses and in independent and honors research,
students have the opportunity to investigate areas at the frontiers of modern biology.
Although the Biology major is specifically designed to provide a balanced curriculum in the broader
context of the liberal arts, it is also excellent preparation for graduate studies in medicine and the life
sciences.
MAJOR REQUIREMENTS
In order to make the major accessible to students with diverse interests, required courses are kept to a
minimum. The Biology major is satisfied by nine courses, as follows:
Biology 101 The Cell
Biology 102 The Organism
Biology 202 Genetics
Any two 300-level courses, one of which must have a laboratory associated with it.
Any one 400-level course.
Any other three courses or any other two courses and Chemistry 201-202.
NOTE: Independent study courses and AMS 311 (Same as Biology 231) do not fulfill the 300-level course
requirement. Both WIOX 215, Biology: Ecology of Flowering Plants, and WIOX 216, Biology: Evolu-
tion, in the Williams Oxford Program qualify for major credit.
Distribution Requirement
In order to ensure that majors broaden their knowledge of biology, one of the elective courses for the
major must include a course covering biological processes at levels of organization above the cell. Courses
that satisfy this distribution requirement are indicated in the individual course description.
Biology
­ 108 ­
COURSE SELECTION AND PLACEMENT
It is preferable for students who plan to major in biology, or think they may be interested in doing so, to
take Biology 101, 102 during their first year at Williams. It is also possible to begin the Biology major
during the sophomore year, although students should understand that it may require taking several semes-
ters with two or more biology courses.
Students interested in biology, whether or not they intend to major in it, are encouraged to take Biology
101, 102. It is also possible, with permission of the department, to take Biology 203 Ecology and Biology
204 Animal Behavior without prerequisite. Other biology courses designed specifically for students who
do not intend to take additional upper-level courses in biology include Biology 132 Human Biology and
Social Issues, Biology 134 The Tropics: Biology and Social Issues, and Biology 133 Biology of Exercise
and Nutrition. All of these courses satisfy the Division III distribution requirement; in addition, Biology
134 satisfies the Peoples and Cultures distribution requirement.
Beginning students should normally enroll in Biology 101 and 102. Students with unusually strong
backgrounds in biology, such as those with outstanding performance on the College Board Biology Ad-
vanced Placement Test, may be permitted to elect a sophomore-level course in lieu of Biology 101 and/or
Biology 102 upon successful completion of a departmental qualifying exam.
Students interested in attending graduate school in biology are advised to take organic chemistry
(Chemistry 201-202).
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN BIOLOGY
In order to be recommended for the degree with honors, a Biology major is normally expected to have
completed the equivalent of two semesters and a winter study (031) of independent research culminating in
a thesis which demonstrates outstanding achievement of an original and innovative nature. Although the
presentation of a thesis, and associated oral presentation in the fall and poster defense in the spring, are
required for consideration for a degree with honors, their completion should not be interpreted as a guaran-
tee of a degree with honors. The principal considerations in admitting a student to the program of indepen-
dent honors research will be mastery of fundamental material and skills, ability to pursue independent
study successfully, and demonstrated interest and motivation. Students interested in participating in the
honors program should consult with the department prior to spring break; approval must be received be-
fore spring registration in the junior year.
The minimum course requirements for a degree with honors in Biology are Biology 101, Biology 102,
Biology 202, two 300-level biology courses (one of which must have a laboratory associated with it), one
400-level biology course, Biology 493, Biology 494, WSP 031, and any other two courses in biology (or
any other one course and Chemistry 201-202).
In addition to the normal honors route, which includes two semesters (Biology 493-494) and a winter
study of research (WSP 031) during senior year, students have the option, subject to the approval of their
thesis advisor, to begin the honors research during winter study junior year or during the second semester
junior year. Students beginning honors in winter study of junior year would take Biology 494 in the spring
of their junior year followed by Biology 493 in the fall of their senior year; students beginning honors
during the second semester of junior year would take Biology 494 that semester, followed by Biology 493
in the fall of senior year and winter study research in the winter of the senior year.
BIOCHEMISTRY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY
Students interested in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (BIMO) should consult the general state-
ment under Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. Biology majors not enrolled in the BIMO Program can
take Chemistry/Biology/Biochemistry 321 and 322 if they have required prerequisites.
NEUROSCIENCE
Students interested in Neuroscience should consult the general statement under Neuroscience.
BIOL 101(F) The Cell
This course provides an introduction to the cellular aspects of modern biology. It explains the development
of cell structure and function as a consequence of evolutionary processes, and it stresses the dynamic prop-
erties of living systems. Topics considered include biological molecules and enzyme action, membrane
structure and function, energy exchange and design of metabolic systems, expression of genetic informa-
tion, and cell signalling. In addition to textbook assignments, articles from the recent biological literature
will be assigned and discussed.
Lectures, discussions, and laboratory: six hours a week.
Evaluation will be based on two hour tests, a final exam, and weekly lab reports.
No prerequisites.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF, 11:00-11:50 MWF, 8:30-9:45 TR, 11:20-12:35 TR
Lab: 1-4 M, T, W, R D. LYNCH, LASKOWSKI
BIOL 102(S) The Organism
This course uses an evolutionary approach to introduce organismal biology. The course stresses interre-
latedness of different levels of biological organization from the cell to the organism. Topics include the cell
cycle, animal and plant development, evolutionary mechanisms, speciation, and biodiversity. Examples
are drawn from a broad range of animal, fungal, and plant groups. In addition to textbook assignments,
Biology
­ 109 ­
articles from recent biological literature are assigned and discussed.
Lectures, discussions, and laboratory: six hours a week.
Evaluation will be based on two hour tests, a final exam, and weekly lab reports or paper abstracts.
Prerequisite: Biology 101.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF, 11:00-11:50 MWF, 8:30-9:45 TR, 11:20-12:35 TR
Lab: 1-4 M, T, W, R D. C. SMITH, H. WILLIAMS
BIOL 104 The Organism: Special Laboratory (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered
2001-2002)
This course consists of the same lectures as Biology 102, but has advanced laboratory sections incorporat-
ing an approach that allows students to participate and take responsibility in the design of laboratory inves-
tigations. Group laboratory exercises will be planned during collaborative discussion meetings between the
lab instructors and students in the course. Quizzes, hour exams, and final exam will be identical to those of
Biology 102.
Lectures: three hours per week. Weekly laboratory sessions will alternate with discussion/planning ses-
sions.
Evaluation: quizzes, two hour exams, final exam, laboratory reports and discussions.
Prerequisite: Biology 101. Permission of the instructor is required. Enrollment limited to 30 with preference
given to those demonstrating excellence in Biology 101.
D. C. SMITH
BIOL 132(S) Human Biology and Social Issues
From reading the headlines in newspapers and magazines one gets the impression that human society is on
the verge of a wondrous transformation to be brought about by the application of new biological knowl-
edge. Can science really provide us with a future that is free of disease and social problems? Is biology the
important underlying dictator of who we are and how we live our lives? Or are we more than the sum of
our biological parts?
In lectures, we'll examine recent scientific advances and/or setbacks in understanding and manipulating
human reproduction, development, inheritance, and health. In particular, research in the areas of the Hu-
man Genome Project, gene therapy, cloning, cancer, and AIDS will be explored. In addition, in discussion
sections we will address the implications of this current research for individuals and for society as a whole.
Lectures: three hours a week; discussion: one meeting approximately every other week.
Evaluation will be based on hour exams, a final exam, a laboratory exercise, and participation on a discus-
sion panel.
No prerequisites. Closed to Biology and Chemistry majors; does not satisfy premedical program course
requirements in biology; does not count for Biology major credit.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1:10-2:25 T, R; 2:35-3:50 T ALTSCHULER
BIOL 133 Biology of Exercise and Nutrition (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered
2001-2002)
This class, intended for the non-scientist, focuses on the impact of exercise and nutrition on the human
body. We will discuss topics such as how different types of training influence exercise performance; the
changes that occur in the cardiovascular system during an exercise routine; an examination of the inherent
limits of the body to perform aerobic and anaerobic tasks; and long-term health consequences of a lifetime
of activity or inactivity. We will also examine how nutrition and metabolism affect body composition. For
example, we will rigorously and scientifically scrutinize the use of "fad" diets as a means to lose weight.
Course work will consist of lectures, discussion groups, and hands-on experiences with equipment used in
exercise physiology, all during regular lecture hours.
Evaluation will be based on exams and short papers.
No prerequisites. Does not count for major credit in Biology.
SWOAP
BIOL 134 The Tropics: Biology and Social Issues (Same as Environmental Studies 134) (Not
offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)*
Intended for the non-scientist, this course explores the biological dimensions of social issues in tropical
societies, and focuses specifically on the peoples and cultures of tropical regions in Africa, Asia, Latin
America, Oceanea, and the Caribbean. Tropical issues have become prominent on a global scale, and
many social issues in the tropics are inextricably bound to human ecology, evolution, and physiology. The
course begins with a survey of the tropical environment of humans, including major climatic and habitat
features. The place of the tropics in human evolution is then covered, with treatments of recent advances in
paleontology and molecular biology and their implications for human cultural diversity. The next section
focuses on human population biology, and emphasizes demography and the role of disease. The final part
of the course covers the place of human societies in local and global ecosystems including the challenges
of tropical food production, the importance of organic diversity, and the interaction of humans with their
supporting ecological environment.
Lectures: three hours a week.
Evaluation will be based on a midterm, a short paper, and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Does not count for major credit in Biology.
D. C. SMITH
Biology
­ 110 ­
BIOL 202(F) Genetics
Genetics, classically defined as the study of heredity, has evolved into a discipline whose limits are contin-
ually expanded by innovative molecular technologies. This course covers the experimental basis for our
current understanding of the inheritance, structures, and functions of genes. It introduces approaches used
by contemporary geneticists and molecular biologists to explore questions about aspects of biology rang-
ing from embryonic development to aging. The laboratory part of the course provides an experimental
introduction to modern genetic analysis. Laboratory experiments include linkage analysis, bacterial trans-
formation with plasmids, DNA restriction mapping, and computer-based cloning.
Lectures and laboratory: six hours a week.
Evaluation will be based on hour exams, a final exam, laboratory reports, and problem sets.
Prerequisites: Biology 101 and 102.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 M, T, W, R RAYMOND
BIOL 203(F) Ecology (Same as Environmental Studies 203)
This course combines lectures with field and indoor laboratory exercises to explore factors that determine
the distribution and abundance of plants and animals in natural systems. The course begins with an overall
view of global patterns and then builds from the population to the ecosystem level. An emphasis is given to
basic ecological principles and relates them to current environmental issues. Selected topics include popu-
lation dynamics (competition, predation, coevolution); community interactions (succession, food chains
and diversity) and ecosystem function (biogeochemical cycles, energy flow).
Lecture and laboratory: six hours a week.
Evaluation will be based on lab reports, hour exams, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Biology 101 and 102, or Environmental Studies 101 or 102, or permission of the depart-
ment.
Required course in the Environmental Studies Program. Satisfies distribution requirement in major.
Hour: 8:00-8:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 M, T SCHMIDT
BIOL 204 Animal Behavior (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
Making sense of what we see while watching animals closely is both an enthralling pastime and a disci-
pline that draws on many aspects of biology. Explanations can be found on many levels: evolutionary
theory tells us why certain patterns are implemented, neuroscience gives insights as to how the world ap-
pears to the behaving animal, endocrinology provides information on how suites of behaviors are regu-
lated, and genetics lets us know individuals are related. The first part of the course focuses upon how de-
scriptive studies provide the basis for formulating questions about behavior as well as the statistical meth-
ods used to evaluate the answers to these questions. We then consider the behavior of individuals, both as it
is mediated by biological mechanisms and as it appears from an evolutionary perspective. The second half
of the course is primarily concerned with the behaviors of groups of animals from a wide variety of verte-
brate and invertebrate species. We will concentrate upon the stimuli, responses, and internal mechanisms
that maintain social systems as well as the selection pressures that drive animals toward a particular social
system.
Lectures and laboratory, six hours a week.
Evaluation is based upon one research project, two lab reports, a research paper, and problems.
Prerequisite: Biology 102, or Psychology 101, or permission of the instructor.
(This course is part of the Critical Reasoning and Analytical Skills initiative.)
H. WILLIAMS
BIOL 205(S) Physiology
This course examines principles, patterns, and mechanisms of biological function from the level of cells
and tissues to the whole organism. Emphasis is placed on relationships between structure and function,
mechanisms of regulation, control and integration, and adaptation to the environment. The primary focus is
on vertebrate systems, but non-vertebrates are also considered. Laboratories provide practical experience
in measurement and experimental elucidation of physiological phenomena and functional analysis of gross
structure.
Evaluation will be based on tests, lab reports, practicals, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Biology 101 and 102.
Satisfies distribution requirement in major.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 M, T, W ZOTTOLI
BIOL 211(S) Invertebrate Paleobiology (Same as Geosciences 212)
(See under Geosciences for full description.)
Prerequisite: Biology 101, 102, or 203, or any 100-level Geosciences course.
BIOL 212(F) Introduction to Neuroscience (Same as Psychology 212 and Neuroscience 201)
A study of the relationship between brain, mind, and behavior. Topics include a survey of the structure and
function of the nervous system, neuroethology, development, learning and memory, sensory and motor
systems, language, consciousness, assessment of human brain damage, and clinical disorders such as
schizophrenia, Parkinson's Disease, and Alzheimer's Disease. The laboratory portion of the course focuses
on current topics in neuroscience.
Requirements: two hour exams, a final exam, and laboratory demonstrations.
Biology
­ 111 ­
Prerequisite: Psychology 101 or Biology 101. Open to first-year students.
Satisfies distribution requirement in major. Satisfies one semester of the Division III requirement.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR Lab: 1-4 M, T, W ADLER and P. SOLOMON
BIOL 220 Field Botany and Plant Natural History (Same as Environmental Studies 220) (Not
offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
This field-lecture course emphasizes the evolutionary and ecological relationships among important spe-
cies and plant families represented in the local and regional flora. The natural history of groups of plants
and plant family characteristics are the main topics of course lectures and workshops, while field labs con-
centrate on identifying species and investigating the habitats that they inhabit. There will be one all-day
field trip in addition to the regularly scheduled laboratory excursions.
Lectures, workshops, and field trips: six hours a week.
Evaluation will be based on hour exams, field quizzes, a field project, and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 36.
Satisfies distribution requirement in major.
J. EDWARDS
BIOL 231(F,S) Marine Ecology (Same as American Maritime Studies 311) (Offered only at
Mystic Seaport.)
(See under American Maritime Studies for full description.)
Prerequisites: Biology 101 and 102 or permission of instructor.
BIOL 301 Developmental Biology (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
A comprehensive lecture course examining the principles and mechanisms of metazoan development in
several model systems. Topics include cell differentiation, embryonic induction, cell communication, mor-
phogenesis, pattern formation, cell lineage and sex determination with an emphasis on experimental ap-
proaches.
Lectures and laboratory: six hours a week.
Evaluation will be based on hour exams, short papers, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Biology 202 or permission of instructor.
SAVAGE
BIOL 302(S) Communities and Ecosystems (Same as Environmental Studies 312)
An advanced ecology course that examines how organisms interact with each other and with abiotic fac-
tors. This course emphasizes phenomena that emerge in complex ecological systems, building on the fun-
damental concepts of population biology and ecosystem ecology. Lectures and workshops explore how
communities and ecosystems are defined, and how theoretical, comparative, and experimental approaches
are used to elucidate their structure and function. Field laboratories emphasize hypothesis-oriented experi-
ments; field trips introduce the diversity of natural communities and ecosystems in New England.
Lectures and laboratory: six hours a week.
Evaluation will be based on lab reports, a term project with presentation, a midterm paper, and a final
exam.
Prerequisite: Biology/Environmental Studies 203 or 220 or
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR Lab: 1-4 W SCHMIDT
BIOL 304(S) Neurobiology
This course is concerned with understanding the biology of the nervous system, focusing primarily on the
cellular and molecular bases of neuronal function. Formal lectures cover such topics as nerve resting and
action potentials, neurotransmitters and synapses, regulation of neuronal gene transcription and the neural
correlates of behavior in organisms with simple nervous systems. Reading original research papers and dis-
cussing them constitutes an important part of the course. Some of the topics that may be covered include:
transmitter release mechanisms, neural development and its control, plasticity in the nervous system, and
clinical disorders such as epilepsy. Laboratories are designed to introduce the students to modern tech-
niques in neurobiology such as intracellular recording, histochemistry, cell culture and calcium imaging.
Lectures and laboratories: six hoursaweek.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, lab notebooks and reports, two hour exams and a final
exam.
Prerequisites: Biology 101 and Biology 205 or Biology 212.Enrollment limited to 30.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR Lab: 1-4 T, R ADLER
BIOL 305 Evolution (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
This course offers a critical review of contemporary scholarship on evolutionary biology. Topics include
adaptation, speciation, coevolution, population genetics, and molecular evolution. Current problems, such
as cultural evolution and sociobiology, also will be discussed. Assigned readings will be drawn from cur-
rent research articles and overviews.
Discussions, lectures, and reading in the original literature: three hours a week.
Evaluation will be based on problem sets, class discussions, two exams, and four essays.
Prerequisite: Biology 202.
Satisfies distribution requirement in major.
D. C. SMITH
Biology
­ 112 ­
BIOL 306(F) Advanced Molecular Genetics
This course explores the structure and function of prokaryotic and eukaryotic genes using an integrated
genetic and molecular approach. Topics covered include DNA replication, chromatin structure, transpos-
able genetic elements. transcription, and RNA processing. Laboratory will provide experience with meth-
ods used to analyze DNA and RNA, such as Southern and Northern hybridization, polymerase chain reac-
tion, and DNA sequencing.
Lectures and laboratory: six hours a week.
Evaluation will be based on periodic exams, lab reports, and a class presentation.
Prerequisite: Biology 202.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR Lab: 1-4 T, R ALTSCHULER
BIOL 308(S) Plant Growth and Development
This course examines basic principles of plant growth and development with emphasis on how plants in-
teract with their environment. Selected topics include: light responses, hormone physiology, plant-microbe
interactions, morphogenesis, floral development, and meristem function. Laboratory activities stress mod-
ern approaches to studying plant biology including the use of genetic mutants.
Lectures and laboratory: six hours a week.
Evaluation will be based on problem sets, lab reports, hour exams and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Biology 202.
Satisfies distribution requirement in major.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 T LASKOWSKI
BIOL 309(S) Mammalian Molecular Physiology
This course is an advanced physiology course that examines mammalian organ function at the molecular
level. Important proteins and biochemical events that dictate subcellular and cellular processes will be dis-
cussed for every organ system. Material will be presented and discussed in the context of the molecular
basis of pathophysiological states of human disease. Topics will include diabetes, essential hypertension,
muscular dystrophy, and other genetic diseases. Lectures will be derived from textbook and original litera-
ture. Student-led discussions will come from the original research and literature.
Lectures and discussions: three hours a week.
Evaluation will be based on hourly exams, student-led discussions and/or term papers, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Biology 202, 205 or permission of instructor.
Satisfies distribution requirement in major.
Hour: 8:00-8:50 MWF SWOAP
BIOL 313(S) Immunology
The immune response is a defense mechanism comprised of a complex network of interacting molecules
and cells which function to recognize and respond to agents foreign to the individual. This course will
focus on the biochemical mechanisms which act at the molecular and cellular levels to regulate this pro-
cess. Textbook readings will be supplemented with current literature.
Lectures and laboratory: six hours a week.
Evaluation will be based on two hour exams, a final exam, a comprehensive lab report, and a research
paper.
Prerequisite: Biology 202.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR Lab: 1-4 W, R RAYMOND
BIOL 314 Virology (Not offered 2000-2001)
This course will consider the molecular biology of animal, plant and bacterial viruses, with the primary aim
of demonstrating how the different replication strategies of these viruses were elucidated. Other topics such
as pathogenicity, vaccine development, and viral/host coevolution will be examined. Readings from a text-
book and the primary literature will form the basis of class discussions.
Discussions: three hours a week.
Evaluation will be based on exams and short papers.
Prerequisite: Biology 313 or concurrent enrollment.
ROSEMAN
BIOL 321(F) Biochemistry I--Structure and Function of Biological Molecules (Same as
Chemistry 321 and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 321)
This course introduces the basic concepts of biochemistry with an emphasis on the structure and function
of biological macromolecules. Specifically, the structure of proteins and nucleic acids are examined in de-
tail in order to determine how their chemical properties and their biological behavior result from those
structures. Other topics covered include enzyme kinetics, mechanism of catalysis and regulation; the mo-
lecular organization of biomembranes and membrane transport; and the principles of recombinant DNA
technologies. In addition, the principles and applications of the methods used to characterize macromole-
cules in solution and the interactions between macromolecules are discussed.
The laboratory provides an opportunity to study the structure of macromolecules and to learn the funda-
Biology
­ 113 ­
mental experimental techniques of biochemistry including electrophoresis and chromatography.
Lectures: three hours a week; laboratory: four hours a week.
Evaluation will be based on two short exams, a final exam, problem sets and performance in the laborato-
ries including lab reports.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 202 and Biology 101.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-5 W L. KAPLAN
BIOL 322(S) Biochemistry II--Metabolism (Same as Chemistry 322 and Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology 322)
This course provides an in-depth discussion of the complex metabolic reactions which are central to life.
Emphasis is placed on the biological flow of energy including alternative modes of energy generation (aer-
obic, anaerobic, photosynthetic); the regulation and integration of the metabolic pathways including com-
partmentalization and the transport of metabolites; and biochemical reaction mechanisms including the
structures and mechanisms of coenzymes. This comprehensive study also includes the biosynthesis of
small molecules (carbohydrates, lipids, amino acids, and nucleotides).
Laboratory experiments introduce the principles and procedures used to study enzymatic reactions, bioen-
ergetics, and metabolic pathways.
Lectures: three hours a week; laboratory: four hours a week.
Evaluation is based on quizzes, an hour exam, a final exam, and performance in the laboratories including
lab reports.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 202 and Biology 101.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR Lab: 1-5 W, R D. LYNCH
BIOL 333 The Ecology of Biological Resources (Same as Environmental Studies 333) (Not
offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
A field and seminar course investigating the patterns and processes in human-dominated ecosystems, es-
pecially those that produce food and fiber, process wastes, or provide a context for human activities such as
recreation. Topics will include: concepts of ecosystem modeling, sustainability applicable to biological re-
source systems, agricultural systems, forestry and silvicultural practices, aquaculture, hydroponics and
greenhouse management, composting of organic materials, waste water treatment, maintenance of biodiv-
ersity, and management of game and non-game species. Field trips, taken to various biological resource
operations in the region, will serve as introductions to seminars and class discussions. Each student will
present a 75-minute seminar on an aspect of the course and write a final synthesis paper.
Field trips and seminars three hours per week.
Evaluation is based upon field trip writing assignments, seminar presentation, course participation, and
final paper.
Prerequisite: Biology 203 or Environmental Studies 203 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limited
to 12.
ART
BIOL 402T(S) Current Topics in Ecology (Same as Environmental Studies 404T)+
This tutorial will deal with current issues in ecology at the community and ecosystem levels. The first half
of the tutorial will explore facets of community ecology such as the impacts of invasions of exotic organ-
isms into native ecosystems; critical area size, fragmentation, and other biogeographic issues in conserva-
tion biology; and usual, short-distance versus unusual long-distance dispersal mechanisms for various or-
ganisms. The second half of the tutorial will concentrate on ecosystem-level issues such as maximum ver-
sus optimum harvesting rates in human-dominated biospheric processes and the global implications of
rates of change in environmental variables.
Evaluation will be based on oral presentations, class participation, and written assignments.
Prerequisite: Biology/Environmental Studies 203 or Biology 204 (Animal Behavior).
Satisfies distribution and senior requirements in major.
Hour: TBA TBA
BIOL 410 Topics in Cell, Molecular and Developmental Biology (Not offered 2000-2001; to
be offered 2001-2002)
The metazoan body plan exhibits diverse morphological traits, yet recent advances have uncovered a re-
markable number of shared developmental pathways at both the cellular and the molecular levels across
phyla. This advanced seminar focuses on current issues in metazoan development, and is designed to de-
velop methods for rapid and critical appreciation of research papers. Class discussions and readings will be
based upon articles from the primary literature.
Discussions: three hours a week
Evaluation will be based on class participation and short papers.
Prerequisites: Biology 202 and any 300 level course. Enrollment limited to 24. Open to juniors and se-
niors, with preference to seniors who have not taken a 400-level course.
SAVAGE
BIOL 411(F) Plasticity in the Nervous System
The ability to respond to environmental stimuli and to adapt to change is fundamental to all aspects of
higher cognitive function. Processes as diverse as learning and memory, the development of alternative
Biology
­ 114 ­
neuronal pathways during recovery from trauma, the acquisition of pharmacological tolerance and the rec-
ognition of olfactory cues in maternal/newborn bonding all depend upon such neuronal plasticity. This
course will consider a variety of short-term and long-term plastic phenomena in the nervous system, focus-
ing on the underlying cellular and molecular mechanisms. Specific topics may include plasticity of synap-
tic function (e.g., LTP in the hippocampus and its possible relevance to memory, cellular correlates of ha-
bituation and sensitization in Aplysia), plasticity during development (neurite outgrowth, plasticity of neu-
ronal phenotype, the acquisition of excitability) and plasticity under various pathological conditions (kin-
dling and epilepsy, drug addiction, response to injury). The class will emphasize reading and criticism of
articles in the primary literature.
Discussions: three hours a week.
Evaluation will be based on class participation and several short papers.
Prerequisites: Biology 202 and Biology 205 or Biology 212. Enrollment limited to 24. Open to juniors and
seniors, with preference to seniors who have not taken a 400-level course.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR, 11:20-12:35 TR ZOTTOLI
BIOL 412(S) Biochemical Regulatory Mechanisms
All biological systems are subject to regulation; in recent years, we have come to understand a great deal
about a wide range of regulatory systems. This course, which will explore the biochemical mechanisms by
which regulatory molecules control cellular processes, is designed to provide a synthetic view of regulato-
ry events in the living cell. Topics will include the cell cycle; regulation by the neuroendocrine system at
the molecular level, including the chemical structure of hormones, growth factors, and other regulatory
molecules, cell surface interactions, cell signaling, and mechanisms of action of regulatory molecules; and
the molecular mechanisms of cancer, with the aim of describing cancer as a derangement of normal regula-
tory events that control cell growth, division, and differentiation. Class discussions will focus on readings
in the original literature.
Discussions: three hours a week.
Evaluation will be based on class participation and short papers.
Prerequisite: Biology 202. Enrollment limited to 24. Open to juniors and seniors, with preference to seniors
who have not taken a 400-level course.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR, 11:20-12:35 TR DEWITT
BIOL 413(F) Molecular Basis of Biological Clocks
Circadian rhythms have been described in all organisms studied, including humans, a wide range of other
eukaryotes and several prokaryotes. With periods of about 24 hours, these rhythms regulate biochemical,
cellular, physiological and behavioral activities. Circadian rhythms are generated by cellular
clocks--genetically determined internal pacemakers that maintain their oscillations in the absence of envi-
ronmental cues but may be reset by periodicities in the environment, especially the light-dark cycle. Only
recently have we begun to understand how circadian rhythms are generated and controlled at the cellular
level. This course will explore the basic biochemical features of biological clocks with the aim of under-
standing their crucial role in regulating key biological parameters, such as enzyme levels, levels of hor-
mones and other regulatory molecules, and activity and sleep cycles. Class discussions will focus on read-
ings in the original literature.
Discussions: three hours a week.
Evaluation will be based on class participation and several short papers.
Prerequisite: Biology 202. Enrollment limited to 24. Open to juniors and seniors, with preference to seniors
who have not taken a 400-level course.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR, 11:20-12:35 TR DEWITT
RESEARCH AND THESIS COURSES
Individual research projects must be approved by the department. Application should be made to the de-
partment prior to spring registration.
NOTE: Senior thesis and independent study courses do not count as 300-level course requirements for the
major.
BIOL 493(F)-W031-494(S) Senior Thesis
Each student continues with a problem selected in the spring of the junior year and prepares a thesis under
the supervision of a member of the department.
BIOL 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study--Junior year
BIOL 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study--Senior year
­ 115 ­
CHEMISTRY (Div. III)
Chair, Professor DAVID P. RICHARDSON
Professors: R. CHANG*, L. KAPLAN, LOVETT*, D. RICHARDSON, THOMAN. Professor Emeritus:
MARKGRAF. Associate Professors: PEACOCK-LÓPEZ**, L. PARK. Assistant Professors: CHI-
HADE, KOEHLER, SCHOFIELD, T. SMITH, WEISS**.Senior Lecturer:A. SKINNER.
MAJOR
Through a variety of individual courses and sequential programs, the department provides an opportuni-
ty for students to explore the nature and significance of chemistry, an area of important achievement in our
quest for knowledge about ourselves and the world around us. The student is able to become aware of the
special viewpoint of chemists, the general nature of chemical investigation, some of its important results,
how these results are expressed, and something of their significance within the fields of science and in the
area of human endeavor as a whole.
A major in chemistry can be achieved in several ways, preferably beginning in the student's first year at
Williams, but also beginning in the sophomore year. Building on a foundation in general chemistry, organ-
ic chemistry, and physical chemistry, a student elects additional advanced courses to complete a major that
is consistent with his or her background in other sciences, interests, and goals. A student's program might
emphasize biochemistry, organic chemistry, or physical chemistry, with additional courses available in
analytical chemistry, inorganic chemistry, and materials science. Students considering a major in chemistry
should consult with a member of the department as early as possible in order to plan a program which best
suits their interests and abilities and which makes full use of their previous preparation.
Usually the requirements for the major are fulfilled by completing "Required Courses" and the ap-
propriate number of "Elective Courses." Starting at the 200 level, at least five of the courses taken must
have a laboratory component. In addition, the department has a number of "Independent Research
Courses" which, while they do not count toward completion of the major, provide a unique opportunity to
pursue an independent research project under the direction of a faculty member.
Required Courses
Introductory Levela
101, 102/106 (or 103-104/108) Concepts of Chemistry
Intermediate Levelb
201-202 Organic Chemistry
and either
301, 302c Physical Chemistry: Thermodynamics, Structure
and Dynamics
or
301, 310d Physical Chemistry: Thermodynamics, Enzyme
Kinetics and Reaction Mechanisms
or
306 Physical Chemistry: A Biochemical Approach
Elective Courses
Advanced Levele
303 Synthetic Organic Chemistry
304 Instrumental Methods of Analysis
305 Inorganic/Organometallic Chemistry
308 Toxicology and Cancer
310 Enzyme Kinetics and Reaction Mechanisms
311 Physical Organic Chemistry
312T Heterocyclic Chemistry
314T A Theoretical Approach to Biological Phenomena
316T Bioinorganic Chemistry
318 Materials Science: The Chemistry and Physics of Materials
321 Biochemistry I--Structure and Function of Biological Molecules
322 Biochemistry II--Metabolism
401 Quantum Chemistry and Molecular Spectroscopy
406 Topics in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
Independent Research Courses
393, 394 Junior Research and Thesis
397, 398 Independent Study, for Juniors
493-W031-494 Senior Research and Thesis
497, 498 Independent Study, for Seniors
Chemistry
­ 116 ­
aBased on an outstanding performance on the College Board Chemistry Advanced Placement Test, and
having consulted with the chair, a first-year student may gain credit toward the major for 101, 102 and
elect Chemistry 201-202 or 301, 302 directly.
bWhile the organic chemistry courses are normally elected before the physical chemistry courses, the order
may be reversed. The organic chemistry courses and the physical chemistry courses may also be elected
concurrently.
cChemistry 301 is a prerequisite for Chemistry 302. Chemistry 301, 302 are strongly recommended for
anyone considering graduate study in chemistry.
dChemistry 301, 310 are strongly recommended for anyone considering graduate study in biochemistry.
eThe Chemistry major requires either nine semester chemistry courses or eight semester chemistry courses
plus two approved courses from among the following: Biology 101, 102; Computer Science 134; Mathe-
matics 103, 104, 105; Physics 131, 132; or any courses in these departments for which the approved
courses are prerequisites. No more than two advanced-level organic courses may be counted toward
completion of the major.
Completion of any one of the advanced-level elective courses will satisfy the College requirement that a
student complete a major seminar.
For the purpose of assisting students in selecting a program consistent with their interests, the following
groupings of electives and faculty advisors are suggested. However, a case can be made for selecting
courses from the different groups.
Biochemistry: Chemistry 303, Chemistry 308, Chemistry 310, Chemistry 311, Chemistry 314T, Chem-
istry 321, Chemistry 322, Chemistry 406 (Students interested in biochemistry should consult with Mr.
Kaplan, Mr. Chihade, Mr. Lovett, or Ms. Weiss.)
Organic Chemistry: Chemistry 303, Chemistry 310, Chemistry 311, Chemistry 312T, Chemistry 313
(Students interested in organic chemistry should consult with Mr. Chihade, Mr. Markgraf, Mr. Richard-
son, or Mr. Smith.)
Physical and Inorganic Chemistry: Chemistry 304, Chemistry 305, Chemistry 313, Chemistry 314T,
Chemistry 316T, Chemistry 318, Chemistry 401 (Students interested in physical chemistry should con-
sult with Mr. Chang, Ms. Koehler, Mr. Peacock-López, or Mr. Thoman. Students interested in inorganic
chemistry should consult with Ms. Park or Mr. Schofield. Students interested in materials science should
consult with Ms. Park.)
The Chemistry major provides excellent preparation for graduate study in chemistry, biochemistry,
chemical engineering, environmental science, medicine, and the medical sciences. The major can also be
useful to those whose later professional or business careers may be related to chemical materials or pro-
cesses. While any accepted route through the major would permit a student to proceed to graduate study in
chemistry, three electives should be considered a minimum, and the particular importance of Chemistry
301, 302, 304, 305, and 321 as preparation for advanced study should be noted. In addition, at least a se-
mester of research and courses in computer science are strongly recommended.
Students with principal interests outside of the sciences may extend a secondary school foundation in
chemistry by electing a basic two-semester introductory course of a general nature or they may elect se-
mester courses designed for nonmajors. All courses in chemistry satisfy the distribution requirement.
The department is accredited by the American Chemical Society (A.C.S.), a professional body of aca-
demic, industrial, and research chemists. The A.C.S. suggests the following courses for someone consider-
ing graduate study or work in chemistry or a related area. Students completing these courses are designated
Certified A.C.S. Majors: 101, 102 (103-104), 201-202, 301, 302, 304, 305, 493-494; and at least two
courses from 303, 311, 321, 322, 401, 406.
BIOCHEMISTRY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY
Students interested in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology should consult the general statement under
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology in the Courses of Instruction.
MATERIALS SCIENCE
Students interested in Materials Science are encouraged to elect courses from the Materials Science
cluster offered jointly with the Physics Department, and should consult the information on page 229 de-
scribing this option.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN CHEMISTRY
The degree with honors in Chemistry provides students with an opportunity to undertake an indepen-
dent research project under the supervision of a faculty member, and to report on the nature of the work in
two short oral presentations and in a written thesis.
Chemistry majors who are candidates for the degree with honors take the following in addition to a
major listed above:
Chemistry 493-W31-494 Senior Research and Thesis.
The principal considerations in admitting a student to a program of independent research are mastery of
fundamental materials and skills, ability to pursue independent study successfully, and demonstrated stu-
Chemistry
­ 117 ­
dent interest and motivation. In addition, to enroll in these courses leading to a degree with honors, a stu-
dent must have a B- average in all chemistry courses or the permission of the chair. At the end of the first
semester, the department reviews the student's progress and determines whether the student is a candidate
for a degree with honors. The designation of a degree with honors in Chemistry or a degree with highest
honors in Chemistry is based primarily on a departmental evaluation of the accomplishments in these
courses and on the quality of the thesis. Completion of the research project in a satisfactory manner and
preparation of a well-written thesis usually results in a degree with honors. In cases where a student has
demonstrated unusual commitment and initiative resulting in an outstanding thesis based on original ex-
perimental results, combined with a strong record in all of his or her chemistry courses, the department
may elect to award a degree with highest honors in Chemistry.
EXCHANGE AND TRANSFER STUDENTS
Students from other institutions wishing to register for courses in chemistry involving college-level pre-
requisites should do so in person with a member of the Chemistry Department staff. Registration should
take place by appointment during the spring semester prior to the academic year in which courses are to be
taken. Students are requested to have with them transcripts of the relevant previous college work.
COURSES FOR NON-MAJORS WITH NO PREREQUISITES
CHEM 113 Chemistry and Crime: From Sherlock Holmes to Modern Forensic Science (Not
offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
In this course, designed for students who do not plan to major in the natural sciences, we use a case-ori-
ented approach to explore selected topics of forensic science. These include: (1) the scientific and techno-
logical foundation for the examination of physical, chemical, and biological items of evidence, and (2) the
scope of expert qualifications and testimony, the legal status of scientific techniques, and the admissibility
of the results in evidence. The analysis of trace evidence, including glass, soil, gunpowder residues and
bullet fragments, and inorganic and heavy metal poisons are discussed through an understanding of the
basic concepts of chemistry and analytical chemistry. Forensic toxicology and pharmacology are applied
to the analysis of alcohol, poisons, and drugs based upon the principles of organic chemistry and biochem-
istry. The characterization of blood and other body fluids necessitate an understanding of serology and
molecular genetics. The cases which stimulate the exploration of these areas include: the John and Robert
Kennedy assassinations, the Jeffrey MacDonald case (Fatal Vision), the Wayne Williams case, the deaths
of celebrities Marilyn Monroe, John Belushi, and Janis Joplin, the authenticity of the Shroud of Turin, the
Lindberg baby kidnapping, the Tylenol poisonings, and the identity of Anastasia.
An interactive laboratory program provides an appreciation of scientific experimentation in general and the
work of a crime lab in particular. It includes an analysis of evidence collected at various crime scenes and
provides an opportunity to learn forensic techniques such as chromatography (for ink, drug, and fire accel-
erant analysis), spectroscopy (for alcohol and drug analysis), and electrophoresis (for DNA fingerprinting).
Lectures: three hours a week; laboratory: four hours a week.
Evaluation is based on problem sets, and/or quizzes, hour tests, a final exam, and laboratory performance.
No prerequisites.
CHEM 115(S) AIDS: The Disease and Search for a Cure
Since the discovery of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) in 1983, modern techniques of molec-
ular biology have revealed much about its structure and life cycle. The intensity of the scientific investiga-
tion directed at HIV-1 is unprecedented in history. We now know more about this virus than perhaps any
other known pathogen. However, the early optimism concerning the prospects for an effective AIDS vac-
cine has now waned and HIV strains that are resistant to drug therapies are common. We are now more
than a decade into the AIDS pandemic and the World Health Organization estimates that there are now 59
million HIV-infected persons worldwide.
We examine the molecular biology of the HIV virus, the molecular targets of anti-HIV drugs, and the pros-
pects for a cure. We discuss the origin, epistemology and modes of transmission of HIV-1 and HIV-2, and
look at how HIV-1 interacts with the human immune system. We also discuss both old and new methods of
vaccine development and the prospects for making an effective AIDS vaccine.
This course is designed for the non-science major who does not intend to pursue a career in the natural
sciences.
Lectures: three hours a week.
Evaluation is based on problem sets, two hour tests, quizzes, and a final exam.
Hour: 12:00-12:50 MWF WEISS
CHEM 119 Chemistry for the Consumer in the Twenty-First Century (Not offered
2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
In modern life, consumers constantly make decisions about which products to support. This is done either
by actually buying products or by supporting legal measures allowing their production. With the global
impact of modern technology, our decisions as consumers and policy-makers will be more important in the
twenty-first century than ever before. How are we going to assimilate the information provided through the
media and make reasonable decisions? How was the nuclear waste problem overlooked in the 50s? Is the
answer in science, or is the "truth" in science also tainted by human ambitions?
Chemistry
­ 118 ­
We explore topics such as the use and abuse of energy, pollution, chemical communication, polymers and
other materials, drug design, cooking, metabolism, androgens and estrogens, and nitric oxide (NO). To
understand the relevance of modern chemistry in our lives, this course examines some of the fundamental
principles of physical, organic and inorganic chemistry, and their relation to biochemistry and molecular
physiology.
Besides discussing chemical principles, the course considers the impact of human decisions and behavior
in science. Is gender discrimination in the natural sciences a concern in the twenty-first century? Should we
be afraid of fraudulent experiments in modern science? What is the future of nuclear energy, of electric
cars? Overall, a good understanding of the scientific principles discussed in this course will allow consum-
ers to make better decisions in the twenty-first century.
Lectures: three hours a week.
Evaluation is based on problem sets, a midterm exam, a final paper, and a final exam.
This course is designed for students with little or no science background, who do not intend to pursue a
career in the natural sciences.
CHEM 121(F) Fighting Disease: The Evolution and Operation of Human Medicines
The past decade has seen an explosion in the number of pharmaceuticals available to doctors and their
patients. Pills are now available to treat conditions as varied as depression and baldness, and a cure for the
common cold is on the immediate horizon. A visit to the doctor now seems incomplete without a prescrip-
tion. Recent changes in Food and Drug Administration and health insurance policies have also placed a
larger burden on consumers in deciding which drugs to take, and in paying for the medication.
This course focuses on understanding, at a biochemical level, how several drugs work their curative magic
as well as how they may lead to undesired side effects. We will examine the processes through which drugs
are discovered or created and how they are then brought to consumers. Topics will range from the discov-
ery of aspirin and the effect of World War II on the discovery of cheap treatments for malaria to advances in
protease inhibitors and combination therapies which have dramatically extended the lives of AIDS pa-
tients. A major goal of the course is understanding the connections between basic research, biotechnology
companies, multinational pharmaceutical firms, patent attorneys, regulatory agencies, doctors, and insurers
which eventually lead to the availability of a given drug.
Lectures: three hours a week.
Evaluation is based on quizzes, graded problem sets, class participation, one short paper, a final paper, a
midterm, and a final exam.
This course is designed for students with little or no science background, who do not necessarily intend to
pursue a career in the natural sciences. Basic principles in organic chemistry and biochemistry will be de-
veloped as needed.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF CHIHADE
COURSES WITH PREREQUISITES
CHEM 101(F), 102(S) Concepts of Chemistry
This course provides a general introduction to chemistry for those students who are anticipating profes-
sional study in chemistry, in related sciences, or in one of the health professions, as well as for those stu-
dents who are interested in exploring the fundamental ideas of chemistry as part of their general education.
In addition to presenting an overview of chemical concepts, the course provides the foundation for the
further study of organic, physical chemistry, and biochemistry, and it gives special attention to the prin-
ciples of qualitative and quantitative analysis.
The principal topics include chemical bonding, molecular structure, stoichiometry, chemical equilibrium,
acid-base reactions, oxidation-reduction reactions, solubility equilibria, energy changes in chemical reac-
tions, rates of chemical reactions, and related applications. Laboratory work comprises a system of qualita-
tive analysis and quantitative techniques, including electrochemical and spectrophotometric measure-
ments.
Lectures: three hours a week; laboratory: four hours a week.
Evaluation is based on homework assignments, laboratory work, quizzes, one hour test, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: basic proficiency in mathematics as demonstrated in the diagnostic test administered to all
first-year students at the beginning of the academic year. In lieu of that, Chemistry 101 may be taken con-
currently with Mathematics 100(F) or 101--see under Mathematics. Chemistry 101 or its equivalent is
prerequisite to Chemistry 102.
Those students with a strong background in chemistry from high school are encouraged to consider Chem-
istry 103-104.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF Lab: 1-5 M, T, W, R; 8-12 T First Semester: THOMAN
9:00-9:50 MWF Lab: 1-5 M, T, W, R; 8-12 T Second Semester: PEACOCK-LÓPEZ
CHEM 103(F)-104(S) Concepts of Chemistry: Advanced Section
This course (loosely paralleling that of Chemistry 101, 102) provides a firm foundation in chemistry for
those students who are anticipating professional study in chemistry, in related sciences, or in one of the
health professions, as well as for those students who are interested in exploring in some depth the funda-
mental ideas of chemistry as part of their general education. This course is designed to capitalize on the
background of those students with sound preparation in secondary school chemistry and to provide maxi-
Chemistry
­ 119 ­
mum diversity and depth of coverage. The course provides the foundation for the further study of organic
and physical chemistry.
The principal topics include modern atomic theory, molecular structure, states of matter, chemical equilib-
rium, thermodynamics, kinetics and stoichiometry, and applications drawn from areas of contemporary
interest including biochemistry and the environment.
Laboratory work comprises a system of qualitative analysis and quantitative techniques, including electro-
chemical and optical measurements.
Lectures: three hours a week; laboratory: four hours a week.
Evaluation is based on homework assignments, laboratory work, hour tests, and a final exam.
Placement exam and permission of the instructor required.
Hour: 8:00-8:50 MWF Lab: 1-5 M, W First Semester: L. PARK
8:00-8:50 MWF Lab: 1-5 M, T, W, R; 8-12 T Second Semester: SCHOFIELD
SPECIAL LABORATORY SECTION FOR CONCEPTS OF CHEMISTRY
The following two courses provide an opportunity for outstanding students in Chemistry 101 and 103 to
participate in a special laboratory program while continuing their studies in Chemistry 102 and 104, re-
spectively. Students in Chemistry 106 attend the Chemistry 102 lectures and students in Chemistry 108
attend the Chemistry 104 lectures. However, the students in both 106 and 108 attend a common, special
laboratory section instead of a regular 102 or 104 laboratory section.
CHEM 106(S) Concepts of Chemistry--Special Laboratory Section
This course is a continuation of Chemistry 101 and contains the same material as Chemistry 102 except
for the laboratory program described below:
The aim of this advanced laboratory section is to enrich and enhance the laboratory experiences of moti-
vated students of recognized ability by providing a laboratory program which more closely resembles the
unpredictable nature and immediacy of true chemical research. Students synthesize, isolate, and character-
ize (using a range of modern physical and spectroscopic techniques) a family of unknown materials in a
series of related experiments constituting an integrated, semester-long investigation. A flexible format is
employed in which the students are responsible for helping to plan the course of their laboratory work
based upon discussions with the instructor of the previous week's experimental results.
Students are drawn from Chemistry 102 with placement based upon student selection and nomination by
the Chemistry 101 instructor. Participants attend their regular Chemistry 102 lecture but attend the special
laboratory section instead of a Chemistry 102 laboratory section.
Lectures: three hours a week as in 102; laboratories: four hours a week, and a weekly one-hour discussion
session.
Evaluation is based on the requirements for the Chemistry 102 lecture and performance in this special lab-
oratory section including written laboratory reports and participation in discussions. Enrollment limited
with preference given to first-year students.
Permission of the instructor is required. This course was developed under a grant from the Ford Founda-
tion.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF Lab: 1-5 M, W D. RICHARDSON and SCHOFIELD
CHEM 108(S) Concepts of Chemistry: Advanced Section--Special Laboratory Section
This course is a continuation of Chemistry 103 and contains the same material as Chemistry 104 except
for the laboratory program described below:
The aim of this advanced laboratory section is to enrich and enhance the laboratory experiences of moti-
vated students of recognized ability by providing a laboratory program which more closely resembles the
unpredictable nature and immediacy of true chemical research. Students synthesize, isolate, and character-
ize (using a range of modern physical and spectroscopic techniques) a family of unknown materials in a
series of related experiments constituting an integrated, semester-long investigation. A flexible format is
employed in which the students are responsible for helping to plan the course of their laboratory work
based upon discussions with the instructor of the previous week's experimental results.
Students are drawn from Chemistry 104 with placement based upon student selection and nomination by
the Chemistry 103 instructor. Participants attend their regular Chemistry 104 lecture but attend the special
laboratory section instead of a Chemistry 104 laboratory section.
Lectures: three hours a week as in 104; laboratories: four hours a week, and a weekly one hour discussion
session.
Evaluation is based on the requirements for the Chemistry 104 lecture and performance in this special lab-
oratory section including written laboratory reports and participation in discussions. Enrollment limited
with preference given to first-year students. This course was developed under a grant from the Ford
Foundation.
Permission of the instructor is required.
Hour: 8:00-8:50 MWF Lab: 1-5 M, W D. RICHARDSON and SCHOFIELD
CHEM 201(F)-202(S) Organic Chemistry
This course provides the necessary background in organic chemistry for students who are planning ad-
vanced study or a career in chemistry, the biological sciences, or the health professions. It comprises the
systematic study of the common classes of organic compounds with emphasis on theories of structure and
Chemistry
­ 120 ­
reactivity. The coordinated laboratory work includes organic synthesis, structure-reactivity studies, and the
identification of unknown compounds.
Lectures: three hours a week; laboratory: four hours a week.
Evaluation is based on three hour exams, problem sets, laboratory performance, including written lab re-
ports, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 101, 102/106 (103-104/108) or placement exam or permission of instructor.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-5 M, T, W, R; 8-12 T First Semester: D. RICHARDSON
10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-5 M, T, W, R; 8-12 T Second Semester: T. SMITH
CHEM 301, 302, and 306 Physical Chemistry
The following three courses provide a thorough introduction to physical chemistry. Students who wish to
explore the physical aspects of chemistry in greater depth than provided by 306 are urged to consider 301,
302. This pattern of course elections is particularly appropriate for those students who have taken Chemis-
try 103-104/108.
The focus of thermodynamics in 301 makes this course of special interest to students considering careers in
biochemistry, biology, geology, engineering, and physics. First-year students, sophomores, and other stu-
dents not meeting the formal prerequisites listed below, but who possess thebasicskillsprovided bythose
courses, may register for 301 with the instructor's approval.
CHEM 301(F) Physical Chemistry: Thermodynamics
The thermodynamic laws provide us with our most powerful and general scientific principles for predict-
ing the direction of spontaneous change in physical, chemical, and biological systems. This course devel-
ops the concepts of energy, entropy, free energy, temperature (and absolute zero), heat, work, and chemical
potential within the framework of classical thermodynamics. The principles developed are applied to a
variety of problems: chemical reactions, phase changes, energy technology, and environmental science.
Laboratory experiments provide quantitative and practical demonstrations of the theory of real and ideal
systems studied in class.
Lectures: three hours a week; laboratory: four hours a week.
Evaluation is based on problem sets, laboratory work, two hour tests, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 101, 102/106 (103-104/108), a basic knowledge of applied integral and differen-
tial calculus such as provided by Mathematics 104, 105, and some basic mechanics such as provided by
Physics 131 or 141.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR Lab: 1-5 M, W KOEHLER
CHEM 302(S) Physical Chemistry: Structure and Dynamics
This course integrates a number of physical chemistry topics. An introduction to quantum mechanics pro-
vides students with the basis for understanding molecular structure. Statistical mechanics is then used to
demonstrate the formal and quantitative link between the properties of single molecules and the thermody-
namic and kinetic behavior of macroscopic collections of molecules. Rate laws, enzyme kinetics, and
transport properties are discussed. Applications of these principles are chosen from a variety of areas, in-
cluding polymer chemistry, biochemistry, photochemistry, and solid and liquid state chemistry. Quantita-
tive laboratory experiments and consultation with the scientific literature provide the background neces-
sary for carrying out an independent theoretical or experimental project.
Lectures: three hours a week; laboratory: four hours a week.
Evaluation is based on problem sets, laboratory work, two hour tests, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Chemistry 301.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR Lab: 1-5 W THOMAN
CHEM 303(F) Synthetic Organic Chemistry
The origins of organic chemistry are in the chemistry of living things and the emphasis of this course is on
the chemistry of naturally-occurring compounds. This course presents the logic and practice of chemical
total synthesis while stressing the structures, properties and preparations of terpenes, polyketides and alka-
loids. Modern synthetic reactions are surveyed with an emphasis on the stereochemical and mechanistic
themes that underlie them. To meet the requirements for the semester's term paper, each student chooses an
article from the recent synthetic literature and then analyzes the logic and strategy involved in the published
work. Laboratory sessions introduce students to techniques for synthesis and purification of natural prod-
ucts and their synthetic precursors.
Lectures: three hours a week; laboratory: four hours a week.
Evaluation is based on problem sets, hour exams, laboratory work, a term paper, a final exam, and class
participation.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 201-202.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF Lab: 1-5 M T. SMITH
CHEM 304(S) Instrumental Methods of Analysis (Same as Environmental Studies 304)
This course provides the student an understanding of the applicability of current laboratory instrumentation
both to the elucidation of fundamental chemical phenomena and to the measurement of certain atomic and
molecular parameters. Experimental methods, including absorption and emission spectroscopy in the x-
ray, ultraviolet, visible, infrared, microwave, and radio frequency regions, chromatography, electrochemis-
try, mass spectrometry, magnetic resonance, and thermal methods are discussed, with examples drawn
Chemistry
­ 121 ­
from the current literature. The analytical chemical techniques developed in this course are useful in a wide
variety of scientific areas. The course also covers new developments in instrumental methods and ad-
vances in the approaches used to address modern analytical questions.
Lectures: three hours a week; laboratory: four hours a week.
Evaluation is based on problem sets, laboratory work, two hour tests, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 201-202.
Hour: 7:00-9:30 p.m. T Lab: 1-5 R L. PARK
CHEM 305(F) Inorganic/Organometallic Chemistry
This course is designed for the student interested in the fundamentals of inorganic and organometallic
chemistry. It begins with a review of bonding theory, with an introduction to the symmetry-based approach
to molecular orbitals. Next, transition-metal coordination and organometallic compounds are examined,
focusing on bonding, reaction mechanisms and spectroscopy; applications of these compounds in catalytic
processes and organic synthesis are discussed. Some discussion of main-group chemistry and complexes is
also included. Laboratory work includes the synthesis and spectroscopic characterization of a variety of
inorganic materials, and will incorporate techniques involved in the preparation and handling of air-sensi-
tive compounds.
Lectures: three hours a week; laboratory: four hours a week.
Evaluation is based on problem sets, laboratory work, two hour exams, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 201-202 or 301, 302.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR Lab: 1-5 T SCHOFIELD
CHEM 306(S) Physical Chemistry: A Biochemical Approach
This course is designed to introduce the principles of physical chemistry to students primarily interested in
the biochemical, biological, or medical professions. Topics of physical chemistry are presented from the
viewpoint of their applications to biochemical problems. Included are discussions of thermodynamics and
biochemical energetics, properties of solutions and electrolytes, electrochemical cells and biological oxida-
tion-reduction systems, chemical kinetics, and enzyme action.
Lectures: three hours a week; laboratory: four hours a week.
Evaluation is based on problem sets, laboratory work, two hour tests, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 101, 102/106 (103-104/108), and Mathematics 104 or equivalent.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR Lab: 1-5 T L. KAPLAN
CHEM 308(S) Toxicology and Cancer (Same as Environmental Studies 328)
What is a poison and what makes it poisonous? Paracelcus commented in 1537: "What is not a poison? All
things are poisons (and nothing is without poison). The dose alone keeps a thing from being a poison." Is
the picture really this bleak; is modern technology-based society truly swimming in a sea of toxic materi-
als? How are the nature and severity of toxicity established, measured and expressed? Do all toxic materi-
als exert their effect in the same manner, or can materials be poisonous in a variety of different ways? Are
the safety levels set by regulatory agencies low enough for a range of common toxic materials, such as
mercury, lead, and certain pesticides? How are poisons metabolized and how do they lead to the develop-
ment of cancer? What is cancer and what does it take to cause it? What biochemical defense mechanisms
exist to counteract the effects of poisons?
This course attempts to answer these questions by surveying the fundamentals of modern chemical tox-
icology and the induction and progression of cancer. Topics will range from description and quantitation of
the toxic response, including risk assessment, to the basic mechanisms underlying toxicity, mutagenesis,
carcinogenesis and DNA repair. A basic understanding of organic chemistry will be required.
Lectures: three hours a week; discussion session: one hour a week.
Evaluation is based on two hour tests, a class presentation and paper, participation in discussion sessions,
and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Chemistry 201.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF D. RICHARDSON
CHEM 310(S) Enzyme Kinetics and Reaction Mechanisms
Enzymes are complex biological molecules capable of catalyzing chemical reactions with very high effi-
ciency, stereo-selectivity and specificity. The study of enzymatically-catalyzed reactions gives insight into
the study of organic reaction mechanisms in general, and into the topic of catalysis especially. This course
explores the methods and frameworks for determining mechanisms of enzymatic reactions. These meth-
ods are based on a firm foundation of chemical kinetics and organic reaction mechanisms. The first half of
the course is devoted to enzyme kinetics and catalysis including discussions of transition state theory, struc-
ture-reactivity relationships, Michaelis-Menten parameters, pH-dependence of catalysis, and methods for
measuring rate constants. As the course progresses, the concepts of mechanism and its elucidation is ap-
plied to enzymatic processes as we discuss reaction intermediates and stereochemistry of enzymatic reac-
tions. In the latter part of the course, the use of altered reactants, including mechanism-based inactivators, is
compared to the use of genetically modified enzymes as tools for probing enzymatic reactions.
Lectures: three hours a week.
Evaluation is based on problem sets, quizzes, a midterm exam, a paper, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Chemistry 201-202.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF CHIHADE
Chemistry
­ 122 ­
CHEM 311 Physical Organic Chemistry (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
This course extends the background derived from previous courses to the understanding of organic reac-
tion mechanisms. Correlations between structure and reactivity are examined in terms of kinetic and ther-
modynamic parameters including solvent effects, isotope effects, stereochemical specificity, linear free en-
ergy relationships, acid/base theory, delocalized bonding, and aromaticity. Solvolysis reactions, pericyclic
reactions, and molecular and cationic rearrangements are treated in detail.
Lectures: three hours a week; laboratory: four hours a week.
Evaluation is based on problem sets, two hour tests, laboratory work, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 201-202.
CHEM 312T Heterocyclic Chemistry (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
The organic chemistry of heterocyclic compounds containing N, O, and/or S atoms is presented. The prin-
cipal topics include the preparation, physical properties, and reactivity of five- and six-membered ring sys-
tems. Total syntheses of natural products containing heterocyclic units are discussed.
The instructor sets the topic for the weekly meetings. All students are responsible for the readings and
problem sets, which are based on research journals, monographs, and advanced-level textbooks. Two stu-
dents give forty-five-minute oral presentations; the other students are responsible for queries, amplifica-
tion, and problem sets. Additional problems are solved at the blackboard.
Evaluation is based on quality of presentations, class participation, problem sets, and a term paper on the
total synthesis of a complex natural product. There are no written exams.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 201-202.
CHEM 314T A Theoretical Approach to Biological Phenomena (Not offered 2000-2001; to be
offered 2001-2002)
This course focuses on the application of physicochemical theoretical methods to biophysical and
biochemical systems. The basis of the classical theoretical models, as well as new theoretical approaches to
biological phenomena are discussed. The predictions of these theoretical models are compared to the re-
sults obtained by experiment. The topics include a thermodynamic approach to biochemical reactions and
bioenergetics; receptor-mediated endocytosis; nonequilibrium kinetics of concentrated enzyme solutions;
analysis of the differences between direct transfer and diffusional transfer of metabolites; and mathematical
immunology, with an emphasis on the complement system.
After an initial meeting of all students, groups of two students meet with the instructor weekly for fifty
minutes where one student gives an oral presentation. Both students are responsible for readings and writ-
ten solutions to assigned problems based on advanced-level textbooks, review articles, and research jour-
nals. The last week is devoted to the presentation of final projects.
Evaluation is based on the quality of presentations, class participation, written essays, solutions to prob-
lems, and an oral final exam.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 301 or 306 and a basic knowledge of applied mathematics as provided by Mathe-
matics 210 and 211 and permission of the instructor.
CHEM 316T(S) Bioinorganic Chemistry
The inorganic chemistry of transition metals and the unique role they play in biology and medicine are
presented. Course material first provides an overview of inorganic coordination chemistry, including topics
of structure and bonding, spectroscopic methods, kinetics and reaction mechanisms. Building from this
basis, topics of current research interest are explored, including oxygen transport and activation, coenzyme
B12-dependent reactions, electron-transfer proteins, metal-mediated gene expression, and the chemothera-
peutic and diagnostic uses of metal complexes.
The instructor sets a reading list and problem set for each meeting to be drawn from advanced mono-
graphs, review articles and current research journals. One student is expected to prepare and deliver an oral
presentation of the material, while the other student questions the speaker and details solutions to the prob-
lem set. Additional material--provided and discussed in class--serves as the basis for further elaboration
of each topic.
Evaluation is based on the quality of presentations, class participation, problem sets, and a term paper on a
current topic in bioinorganic research.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 202 and Biology 101. Enrollment limited to 4.
Hour: 7:00-9:30 p.m. T SCHOFIELD
CHEM 318 Materials Science: The Chemistry and Physics of Materials (Same as Physics 318)
(Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
Materials Science is a broad study of the physical properties of substances, such as hardness, elasticity,
electrical conductivity, and optical properties. This course investigates the relationship between microscop-
ic structure and macroscopic properties of polymers (plastics, elastomers, liquid crystals), electronic mate-
rials (semiconductors, conducting polymers, and superconductors) and solids (metals, magnets, ceramics,
minerals, and glasses). We approach these topics from both physical and chemical perspectives, reflecting
the interdisciplinary nature of the field. For instance, we explore how the underlying structure of materials
arises from quantum mechanics and how temperature determines collective response properties such as
elasticity or conductivity. This course also studies the design of new materials and their synthesis at the
molecular level.
Chemistry
­ 123 ­
Lectures: three hours a week.
Evaluation is based on weekly problem sets, reviews of research articles, one hour exam, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: one year of introductory Chemistry (101,102 or 103-104), one year of introductory Physics
(131,132 or 141,142), and one 200-level course in either Chemistry or Physics; or permission of instruc-
tors.
CHEM 321(F) Biochemistry I--Structure and Function of Biological Molecules (Same as
Biology 321 and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 321)
This course introduces the basic concepts of biochemistry with an emphasis on the structure and function
of biological macromolecules. Specifically, the structures of proteins and nucleic acids are examined in
detail in order to determine how their chemical properties and their biological behavior result from those
structures. Other topics include enzyme kinetics, mechanism of catalysis and regulation; the molecular or-
ganization and expression of prokaryotic and eukaryotic genes; and the principles of recombinant DNA
technologies. In addition, the principles and applications of the methods used to characterize macromole-
cules in solution and the interactions between macromolecules are discussed.
The laboratory provides an opportunity to study the structure of macromolecules and to learn the funda-
mental experimental techniques of biochemistry including electrophoresis and chromatography.
Lectures: three hours a week; laboratory: four hours a week.
Evaluation is based on two short exams, a final exam, problem sets, and performance in the laboratories
including lab reports.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 202 and Biology 101.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-5 W L. KAPLAN
CHEM 322(S) Biochemistry II--Metabolism (Same as Biology 322 and Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology 322)
This course provides an in-depth discussion of the complex metabolic reactions which are central to life.
Emphasis is placed on the biological flow of energy including alternative modes of energy generation (aer-
obic, anaerobic, photosynthetic); the regulation and integration of the metabolic pathways including com-
partmentalization and the transport of metabolites; and biochemical reaction mechanisms including the
structures and mechanisms of coenzymes. This comprehensive study also includes the biosynthesis of
small molecules (carbohydrates, lipids, amino acids, and nucleotides).
Laboratory experiments introduce the principles and procedures used to study enzymatic reactions, bioen-
ergetics, and metabolic pathways.
Lectures: three hours a week; laboratory: four hours a week.
Evaluation is based on quizzes, an hour exam, a final exam, and performance in the laboratories including
lab reports.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 202 and Biology 101.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR Lab: 1-5 W, R D. LYNCH
CHEM 401(F) Quantum Chemistry and Molecular Spectroscopy
This course provides an introduction to the basic principles of quantum mechanics and their application to
problems of chemical interest such as chemical bonding, chemical reactivity, and molecular spectroscopy.
Emphasis is placed upon developing an understanding of the quantum mechanical basis for classical
chemical concepts and introducing students to current research applications. The laboratory provides an
opportunity to utilize quantum mechanics in the interpretation of optical and magnetic resonance spectros-
copy measured on the modern instruments available in the department. Several seminar sessionsgive the
student direct experience with computational techniques inmodern quantumchemistry. Computerexperi-
ence is desirable.
Lectures: three hours a week; laboratory: four hours a week.
Evaluation is based on problem sets, laboratory work, an hour test, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 301, 302 or equivalent background in physics.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF Lab: 1-5 R KOEHLER
CHEM 406(S) Topics in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
This course involves a critical reading, analysis, and discussion of papers from the current biochemistry
and molecular biology literature. Specific topics vary from year to year but are chosen to illustrate the im-
portance of a wide range of both biological and chemical approaches to addressing important questions in
the biochemical and molecular biological fields.
Lecture and discussion: three hours a week.
Evaluation is based on class discussions and presentations, several short papers, and a final paper.
Prerequisites: BIMO 321 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limited to 12. Preference given to seniors.
Hour: TBA WEISS
RESEARCH AND THESIS COURSES
CHEM 393(F), 394(S) Junior Research and Thesis
Chemistry, Classics
­ 124 ­
CHEM 493(F)-W031-494(S) Senior Research and Thesis
Individual research projects in a field of interest to the student are carried out under the direction of a facul-
ty member and culminate in a thesis. Students in this program are strongly encouraged to keep 1:10 p.m. to
2:25 p.m. on Friday free for departmental colloquia.
CHEM 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study, for Juniors
CHEM 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study, for Seniors
Individual research projects in a field of interest to the student are carried out under the direction of a facul-
ty member.
CLASSICS (Div. I)
Chair, Professor MEREDITH C. HOPPIN
Professors: FUQUA, HOPPIN. Harry C. Payne Visiting Professor of Liberal Arts: PORTER. Associate
Professor: CHRISTENSEN. Assistant Professors: KRAUS, PANOUSSI.
The course offerings in Classics enable students to explore the ancient Greek, Roman, and Greco-Ro-
man worlds from various perspectives: art, archaeology, philosophy, religion, and especially literature and
history. Courses are of two types: language (Greek and Latin) and translation (Classical Civilization). The
100-level language courses are intensive introductions to Greek and Latin grammar; the 200-level lan-
guage courses combine comprehensive grammar review with readings from Greek or Latin texts of pivotal
historical periods; the 400-level language courses explore in depth selected authors or topics and the meth-
ods of analysis appropriate to each of them. Courses in which texts are read in translation provide both
introductory surveys and opportunities for more specialized study of the ancient Greco-Roman world from
earliest historical times through late antiquity.
MAJOR
Majors and prospective majors are encouraged to consult with the department's faculty to ensure a well-
balanced and comprehensive selection of Classics courses appropriate to their individual interests. A
course or courses in ancient history are strongly recommended. Majors may also benefit from advice on
courses offered in other departments which would complement their particular interests in Classics. A
reading knowledge of French, German, and Italian is useful for any study in Classics and is required in at
least two of these modern languages by graduate programs in classics, ancient history, classical art and
archaeology, and medieval studies.
The department offers two routes to the major: Classics and Classical Civilization.
Classics: (1) Six courses in Greek and/or Latin, with at least two 400-level courses in one language; (2)
Three additional courses, elected from the offerings in Greek, Latin, or Classical Civilization or from ap-
proved courses in other departments.
Classical Civilization:(1) Either Classics 101 or 102, and either Classics 222 or 223; (2) Three addition-
al courses from the offerings in Classical Civilization or from approved courses in other departments. (3)
Three courses in Greek or Latin with at least one at the 400 level, or four courses in one language at any
level. (4) A senior independent study is normally required to complete the Classical Civilization major.
Several of the courses elected, including the independent study, should relate to each other in such a way as
to reflect a concentration on a particular genre, period, or problem of Greek and Roman civilization, in-
cluding topics in ancient art and archaeology, religion in the Greco-Roman world, and ancient philosophy.
In addition to the courses in Classical Civilization, appropriate courses from other departments or from
approved study abroad programs may be elected for the major. Examples of such courses, which may vary
from year to year, are ArtH 412 (Monsters and Narrative: Greek Architectural Sculpture), Political Sci-
ence/Philosophy 231 (Ancient Political Thought), and appropriate courses at the Intercollegiate Center for
Classical Studies in Rome or at another approved overseas program.
Senior Colloquium: In lieu of a semester-long major seminar, majors will participate in the Senior
Colloquium, a student-faculty discussion group that meets twice each semester during the senior year. The
meetings focus on critical readings in Classics, often in conjunction with a guest lecturer's visit.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN CLASSICS
Students who wish to be considered for the degree with honors will normally present a thesis or pursue
appropriate independent study in the fall and winter study of their senior year. This thesis or independent
study offers students an opportunity to work in depth on a topic of their choosing and to apply and develop
the techniques and critical methods with which they have become acquainted during their regular course
work. It may also include relevant work with members of other departments. In order to write a thesis,
students normally must have a minimum GPA of 3.3 in their major courses and must submit a thesis pro-
posal before the end of the spring semester of their junior year that earns departmental approval. To be
awarded the degree with honors in Classics, the student is required to have taken a minimum of ten semes-
ter courses in the department (not including the thesis or independent study) and to have demonstrated
original or superior ability in studies in the field both through course work and through the thesis or equiva-
lent independent study.
Classics
­ 125 ­
COURSE NUMBERING SYSTEM
Language Courses: The numbering of these courses through the 200 level reflects the prerequisites in-
volved; the only prerequisite for any 400-level course is Greek 202 or Latin 202, or equivalent language
preparation. The numbering of the 400-level courses partially reflects the order in which they are offered
over a two-year period for Greek and a three-year period for Latin. It also indicates a good order in which
to take the 400-level courses but not an essential order, and individual students may enter the sequence at
any point. While not every student will take every course, the rotation of 400-level courses is arranged to
permit exposure, in a three- to four-year period, to most of the important periods and genres of classical
studies.
Classical Civilization Courses: The numbering of these courses often suggests a recommended but
rarely necessary sequence of study within a given area of classical studies. Most of the translation courses
do not assume prior experience in Classics or a cross-listed field.
CLASSICAL CIVILIZATION
CLAS 101(F) Greek Literature (Same as Literary Studies 107)
A span of nearly four centuries--from the mid-eighth to the early-fourth century B.C.E.--is the chrono-
logical backdrop for most of this survey of archaic and classical Greek literature in translation, but we will
also read still older non-Greek texts like the epic Gilgamesh, in order to gain insight into ancient Greek
culture's unique situation between what would later be termed "Europe" and the "Near East." This course
will consider in depth Homer's Iliad and Odyssey and selections from the Greek lyric poets; these readings
from the archaic period will establish a sense of the fundamental values that continued to shape Greek
culture through the classical period. The second half of the course will concentrate on works produced in
fifth century Athens: tragedies by Aeschylus, Sophocles and Euripides and comedies by Aristophanes. In a
short coda, we will read selections from the early dialogues of Plato and consider how, at the end of the
classical period, Greeks still wrestled with many of the same ambiguities and difficulties that had marked
their earliest literature and that would continue to mark much subsequent Western thought.
Format: lecture/discussion.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short essays, and a final exam.
No prerequisities. Enrollment limited to 25 students in each section; preference will be given to first-year
students and sophomores. Juniors and seniors may be enrolled only with permission of the instructor.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF, 11:00-11:50 MWF FUQUA
CLAS 102(S) Roman Literature (Same as Literary Studies 108)
Modern fascination with the ancient Romans may be due in no small measure to modern assumptions
about the enduring influence of their civilization on our own. The very real continuities between our distant
cultures are certainly due in large part to the enormous impact of Roman on European literature. Yet conti-
nuity is counterbalanced by significant cultural differences that are often overlooked in representations of
ancient Rome in today's literature, film, and television. We will read a variety of Roman literary works in
translation --epic, satire, lyric poetry, oratory, philosophy, historiography, and drama--with an aim to both
appreciating them as literature and gaining a deeper understanding of Roman culture and society. Since a
number of Roman authors were also important figures in Roman political life, we are in an unusually good
position to analyze how Roman literature delineates and deploys cultural ideals, power structures, class
hierarchies, political ideology, religious beliefs, categories of sex, gender and difference, and the relation-
ship between the individual and the state. Readings from Plautus, Terence, Lucretius, Cicero, Caesar, Ca-
tullus, Vergil, Horace, Ovid, Seneca, Tacitus, Suetonius, and Apuleius will be supplemented by critical
essays and by movies (e.g., A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum, Gladiator).
Format: lecture/discussion.
Evaluation will be based on classroom participation, one or two short essays, and midterm and final exams.
No prerequisities. Open to first-year students.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR PANOUSSI
CLAS 103 Greek and Roman Drama (Same as Literary Studies 223 and Theatre 311) (Not
offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
Greek tragedy and Greek "Old Comedy" were multimedia forms of art invented in sixth- and fifth-century
Athens, where tragic and comic performances played a vital part in civic life and popular discourse. In the
first half of this course, we will consider selected plays by the fifth-century tragedians Aeschylus, So-
phocles, and Euripides and by the comic playwright Aristophanes. In the second half, our focus will shift to
plays which, while their existence is unimaginable without their fifth-century precursors, take very differ-
ent forms and were conceived for very different audiences. We will read selected plays by Menander (the
fourth-century Athenian playwright of bourgeois "New Comedy"), Plautus and Terence (comic play-
wrights of second-century Republican Rome), and Seneca (the highly rhetorical tragedian of first-century
imperial Rome). The chronological nature of this survey will facilitate our considering the plays from sev-
eral related perspectives: the political and social situations in and for which they were first produced; devel-
opments in the theatre and in various aspects of staging and performance; and changes in the formal struc-
ture of tragedies and comedies. We will be chiefly concerned, however, with questions concerning tensions
between public and private, gender roles, vengeance, and problems of representation especially relevant to
theatrical productions.
Classics
­ 126 ­
Evaluation will be based on classroom participation, two 5-page papers, and a final exam. Students regis-
tering for Theatre 311 must also do additional reading and a project which will culminate in performances
for the entire class. (Consult the instructor for further details.)
PORTER
CLAS 201(F) Reading the Hebrew Bible (Same as Literary Studies 219 and Religion 201)
The Hebrew Bible, or TaNaKh, serves to various degrees as a formative document in Judaism, Christianity
and Islam, and it has been an immensely rich source for over two thousand years of artistic and literary
creativity. This course seeks to broaden students' knowledge of the basic components of the TaNaKh--of
the narrative, legal, prophetic and wisdom texts that comprise it--while addressing the broader question of
how we might read the Hebrew Bible in the contemporary world. As students increase their knowledge of
the Hebrew Scripture's contents, they will confront and evaluate diverse ways of reading this text, includ-
ing historical, rhetorical, literary and feminist approaches, as well as other methods employed in such var-
ied fields as archaeology, theology, history of religions, and folklore studies. All readings are in translation.
Format: lecture/discussion.
Evaluation will be based on classroom preparation and participation, a midterm, a 2- to 3-page paper, a 5-
to 7-page paper and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Open to first-year students.
This course normally does not count toward the major in Classics.
(This course is part of the Jewish Studies cluster.)
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR KRAUS
CLAS 203(F) Introduction to Judaism (Same as Religion 203)
(See under Religion for full description.)
This course normally does not count toward the major in Classics.
CLAS 207(S) Biblical Interpretation in Classical Antiquity (Same as Religion 207)
In exploring the ways various biblical, Jewish, Christian, and pagan communities in the past interpreted the
Bible, we will investigate both how a given community influenced an understanding of the Bible and how
the Bible influenced the understanding of that community. We will also give attention to the technology of
interpretation, that is, the various methods employed by biblical exegetes. Among the texts, interpreters,
and technologies we will consider: "inner biblical interpretation"; canonization; translation (the Septuagint,
Targum); paraphrase (Philo, Josephus, Pseudo-Philo, Pirke d'rabbi Eliezar, Jubilees); typology and allego-
ry (New Testament, Dead Sea Scrolls; Philo, Clement, Origen); "gapping" (Apocryphal Old Testament
and New Testament, Midrash); pagan views of the Bible (Porphyry and Julian). While the course ex-
amines interpretations of the Old and New Testaments, the term "Bible" is used precisely because the con-
tents of the Bible differed depending on the community.
Format: lecture/discussion. In addition, students will meet in pairs outside of class about once each week to
discuss, analyze and answer questions about the readings. By using this traditional method of Jewish learn-
ing called Chevruta, students will both enact one of the practices they will be learning about and help one
another gain insight into the materials being studied.
Evaluation will be based on classroom participation, a term paper, and midterm and final exams.
No prerequisites. Open to all classes.
(This course is part of the Jewish Studies cluster.)
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF KRAUS
CLAS 208 The Hellenistic World and the Emergence of Rabbinic Judaism (Same as Religion
208) (Not offered 2000-2001)
During the period from the conquest of Asia by Alexander the Great in the late fourth century B.C.E. to the
extension of Roman citizenship by the Severan Emperors about 500 years later in 212 C.E., biblical Juda-
ism was transformed into rabbinic Judaism, whose evolution continues to this day. The context of this piv-
otal development was the Greek and Roman world of the ancient Near East. The resulting contacts be-
tween Jews, Greeks, and Romans led to two major political events in Jewish history--the restoration of
Jewish sovereignty under the Hasmoneans, and the subsequent loss of this sovereignty, including the
eventual destruction of the Temple in Jerusalem, under the Romans. At the same time, the fundamental
institutions of rabbinic Judaism emerged: the Written and Oral Law, the synagogue, and the rabbis them-
selves. Starting from the assumption that this Classical setting had a profound impact on these develop-
ments, this course seeks to understand the relationship between Judaism and its Greek and Roman context.
In particular it will focus on two overarching questions: How did the Classical world and Judaism react to
each other? How did the Classical world and Judaism influence each other? Specific topics to be explored
include the Maccabean revolt, Alexandrian Judaism, anti-Judaism, the philosopher/sage, the destruction of
the Second Temple, the Bar Kochba revolt, and the origin of the Mishnah.
Classes will be primarily lecture.
Evaluation based on a midterm, a 5- to 10-page paper, and a final exam.
No prerequisites.
(This course is part of the Jewish Studies cluster.)
KRAUS
Classics
­ 127 ­
CLAS 209(F) The Religious Landscape of the Roman Mediterranean (Same as Religion
209)
(See under Religion for full description.)
CLAS 213 Greek Art and Myth (Same as ArtH 213) (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered
2002-2003)
(See under Art for full description.)
CLAS 216(S) Body of Evidence: Greek Sculpture and the Human Figure (Same as ArtH 216)
(See under Art for full description.)
CLAS 221(F) Greek Philosophy (Same as Philosophy 221)
(See under Philosophy for full description.)
CLAS 222(S) (formerly 216) Greek History (Same as History 222)
(See under History for full description.)
CLAS 223 (formerly 218) Roman History (Same as History 223) (Not offered 2000-2001)
(See under History for full description.)
CLAS 239(F) Women in Greece and Rome (Same as History 322)
As the product of a patriarchal society, Greco-Roman culture privileged the male in political, religious, and
social life. Yet women played a far from insignificant role in all aspects of human endeavor, public and
private, as is amply attested in our literary, historical, documentary, and artistic sources. Despite the wealth
of ancient material, the voice of women eludes us, since our evidence is almost entirely created by their
male counterparts. In this course, we will take up the challenge of recovering the voice of women in an-
cient Greece and Rome. We will examine the discrepancy between the cultural ideal constructed for
women in literature and the reality of their lives as it emerges from the historical evidence. We will investi-
gate how the cultural categories of male and female were delineated and deployed in various social, politi-
cal, and literary contexts. In so doing, we will concentrate on primary sources (literary, artistic, documenta-
ry) and will explore strategies to overcome their limitations. At the same time, we will read selected works
on feminist theory, anthropology, and sociology, in an effort to achieve a better understanding of contem-
porary issues in women's studies, as the societies of Greece and Rome are often considered to provide the
origin of present Western attitudes toward women. Specific topics covered will include sexual stereotypes
and ideals, power-relations of gender, the ancient family, social and economic status, social and political
history, women's role in religion and cult, visual art, medical theory, homosexuality and pederasty.
Classes format: lecture/discussion.
Evaluation will be based on contributions to class discussion, three short papers, and a final take-home
exam.
No prerequisites. Open to first-year students.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR PANOUSSI
CLAS 274 Women's Religious Experiences in the Ancient Mediterranean World (Same as
Religion 274) (Not offered 2000-2001)
(See under Religion for full description.)
CLAS 280(F) Myth (Same as Anthropology 280 and EXPR 280)
What are the stories that we human beings tell ourselves? Why do we tell them and what is accomplished
in the telling? What is the relationship between storytellers and their audience? What are the politics of
making some stories "official" and others forbidden or subversive? These are some of the questions that
this interdisciplinary course will address through a critical reading of myths, legends, narratives and stories
from ancient Greek sources, the Hebrew Bible, the Christian New Testament, and a broad selection of
traditional societies across time and space. Among the types of story to be considered: origins stories and
other charter myths, trickster myths, hero myths, theological myths, apocalyptic myths, and various myths
of transformation (e.g., myths of resurrection). While attending to the points of contact between myths of
different societies that make comparison of them possible, we will also examine how in structure and func-
tion the myths we study are embedded in their own unique society or culture.
Format: lecture/discussion.
Evaluation will be based on classroom preparation and participation, two short papers, and a performance
exercise.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 30. Open to first-year students.
Satisfies one semester of Division I requirement.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR HOPPIN and JUST
GREEK
CLGR 101(F)-102(S) Introduction to Greek
This full-year, intensive course presents the fundamentals of Greek grammar, syntax, and vocabulary and
introduces students, in the second semester, to works of the classical period (usually by Xenophon and
Euripides).
This course is designed for students who are beginning Greek or have studied less than two years of Greek
Classics
­ 128 ­
in secondary school. Credit is granted for the first semester only if the second semester is taken as well.
Students with some previous experience in Greek may want to enroll in CLGR 102 only. (Consult the de-
partment.)
Evaluation will be based on frequent quizzes, tests, and a final exam.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF First Semester: PORTER
8:30-9:45 MWF Second Semester: HOPPIN
CLGR 201(F) Intermediate Greek
Reading of selections from Hesiod and from Plato, combined with grammar review. The primary goal of
this course is to develop fluency in reading Greek.
Evaluation will be based on classroom participation, quizzes, tests, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Greek 101-102 or two years of Greek in secondary school.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR HOPPIN
CLGR 202(S) Intermediate Greek: Oratory and Rhetoric in Fifth-Century Athens
The traveling educators and thinkers known as the sophists brought radical theories about politics, society,
and morality to mid-fifth-century Athens and so helped to revolutionize much of Athenian thought, while
precipitating a backlash and years of social and political upheaval. Today we can see their influence in
different ways and to different degrees in nearly all of fifth-century Athenian literature. In this course, we
will explore this important intellectual and social phenomenon by reading selected works of the sophists,
such as Gorgias' Helen, and speeches of orators such as Isaeus and Lysias, as well as selections from Aris-
tophanes' Clouds, the comedy which lampoons and lambastes sophistry in the person of Socrates and his
Thinkery. We will also continue to review grammar and to develop Greek reading and interpretive skills
throughout the semester.
Evaluation will be based on classroom participation, quizzes, a midterm and a final exam. Several oral
presentations and short essays may be required as well.
Prerequisite: Greek 201 or permission of the instructor.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF HOPPIN
CLGR 402 Homer: The Odyssey (Not offered 2000-2001)
From the early archaic era through the classical and beyond, Homer's Iliad and Odyssey simultaneously
influenced and reflected Greek conceptions of community, leadership, war, heroism, family, loyalty, the
gods, justice, and much more. And nearly all of subsequent Greek literature, both poetry and prose, devel-
oped in varying degrees of dialogue with these early epic texts. In this course we will explore Homeric
values, narrative style, language, and effect by reading extensive selections from the Odyssey in Greek. We
will also read the entire epic in translation, and supplement our study of the text with computer resources
for textual, metrical, and cultural analysis.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, oral reports, a paper or papers, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Greek 201 or permission of the instructor. CLGR 402 is offered alternately as a course on the
Iliad and the Odyssey. Students who have taken CLGR 402 on the Iliad may elect this course as well.
PORTER
CLGR 403(F) Greek Lyric Poetry
From the archaic period until well into the fifth century, lyric poetry was probably the single most impor-
tant type of poetic expression in the Greek world. This rich and diverse poetry addressed a broad range of
issues, from problems posed by traditional aristocratic ideals to questions about gender roles. While engag-
ing in close reading of individual poems, we will pursue some of the issues that lyric poetry raises for the
cultural and intellectual history of Greece in one of its most dynamic periods of social and political change.
Readings in Greek, including the poetry of Archilochus, Tyrtaeus, Solon, Sappho, Ibycus, Anacreon, and
Simonides, will be supplemented by modern critical discussions and interpretive essays. The course will
also consider issues raised by translation and Greek metrical forms.
Evaluation will be based on reports and short essays that will be prepared on a regular basis throughout the
semester, classroom performance, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Greek 202 or permission of the instructor.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF FUQUA
CLGR 404(S) Greek Tragedy
This course considers general questions about the origins and development of this unique Athenian genre
and institution. It focuses, however, on the play or plays being read in Greek (either one play by Aeschylus
or one by Sophocles and one by Euripides) and on particular issues relevant to that play or plays. Several
plays by all three tragedians are studied in translation.
Evaluation will be based on classroom participation, a paper, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Greek 202 or permission of instructor.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR PANOUSSI
CLGR 405 The Greek Historians: Herodotus (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered
2001-2002)
This course will focus on the reading in Greek of Herodotus' Persian Wars. We will explore the ways in
which Herodotus' rich narrative style and intellectual landscape reflect the influence of Greek and Near-
Eastern oral traditions, Greek tragedy, the theory and practice of contemporary Athenian rhetoric and phi-
Classics
­ 129 ­
losophy, and Hippocratic medical theory, among others. We will also explore his use of ethnography and
anthropology as fundamental to the explanation of the political and military events that constitute the for-
mal subject of his work. We will supplement our study of Herodotus with additional readings, primarily in
translation, from Thucydides, Arrian, and Polybius that will reflect the development of Greek historical
writing from the Classical era through the Hellenistic and Roman periods.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, a midterm, a final paper, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Greek 201 or permission of the instructor.
PANOUSSI
LATIN
CLLA 101(F)-102(S) Introduction to Latin
This is a full-year course on the fundamentals of the Latin language. The first semester and part of the
second emphasize studying the grammar; the rest of the second semester is devoted to reading major liter-
ary and political figures of the first century B.C.E. This course is designed for the student with no previous
preparation in Latin or for the student who has had only a little Latin and wishes a refresher. Credit is
granted for the first semester only if the second semester is taken as well. Students with some previous
experience in Latin may want to enroll in CLLA 102 only. (Consult the department.)
Evaluation will be based on frequent quizzes, classroom exercises, and a final exam.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF First Semester: PANOUSSI
9:00-9:50 MWF Second Semester: FUQUA
CLLA 201(F) Latin Prose: Cicero and Seneca
Roman literature and society underwent profound changes between the Late Republic and the age of Nero,
the last of the Julio-Claudian emperors. These two periods are illuminated in fascinating detail by the letters
of Cicero and Seneca, whose experiences as politicians, poets, philosophers and experts in rhetoric invite a
comparative reading of their work. We will begin with an intensive review of Latin grammar, and will then
focus on the careful reading of selected letters of Cicero and Seneca. This course aims primarily to develop
fluency in reading Latin and is designed for students who have taken three or four years of Latin in second-
ary school, or who have completed Latin 101-102.
Evaluation will be based on classroom performance, quizzes, a midterm, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Latin 101-102 or the equivalent.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR PANOUSSI
CLLA 202(S) Latin Poetry: Catullus and Ovid
Roman poetry of all periods reveals a dynamic relationship between tradition and innovation. During the
turbulent late Republic, Catullus inaugurated a new direction in Roman poetry by combining the influence
of Hellenistic and other Greek poets with that of archaic and contemporary Roman poetic traditions. One
of the most important poets of the ensuing Augustan era was Ovid, whose diverse poetic output reflects a
changed Roman world and its evolving poetic tradition. His poetry, like Catullus', exerted an influence on
the subsequent literary tradition that endures to our own day.
In the first half of this course, we will read the poetry of Catullus and study the variety of influences, genres,
themes, and modes of expression that it embodies. We will try to understand Catullus' place in the evolu-
tion of the Roman poetic tradition as well as the significance of his influence on subsequent generations of
poets. In the second part of the course, we will move ahead about sixty years to Ovid. After reading selec-
tions from his earlier work we will turn to the Metamorphoses, which formulated what came to be the
canonical versions of many Greco-Roman myths. We will consider the epic's use of different forms and
combinations of narratives, Ovid's priorities as a poet, and the significance of metamorphosis as a unifying
theme. Selected narratives will be read in the original and all of the epic in translation.
Evaluation will be based on classroom performance, quizzes, short essays, presentations, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Latin 201 or permission of the instructor.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR KRAUS
CLLA 402 Literature of the Republic (Not offered 2000-2001)
What can the remains of early Latin tell us about the Romans and their neighbors in Italy before the heady
days of the late Republic and the Augustan age? What Latin(s) and other languages did the Romans of the
early- and middle-Republic speak, or regularly hear being spoken? Why did a Latin literature emerge quite
suddenly in the mid-third century, like Minerva springing fully armed from Jove's head? Why was so
much early Latin literature written by people whose native language was not Latin? How did the Latin
language and its literature change between the early and late Republic, and how do these changes provide
evidence for a complex "multicultural" society and for momentous changes in that society during the same
period? These are some of the questions we will address as we read a variety of texts: early Latin inscrip-
tions, fragments from literary giants like Livius Andronicus, Naevius, Ennius, Lucilius, and Cato, and
selections from the comedies of Plautus and Terence, including a complete comedy by one of these play-
wrights. For purposes of comparison, we will occasionally read short selections from later Latin poetry and
prose.
Classics
­ 130 ­
Evaluation will be based on quality of preparation for each class, two or three essays/written exercises, and
midterm and final exams.
Prerequisite: Latin 202 or permission of the instructor.
HOPPIN
CLLA 403 Roman Love Elegy (Not offered 2000-2001)
During the last generation of the Roman Republic, a group of poets developed the genre of poetry we term
"Roman Love Elegy." This new form of poetic expression owed much to Hellenistic Greek poetry and a
tradition of Latin lyric poetry that had come to prominence a generation before. It was a paradoxical genre;
for, while it became one of the most important forms of literary expression at Rome, it also advocated a
series of moral conventions that were alien to traditional Roman standards. This course will look at the
earliest examples of the genre in the work of Catullus and the fragmentary Latin poets and then move to the
works of Propertius and Tibullus. At the end we will look at Ovid's response to the genre in such works as
the Amores.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, several short oral presentations and short papers, and a final
exam.
Prerequisite: Latin 202 or permission of instructor.
FUQUA
CLLA 404 Vergil's Aeneid (Not offered 2000-2001)
Although he used the Iliad and Odyssey as literary models, Vergil created a thoroughly Roman--and Ital-
ian--epic with the Aeneid, a poem which addresses contemporary politics (the principate of Augustus)
through the figure of Aeneas, the mythical hero of Troy. We will pay close attention to the political as well
as the literary background of Rome's greatest literary achievement, and one of the major issues we will
explore is the degree to which Vergil's Aeneid provides a new model of the Roman military and political
leader.
Evaluation will be based on contributions to class, a midterm exam, and a final paper.
Prerequisite: Latin 202 or permission of instructor.
PANOUSSI
CLLA 405 The Roman Historians: Livy and Tacitus (Not offered 2000-2001)
Livy's History of Rome (re)constructs the origins of Roman practices, values, and institutions as it de-
scribes the growth of the Roman state and empire from mythical through historical times. However, this
presentation of the Roman past is strikingly `present' as we see reflected in it the profound influence of the
Augustan era during which Livy wrote. We can see an analogous relationship between the historian's pres-
ent and his formal focus on the past in Tacitus' Annals, for as Tacitus records and interprets the history of
the Julio-Claudian emperors, he presents his vision of the causes and development of the ills of his own
day. However, the historians differ in many significant ways as well and thus are two unique examples of
Roman historiography of the early empire. In this course we will read extensive selections from the works
of each and will explore their tone, style, methods, goals, and historical scope. As we analyze their histori-
cal, historiographical, and narrative issues, we will come to appreciate not only the richness of each au-
thor's works, but also the power of Roman history and self-image to communicate to us across the centu-
ries.
Evaluation will be based on class preparation and participation, an oral presentation, one medium-length
paper, a midterm, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Latin 202 or permission of the instructor.
CLLA 406(F) Horace Odes 1-3
Nietzsche claimed that he never had an artistic delight comparable to his experience of reading a Horatian
ode. Through close readings of selected odes in Books 1-3 we will seek to experience such delight for
ourselves and to learn why, as Nietzsche put it, "what is here achieved is in certain languages not even to be
hoped for." We will examine the relation between poetic landscapes, poetic programs and the poetry's ex-
ploration of subjects like love, friendship, youth and old age, death, politics, private morality; the poet's
capacity to define himself by offering his own account of poetic traditions and his place in tradition; the
variety of voices and perspectives within individual poems and throughout the collection; the demands
thereby placed on the poet's audience and the power of the poetry to transform an audience equal to those
demands. It is in terms of this transformational power of poetry that we will consider Horace's relationship
to his contemporaries, particularly Vergil, his patron Maecenas, and Augustus.
Evaluation will be based on contributions in the classroom, two 2- to 3-page papers (translation with com-
ments), a short memorization assignment, a final paper, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Latin 202 or permission of instructor.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MW PORTER
CLLA 407 The Rhetoric of Cruelty (Not offered 2000-2001)
In no other period did the tensions and ambiguities inherent in Roman society become more apparent than
in the first century C.E. It was a violent and cruel period in which absolute power was often exercised with
a malignancy that has rarely been plied since. This age also produced a literature often marked by profound
humanity and by an inventiveness second only to that of the "Golden Age" a century before. We will read
selections from Seneca, Juvenal, Martial, and Pliny the Younger in the original and from others in transla-
Classics, Computer Science
­ 131 ­
tion. Our goal will be to gain some insight into the paradoxes of this period, Rome's "Silver Age."
Evaluation will be based on class participation, several reports presented by each student, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Latin 202 or permission of the instructor.
CLLA 408(S) Myth and Biography in Later Latin Literature
This advanced Latin course involves reading and analyzing passages from Apuleius, Metamorphoses (sec-
ond century C.E.); Prudentius, Psychomachia (fifth century C.E.); St. Augustine, Confessiones (fifth cen-
tury C.E.); Vitae of Vergil (fourth-fifth century C.E.), and Tiberius Claudius Donatus' commentary on Ver-
gil's Aeneid (fifth century C.E.). Apuleius' novel Metamorphoses contains a semi-autobiographical de-
scription of his initiation into the cult of Isis which has been considered paradigmatic of the pagan conver-
sion experience; earlier in this work, Apuleius provides a famous rendition of the Cupid and Psyche myth.
Although these passages can be read in isolation, when read together they raise fascinating questions about
the interdependence of myth and biography, and more generally of art and life that characterized the later
Roman Empire. This course pursues the relationship between imaginative and actual experience in two
additional, yet distinct contexts. By comparing two Christian authors, Prudentius and Augustine, we see
how art and life continue to interact within the Christian experience of Latin culture. Prudentius' Psycho-
machia, a poetic account in the Vergilian style of the struggle faced by the Christian soul against vices,
provides a stimulating comparison with Augustine's own account of his conversion in his Confessiones. In
these two authors, myth and biography represent apparently discrete categories. However, pagans of the
same period blur this distinction between art and life. The Vitae of Vergil exemplify how biography can
become myth while Donatus' commentary on Vergil's Aeneid demonstrates how myth can become life.
Evaluation will be based on classroom preparation and participation, a midterm, a 5- to 7-page paper, and a
final exam.
Prerequisite: Latin 202 or permission of the instructor.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR KRAUS
CLASSICS
CLAS 493(F), 494(S) Senior Thesis
Recommended for all candidates for the degree with honors. This project will normally be of one semes-
ter's duration.
CLAS 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
Students with permission of the department may enroll for independent study on select topics not covered
by current course offerings.
COMPUTER SCIENCE (Div. III)
Chair, Associate Professor DUANE BAILEY
Professors: BRUCE, LENHART***, MURTAGH**. Associate Professor: BAILEY. Assistant
Professors: DANYLUK, LERNER, TERESCO. Bolin Fellow: SANDYS.
Computers play an enormously important role in our society. General-purpose computers are used
widely in business and industry and are found in an increasing number of homes. Special-purpose comput-
ers are found in everything from automobile engines to microwave ovens. Understanding and exploiting
the great potential of computers is the goal of research in computer science. Among the many fascinating
research projects in progress in computer science today are investigations of: ways to focus more computa-
tional power on a problem through the simultaneous use of many processors in parallel; revolutionary
computer languages designed to simplify the process of constructing complex programs for computers; the
use of computer-generated graphic images in the arts and as a tool for visualization in the natural sciences;
and the use of digital methods in global communications. The Computer Science Department at Williams
seeks to provide students with an understanding of the principles underlying computer science that will
enable them to understand and participate in these exciting developments.
The department recognizes that students' interests in computer science will vary widely. The depart-
ment attempts to meet these varying interests through: (1) its major; (2) a selection of courses intended
primarily for those who are interested in a brief introduction to computer science or who seek to develop
some specific expertise in computing for application in some other discipline; and (3) recommendations
for possible sequences of courses for the non-major who wants a more extensive introduction to computer
science. These offerings are discussed in detail below.
MAJOR
The goal of the major is to provide an understanding of algorithmic problem-solving as well as the con-
ceptual organization of computers and complex programs running on them. Emphasis is placed on the
fundamental principles of computer science, building upon the mathematical and theoretical ideas under-
lying these principles. The introductory and core courses build a broad and solid base for understanding
computer science. The more advanced courses allow students to sample a variety of specialized areas of
computer science including graphics, artificial intelligence, computer networks, software engineering,
compiler design, and operating systems. Independent study and honors work provide opportunities for stu-
dents to study and conduct research on topics of special interest.
Computer Science
­ 132 ­
The major in Computer Science equips students to take advantage of awide variety of career opportuni-
ties. Thus the major can be used as a preparation for a career in computing, for graduate school, or simply
to provide an in-depth study of computer science for the student whose futurecareerwillonlytangentially
be related to computer science.
MAJOR REQUIREMENTS
Required Courses in Computer Science
A minimum of 8 courses is required in Computer Science, including the following:
Introductory Courses
Computer Science 134 Introduction to Computer Science
Computer Science 136 Data Structures and Advanced Programming
Core Courses
Computer Science 237 Computer Organization
Computer Science 256 Algorithm Design and Analysis
Computer Science 334 Principles of Programming Languages
Computer Science 361 Theory of Computation
Electives
Two or more electives (bringing the total number of Computer Science courses to at least 8) chosen
from 300- or 400-level courses in Computer Science. At least one of these must be a course designated
as a PROJECT COURSE. Computer Science courses with 9 as the middle digit (reading, research, and
thesis courses) will normally not be used to satisfy the elective requirements. Students may petition the
department to waive this restriction with good reasons.
Required Courses in Mathematics
Mathematics 211 Linear Algebra
Mathematics 251 Discrete Mathematics
Students who take Computer Science 105, 108 or 109 may use that course as one of the two electives
required for the major in Computer Science. Those who count Computer Science 109 toward the major
must select an elective different from Computer Science 371 (Computer Graphics) for their project course.
Similarly, students who count Computer Science 108 as an elective cannot select Computer Science 373 as
their second elective. Note also that Computer Science 108 and 109 are not open to students who have
already successfully completed a Computer Science course number 134 or above; Computer Science 105
is not open to those who have already successfully completed a Computer Science course number 136 or
above.
To be eligible for admission to the major, a student must normally have completed Computer Science
136 as well as Mathematics 251 by the end of the sophomore year. Mathematics 211 must be completed by
the end of the junior year. Students are urged to have completed two of the four core courses (Computer
Science 237, 256, 334, and 361) by the end of the sophomore year and must normally have completed at
least three out of the four core courses by the end of the junior year.
Satisfactory participation is required in the Computer Science Colloquium by all senior majors. With the
advance permission of the department, two appropriate mathematics courses numbered 240 or above may
be substituted for one Computer Science elective. Other variations in the required courses, adapting the
requirements to the special needs and interests of the individual student, may be arranged in consultation
with the department.
Potential majors are strongly encouraged to pick up the latest copy of the Informal Guide to Courses in
Computer Science, which can be obtained from the departmental office in Bronfman or on the World Wide
Web at http://www.cs.williams.edu. This document contains much more information on the major, includ-
ing suggested patterns of course selection and advice on courses relevant to different student goals.
LABORATORY FACILITIES
The Computer Science Department maintains two departmental computer laboratories for students tak-
ing Computer Science courses. The Macintosh laboratory (used in Computer Science 105, 108, 109, 134,
136, and 237) consists of an electronic classroom containing Macintosh G3 computers connected via an
ethernet network to Macintosh and Sun file and print servers. This laboratory also contains projection facil-
ities enabling the instructor to display the computer screen during lectures and demonstrations.
The Sun laboratory (used in courses numbered 237 and above) consists of a network of powerful UNIX
workstations, which are available exclusively to students taking advanced Computer Science courses.
These workstations also support student and faculty research in computer science.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN COMPUTER SCIENCE
The degree with honors in Computer Science is awarded to a student who has demonstrated outstanding
intellectual achievement in a program of study which extends beyond the requirements of the regular ma-
jor. The principal considerations in recommending a student for the degree with honors will be: mastery of
core material, ability to pursue independent study of computer science, originality in methods of investiga-
tion, and creativity in research. Honors study is highly recommended for those students with strong aca-
demic records in computer science who wish to attend graduate school, pursue high-level industrial posi-
tions in computing, or who would simply like to experience research in computer science.
Computer Science
­ 133 ­
Prospective honors students are urged to consult with their departmental advisor at the time of registra-
tion in the spring of the sophomore or at the beginning of the junior year to arrange a program of study that
could lead to the degree with honors. Such a program normally consists of Computer Science 493 and 494
and a WSP of independent research under the guidance of a Computer Science faculty member, culminat-
ing in a thesis which is judged acceptable by the department. The program culminates in a significant piece
of written work. The written work often includes a major computer program, depending on the nature of
the honors work. All honors candidates are required to give an oral presentation of their work in the Com-
puter Science Colloquium.
Students considering honors work should obtain permission from the department before registering in
the fall of the senior year. Formal admission to candidacy occurs at the beginning of the spring semester of
the senior year and is based on promising performance in the fall semester and winter study units of honors
work. Recommendations for the degree with honors will be made for outstanding performance in the three
honors courses. Highest honors will be recommended for students who have displayed exceptional abil-
ity, achievement, or originality.
INTRODUCTORY COURSES
The department offers four introductory courses--Computer Science 105: Understanding the Web:
Technologies and Techniques, Computer Science 108: Artificial Intelligence: Image and Reality, Comput-
er Science 109: The Art and Science of Computer Graphics, and Computer Science 134: Introduction to
Computer Science. Complete descriptions of each of these courses are found below. In this section we
merely attempt to indicate for which students each of these courses might be appropriate.
Students planning to major in Computer Science will usually begin their studies within the department
by taking Computer Science 134. Computer Science 134 provides an introduction to computer science and
programming. No programming experience is required in order to take this course. Students with signifi-
cant programming experience should consider electing Computer Science 136 (see "Advanced Place-
ment" below). The combination of Computer Science 134 and Computer Science 136servesasaprerequi-
site to most upper-level courses in the department.
Those students interested in learning more about important new ideas and developments in Computer
Science, but who are not necessarily interested in developing extensive programming skills, should consid-
er Computer Science 105: Understanding the Web: Technologies and Techniques, Computer Science 108:
Artificial Intelligence: Image and Reality, or Computer Science 109: The Art and Science of Computer
Graphics. Computer Science 108 discusses the techniques used to construct computer systems that exhibit
intelligent behavior from learning to planning and problem-solving. Computer Science 109 introduces stu-
dents to the techniques of computer graphics used for special effects in films, visualization in the sciences,
and the creation of artistic images.
Non-majors primarily interested in developing programming skills for use in other disciplines are di-
rected to Computer Science 134. Alternately, those expecting to construct programs that produce graphic
images may wish to consider the combination of Computer Science 109 followed by Computer Science
134.
Those students intending to take several Computer Science courses are urged to begin satisfying their
mathematics requirements early. Note in particular that Mathematics 251 covers material complementing
that in the introductory courses (Computer Science 134 and 136) and is a prerequisite for many advanced
courses. As a result it should be taken in the first year a student is at Williams or in the fall of the sophomore
year if possible.
ADVANCED PLACEMENT
Students with an extensive background in computer science are urged to take the Advanced Placement
AB Examination in Computer Science. A score of 4 or better on the AB exam is normally required for
advanced placement in Computer Science 136. Students scoring 3 or lower on that exam or who have
taken the Advanced Placement A Examination in Computer Science should consider enrolling in Comput-
er Science 134.
Students who wish to be placed in Computer Science 136 but who have not taken the Advanced Place-
ment Examination should consult with the department. Such students should have had a good course in
computer science using a structured language such as Pascal, C, or Java, and should have covered such
topics as recursion, arrays, records, files, and have some exposure to object-orientation. Copies of pro-
grams written and titles of books used in courses will be helpful in this process.
PLANS OF STUDY FOR NON-MAJORS
The faculty in Computer Science believes that students can substantially enrich their academic experi-
ence by completing a coherent plan of study in one or more disciplines outside of their majors. With this in
mind, we have attempted to provide students majoring in other departments with options in our depart-
ment's curriculum ranging fromtwo-coursesequences to collections of courses equivalent to what would
constitute a minor at institutions that recognize such a concentration. Students interested in designing such
a plan of study in any department should discuss their plans in detail with a member of the faculty. We
welcome such inquiries from students. To assist students making such plans, however, we include some
suggestions below.
Computer Science
­ 134 ­
Students seeking to develop an extensive knowledge of computer science without majoring in the de-
partment are encouraged to use the major requirements as a guide. In particular, the four core courses re-
quired of majors are intended to provide a broad knowledge of topics underlying all of computer science.
Students seeking a concentration in Computer Science are urged to complete at least two of these courses
followed by one of our upper-level electives. Such a program would typically require the completion of a
total of five computer science courses and one course in mathematics (MATH 251).
There are several sequences of courses appropriate for those primarily interested in developing skills in
programming for use in other areas. For general programming, Computer Science 134 followed by Com-
puter Science 136 and 237 will provide students with a strong background in algorithm and data structure
design together with an understanding of issues of correctness and efficiency. Computer Science 323 pro-
vides valuable exposure to the techniques and tools needed for the development and maintenance of large
software systems. The sequence of courses Computer Science 109 and 134 would provide sufficient com-
petence in computer graphics for many students interested in applying such knowledge either in the arts or
sciences. For students requiring more expertise in the techniques of computer graphics, Computer Science
136 and 371 could be added to form a four-course sequence.
Thereare,ofcourse,manyotheralternatives.Weencourage interestedstudentstoconsultwiththe depart-
ment chair or other members of the department's faculty.
GENERAL REMARKS
Divisional Requirements
All Computer Science courses listed may be used to satisfy the Division III distribution requirement.
Alternate Year Courses
Computer Science 108, 109, 323, 336, 337T, 338T, 371, 373, 432, and 434 are each normally offered
every other year. All other Computer Science courses are normally offered every year.
Course Numbering
The increase from 100, through 200 and 300, to 400 indicates in most instances an increasing level of
maturity in the subject that is expected of students. Within a series, numeric order does not indicate the
relative level of difficulty of courses. Rather, the middle digit of the course number (particularly in upper-
level courses) generally indicates the area of computer science covered by the course.
Course Descriptions
Brief descriptions of the courses in Computer Science can be found below. More detailed information
on the offerings in the department is available in the Informal Guide to Courses in Computer Science that
can be obtained at the departmental office.
Courses Open on a Pass-Fail Basis
Students taking a computer science course on a pass-fail basis must meet all the requirements set for
students taking the course on a graded basis.
With the permission of the department, any course offered by the department may be taken on a pass-
fail basis. Courses graded with the pass-fail option may not be used to satisfy any of the major or honors
requirements. However, with the permission of the department, courses taken in the department beyond
those requirements may be taken on a pass-fail basis.
COURSES INTENDED PRIMARILY FOR NON-MAJORS
CSCI 105(S) Understanding the Web: Technologies and Techniques
This course will enable students to understand the technology that underlies the World Wide Web and pro-
vide them with the skills needed to effectively use this new medium. The course introduces techniques for
creating hypermedia documents on the web. Students will learn the basics of HTML, the formatting lan-
guage used to author World Wide Web documents, and a subset of Java, a language that can be used to add
interactive elements to web pages.
The technology that makes the Web possible is developing as rapidly as its use is growing. New facilities
are introduced frequently. Web "standards" are evolving in several directions simultaneously as vendors
introduce competing proposals. Accordingly, rather than simply learning how to use the Web as it is today,
we will also examine the fundamental technologies that make the Web possible. These include digital en-
coding techniques, computer network organization, communication protocols and encryption systems.
This material will leave students prepared to understand future possibilities for, and obstacles to, the devel-
opment of the Internet.
Evaluation will be based on homework, laboratory work and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 100 or 101 (or demonstrating proficiency in the Quantitative Studies diagnos-
tic test--see catalog under Mathematics).
This course is not open to students who have successfully completed a Computer Science course numbered
136 or above. Enrollment limited to 100.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR Lab: 1-2:30 R, F; 2:30-4 R; 11-12:30 F MURTAGH and LERNER
CSCI 108(F) Artificial Intelligence: Image and Reality
Over 50 years ago, scientists began to envision a world where computers and humans could converse. In
1956 the field of "Artificial Intelligence" was officially born, and the work on "AI" began in earnest. Walk-
Computer Science
­ 135 ­
ing and talking robots are still the stuff of science fiction, but AI is close to making them reality. In this
course, we will explore the field of Artificial Intelligence. We will try to answer the question "what makes a
machine intelligent?" Among the systems we will explore in lecture will be game-playing systems, sys-
tems that learn from their environments, and systems that create plans for complex tasks. Underlying all
the topics addressed in this course will be two fundamental issues: How can information be represented in
a computer so that the machine is able to make use of it? How can the system manipulate that information
so that it is able to perform a task that requires intelligence?
This course will emphasize hands-on laboratory experience. Laboratory projects will focus on the building
and programming of simple robots. This course does not assume any programming experience, but as-
sumes that the student is comfortable working with a computer.
Evaluation will be based on laboratory assignments, problem sets, class participation and exams.
Enrollment limited to 18.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 R DANYLUK
CSCI 109 The Art and Science of Computer Graphics (Not offered 2000-2001)
We watch as a dead planet comes to blazing-fiery life, we negotiate a perilous asteroid field to bring our
starship home safely. Extraordinary events such as these, from motion pictures or from the local video
arcade, are becoming commonplace experiences of modern life. What these events share in common is
that they are both fruits of the rapidly-evolving technology of three-dimensional computer-generated
imagery.
This course provides an opportunity to develop an understanding of the theoretical and practical concepts
underlying computer graphics. The course will emphasize hands-on laboratory experience, with student
work focused around completing a series of projects. From the first week, students will begin making col-
or, shaded, perspective views of three-dimensional models of their own devising. As the course progresses,
concepts of both computer programming and graphics will be presented that will facilitate expansion of the
range and complexity of the images. Lectures, augmented by guided viewings of state-of-the-art comput-
er-generated images and animations, will be used to deepen understanding of what has been learned in the
laboratory.
Lecture/lab three hours per week.
Evaluation will be based on progress in the quality of project work.
For the highly successful student, this course may serve as an alternate to Mathematics 211 as a prerequi-
site for the upper division Computer Graphics course, Computer Science 371.
No prerequisites. This course assumes no previous experience with computers beyond that required to op-
erate a simple word-processing program.
This course is not open to students who have successfully completed a Computer Science course numbered
134 or above.
BAILEY
COURSES INTENDED FOR BOTH NON-MAJORS AND MAJORS
CSCI 134(F,S) Introduction to Computer Science
More than the processor inside, it is the software running on a computer that determines the machine's
behavior and usefulness. In this course, students will learn principles of design, implementation, and test-
ing of object-oriented programs. Using the Java programming language, we will cover fundamental con-
cepts including classes, objects, message sending, control structures, arrays, files, and event-driven pro-
gramming, as well as providing an introduction to concurrency. Through the study of these topics, students
will learn both to construct programs of their own and to understand the capabilities and limitations of
existing software. No previous programming experience is required or assumed. Students with prior expe-
rience with object-oriented programming should discuss appropriate course placement with members of
the department.
Evaluation will be based on assigned programs and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 100 or 101 (or demonstrating proficiency in the Quantitative Studies diagnos-
tic test--see catalog under Mathematics).
Enrollment is limited to 60.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF, 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 M, T First Semester: BRUCE, LERNER
10:00-10:50 MWF, 11:00-11:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 M, T Second Semester: BAILEY, SANDYS
CSCI 136(F,S) Data Structures and Advanced Programming
This course builds the programming skills acquired in Computer Science 134, placing special emphasis on
the software design techniques of modularization and data abstraction. Students are introduced to some of
the most important and frequently used data structures: lists, stacks, queues, trees, hash tables, graphs, and
files. Other topics covered include analysis of algorithm complexity and program verification. The object-
oriented language Java is used to support modularization and abstraction. Programming assignments focus
on the design and implementation of algorithms and data structures. The combination of Computer Sci-
ence 134 and 136 provides a strong background in programming.
Evaluation will be based on programming assignments and exams.
Computer Science
­ 136 ­
Prerequisite: Computer Science 134 or equivalent. (Mathematics 251 is recommended, but not required as
a prerequisite or corequisite for the course.)
Enrollment is limited to 36.
PROJECT COURSE
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 W First Semester: BAILEY
9:00-9:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 W Second Semester: BRUCE
CSCI 237(F) Computer Organization
Study of the basic architecture of a computer system, fundamentals of logic design, mechanics of informa-
tion transfer and control. Machine level instruction sets and assembler language coding will be considered,
with students writing routines in an assembly language.
Evaluation will be based primarily on problem assignments, projects, and exams.
Prerequisite: Computer Science 134, or both experience in programming and permission of the instructor.
Hour: 12:00-12:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 T BAILEY
CSCI 256(S) Algorithm Design and Analysis
Given a list of descriptions of all of the buildings in Manhattan, how could you effectively produce a de-
scription of the Manhattan skyline as seen from a boat on the East River? Or, suppose that for all of the
towns in the U.S., you have information on all of the roads that connect them. How would you determine
the shortest route between any two of the towns? The most obvious ways of solving these problems turn
out to be very inefficient. This course is concerned with investigating methods of designing efficient and
reliable algorithms to solve these and other computational problems. By carefully analyzing the underlying
structure of the problem to be solved it is often possible to dramatically decrease the resources (amount of
time and/or space) needed to find a solution. Through this analysis we can also give proof that an algorithm
will perform correctly and determine its running time and space requirements.
We will present several algorithm design strategies that build on data structures and programming tech-
niques introduced in Computer Science 136. These include: induction, divide-and-conquer, dynamic pro-
gramming, and greedy algorithms. Particular topics to be considered will include shortest path and other
network problems; problems in computational geometry; searching, sorting and order statistics and some
advanced data structures such as balanced binary search trees, heaps, and union-find structures. In addition,
an introduction to complexity theory and the complexity classes P and NP will be provided. As time per-
mits, additional topics such as probabilistic and parallel algorithms will be studied.
Evaluation will be based primarily on problem assignments, programs, and exams.
Prerequisites: Computer Science 136 and Mathematics 251.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF Lab: TBA BRUCE
CSCI 323 Software Engineering (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
In this course, students learn and gain practical experience with software engineering principles and tech-
niques. The practical experience centers on a semester-long team project in which a software development
project is carried through all of the stages of the software lifecycle. Topics in this course include require-
ments analysis, specification, design, abstraction, testing, and maintenance. Particular emphasis is placed
on designing and developing maintainable software and on the use of object-oriented techniques through-
out the software lifecycle.
Evaluation will be based primarily on two exams, several homework assignments, and projects.
Prerequisite: Computer Science 136.
PROJECT COURSE
LERNER
CSCI 334(S) Principles of Programming Languages
Concepts and structures governing the design and implementation of modern programming languages.
Introduction to concepts of compilers and run-time representations of programming languages. Features of
programming languages supporting abstraction. Programming language paradigms including procedural,
functional programming, object-oriented programming, polymorphism, concurrency, etc. Illustrative pro-
grams will be required in languages illustrating each of these paradigms, in particular ML and GJ.
Prerequisite: Computer Science 136.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR Lab: TBA LERNER
CSCI 336T(S) Computer Networks
Less than 20 years ago, computer networks were of interest to researchers in the discipline but rarely used
for practical systems. Now, many computers are so dependent on networking that they would be unable to
function if disconnected from the network to which they belong. The merger between the technology for
computing and communication that this change represents may have as significant an effect on our society
as the emergence of the computer itself.
In this course, we will study the principles underlying the design of computer networks. We will examine
techniques for transmitting information efficiently and reliably over a variety of communication media. We
will look at the addressing and routing problems that must be solved to ensure that transmitted data gets to
the desired destination. We will come to understand the impact that the distributed nature of all network
problems has on their difficulty. We will examine the ways in which these issues are addressed by current
networking protocols such as TCP/IP, Ethernet and Appletalk.
This course will be taught in the tutorial format. Students will meet weekly with the instructor in pairs to
Computer Science
­ 137 ­
present solutions to problem sets and reports evaluating the technical merit of current solutions to various
networking problems. In addition, students will be asked to complete programming assignments involving
the implementation of simple communication protocols.
Evaluation will be based primarily on problem sets, programming assignments, and exams.
Prerequisites: Computer Science 136 and Computer Science 237.
Hour: 8:00-8:50 MWF Lab: TBA MURTAGH
CSCI 337T Digital Design and Modern Architecture (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered
2001-2002)
This tutorial course considers topics in the low-level design of modern architectures. Course meetings will
review problems of designing effective architectures including instruction-level parallelism, branch-pre-
diction, caching strategies, and advanced ALU design. Readings will be taken from recent technical litera-
ture. Labs will focus on the development of custom CMOS circuits to implement projects from gates to
bit-sliced ALU's. Final group projects will develop custom logic-demonstrating concepts learned in course
meetings.
Evaluation will be based on performance in meetings, labs, problem sets, and exams.
Prerequisites: Computer Science 136, Computer Science 237 and permission of the instructor.
PROJECT COURSE
BAILEY
CSCI 338(F) Parallel Processing
Parallel Processing An introduction to the fundamentals of parallel processing. This course investigates the
design implementation, and theoretical analysis of efficient algorithms for a variety of parallel architec-
tures. Parallel hardware and simulators will be used to implement several programming assignments. Pre-
requisites: Computer Science 256, or Computer Science 237.
Note: This course will be offered by Prof. James Teresco, who is joining the department's faculty in the fall
of 2000. Students registering for the course should check with the instructor in the fall for any changes to
the course content or prerequisites.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR Lab: TBA TERESCO
CSCI 361(F) Theory of Computation (Same as Mathematics 361)
Formal models of computation such as finite state automata, recursive functions, formal grammars and
Turing machines will be studied. These models will be used to provide a mathematical basis for the study
of computability. Applications to compiler design and computational undecidability will also be covered.
Evaluation will be based primarily on problem assignments and exams.
Prerequisites: Computer Science 256 or both a 300-level mathematics course and permission of the
instructor.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: TBA DANYLUK
CSCI 371(F) Computer Graphics
Today's programmer is familiar with animated icons moving in response to a mouse and three-dimension-
al CRT images of photo-realistic quality. In this course, we explore the science and technology underlying
these visual effects. Course material covers a broad range of topics, including graphics data structures and
algorithms, interactive windowing systems, curve and surface modeling techniques and fractals.
Students will complete a series of projects including perfecting tools for the rendering of shaded images of
naturalistic three-dimensional scenes. All work will be done on high-performance color workstations.
Evaluation will be based primarily on these project assignments and exams.
Prerequisites: Computer Science 136 and either Mathematics 211 or both Computer Science 109 and per-
mission of the instructor.
PROJECT COURSE.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF Lab: TBA LENHART
CSCI 373(S) Artificial Intelligence
This course introduces the state-of-the-art in the field of Artificial Intelligence, which is concerned with the
ability to create machines that perform tasks requiring "intelligence." This course includes a survey of cur-
rent applications in the areas of machine learning, game playing, robotics, and natural-language process-
ing. The course covers current techniques for solving problems in the field, including knowledge represen-
tation, search strategies, planning, and reasoning.
Evaluation will be based primarily on problem assignments, programming projects, robotics projects, and
exams.
Prerequisites: Computer Science 136 and Mathematics and Statistics 251.
PROJECT COURSE.
Hour: 12:00-12:50 MWF Lab: TBA DANYLUK
CSCI 397(F), 398(S), 497(F), 498(S) Reading
Directed independent reading in Computer Science.
Prerequisite: permission of the department.
Members of the Department
Computer Science, Contract Major
­ 138 ­
CSCI 432 Operating Systems (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
This course explore how computer operating systems allocate resources and create virtual machines. Top-
ics will include storage management, scheduling, concurrent processing, protection of data, and user inter-
faces.
Evaluation will be based primarily on problem assignments, projects, and exams.
Prerequisites: Computer Science 136 and Computer Science 237.
PROJECT COURSE.
LERNER
CSCI 434 Compiler Design (Not offered 2000-2001)
Principles of programming language processors. Discussion and evaluation of current implementation
techniques including the applicable theory. Topics include lexical scanners, parsers, code generation, and
optimization. There will be a major laboratory project in compiler writing.
Evaluation will be based primarily on problem assignments, projects, and exams.
PROJECT COURSE.
Prerequisite: Computer Science 237. Corequisite or Prerequisite: Computer Science 361. Computer Sci-
ence 334 is recommended.
MURTAGH
CSCI 493(F) Research in Computer Science
This course provides highly-motivated students an opportunity to work independently with faculty on re-
search topics chosen by individual faculty. Students are generally expected to perform a literature review,
identify areas of potential contribution, and explore extensions to existing results. The course culminates in
a concise, well-written report describing a problem, its background history, any independent results
achieved, and directions for future research.
Evaluation will be based upon participation, presentations, and the final written report.
Open to senior majors in Computer Science, with permission of the instructor. Enrollment is limited.
This course (along with Computer Science W031and Computer Science 494) is required for students pur-
suing honors, but enrollment is not limited to students pursuing honors.
Hour: 8:00-8:50 MWF Members of the Department
CSCI W031-494(S) Senior Thesis
Prerequisite: Computer Science 493.
CSCI 499(F,S) Computer Science Colloquium
Required of senior majors, highly recommended for junior majors. Meets most weeks for one hour, both
fall and spring.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 F DANYLUK
CONTRACT MAJOR
Contract Major Advisor: PETER D. GRUDIN
Students with the talent and energy for working independently and with the strong support of two facul-
ty advisors may undertake a Contract Major: a coherent study of an interdisciplinary subject not covered
by a regularly offered major. Such a major must be in an area suitable to the talents of the faculty in resi-
dence and cannot consist of minor modifications to an existing major. A Contract Major also must conform
to the structure and have the coherence of a departmental or program major--i.e., it must embody a disci-
plined cumulative study that moves from an elementary to an advanced level and culminates in a synthesis
similar to a senior major course. Hence a Contract Major usually consists of a program of existing courses,
sometimes supplemented by courses of independent study and the senior course.
The process of constructing a proposal for a Contract Major is both interesting and demanding. As part
of that process, students should consider carefully the advantage of working within existing majors or pro-
grams, taking note of the considerable intellectual pleasures involved in sharing similar educational experi-
ences with other students working within the same field. Students might also consider whether their inter-
ests could be met by completing a regular major and coordinate program, or a double major, or simply by
working outside a major field in courses of special interest. Because the Contract Major represents an ex-
ceptional opportunity provided for students whose interests cannot be met through existing departmental
and interdepartmental majors and programs, it cannot be pursued in conjunction with another major.
Students who wish to explore or propose a Contract Major should consult with the Contract Major advi-
sor and with potential faculty sponsors as early as possible in the fall semester of the sophomore year, and
then--during the sophomore year--follow these procedures:
1) The student must initiate discussion with at least two members of the faculty from differing depart-
ments who expect to be in residence during the student's senior year and who are willing to endorse the
Contract Major and undertake a central role in supervising its implementation, criticism, evaluation, and
ultimate validation. Since in essence faculty sponsors substitute for the student's major department, they
are expected to play an important role in the Contract Major.
The student must develop, in conjunction with the faculty sponsors, a written proposal (forms and
guidelines are available in the Dean's Office) which should contain:
Contract Major, Critical Languages
­ 139 ­
a) a description of the proposed major area of study and an explanation of the reasons for proposing
the Contract Major. A sound and persuasive rationale for the major is crucial for obtaining ap-
proval from the Committee on Educational Policy (C.E.P.).
b) a list of all courses in the proposed major and an explanation for each course choice. A minimum
of nine semester courses, one of which must be designated the senior major course (and taken
during the senior year), must be completed for a Contract Major. Normal rules governing course
grades and grade point average apply for entry into and continuation in a Contract Major.
c) a list of other courses taken or anticipated to meet College distribution requirements, including
grades received in courses already completed.
2) By mid-January, the student must meet with the Contract Major Advisor to discuss and further devel-
op the proposal.
3) By the first day of spring semester classes, the student must submit a complete draft of the proposal to
the Contract Major Advisor for feedback.
4) By the end of the fourth week of the spring semester, the student must submit the final proposal to the
Contract Major Advisor. By this date also, the faculty sponsors must submit their endorsement forms to the
Contract Major Advisor. If the student is essentially proposing to transform an existing coordinate program
(e.g. African-American Studies, area studies programs, Environmental Studies, Women's and Gender
Studies, etc.), into a Contract Major, the chair of that program should also submit to the Contract Major
Advisor a statement attesting to the validity of the proposal by the end of the fourth week of the spring
semester.
5) The Contract Major Advisor then conveys the proposal, a copy of the student's most recent academic
progress report, the faculty sponsors' endorsement forms, and recommendations regarding the feasibility
and substance of the proposal, for approval by the Committee on Educational Policy. The C.E.P., after
consultation with departments and programs substantially affected by a proposal, will vote on each propos-
al individually and will report the decision to the Contract Major Advisor, who will notify students and
sponsors before the spring registration deadline. If the time needed for C.E.P. review demands it, the Con-
tract Major Advisor may postpone notification to students and permit them to register late without penalty.
In making its decisions, the C.E.P. considers the student's academic record, the coherence and feasibility of
the plan of study, and the degree of support expressed by the faculty sponsors and, if appropriate, program
chairs.
Subsequent changes in a Contract Major must be requested in writing by the student and approved by
the faculty sponsors as well as by the Contract Major Advisor. Where there has been substantial alteration
of the original program, the Contract Major Advisor will forward the student's written request to the C.E.P.
for reconsideration.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN THE CONTRACT MAJOR
The route to the degree with honors in the Contract Major will normally be a senior thesis requiring two
semesters and a winter study of work. In special circumstances a student may propose to substitute a one-
semester course or a winter study course for one of his or her thesis courses and write a mini-thesis. The
Contract Major with honors shall comprise a minimum of eleven semester courses or ten semester courses
plus one winter study. One semester of independent study undertaken for the thesis may be allowed to
fulfill the requirement for a senior major course.
The faculty sponsors shall determine by the end of winter study whether the student is to be admitted to
honors candidacy. If not admitted to honors candidacy, the student may elect not to continue further inde-
pendent study. If admitted to honors candidacy, the student shall submit a written thesis or minithesis to
three faculty readers, at least one of whom shall be a faculty sponsor and at least one of whom shall not be a
faculty sponsor. The outside reader or readers shall be selected by the Contract Major Advisor in consulta-
tion with the faculty sponsors. There will be a one-hour oral exam by the readers, and they shall make a
final decision regarding honors.
CMAJ 493(F)-W031, W031-494(S) Senior Thesis
CMAJ 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
CRITICAL LANGUAGES (Div. I)
Coordinator, JANE CANOVA
The Critical Languages Program enables students to study important foreign languages not taught in
regular courses at Williams. The languages offered are Arabic, Hebrew, Hindi, Korean, and Swahili. Each
may be studied for one year at the elementary level.
All courses adhere to the guidelines of the National Association of Self-Instructional Language Pro-
grams (NASILP). Students work independently with standard language textbooks and individual cassette
tapes for roughly ten hours per week and attend two one-hour group review sessions per week with native-
speaking tutors. Language faculty from other institutions will conduct the midterm and final exams and
determine the final grades.
To be eligible for a Critical Languages course, the student must:
Critical Languages, Economics
­ 140 ­
z demonstrate proven capability for independent work and previous success in foreign language study;
z explain how study of the language will integrate with his or her major or other academic interests;
z enlist a member of the Williams faculty as a sponsor;
z in some cases take a pretest for placement;
z have attained sophomore standing or higher;
z have at least a 3.00 Grade Point Average.
Interested students should obtain an application form for the desired course prior to Spring Recess.
Forms are available at the Center for Foreign Languages, Literatures, and Cultures in Weston Hall. Stu-
dents must meet with the program coordinator and hand in the completed application forms no later than
one week after the end of Spring Recess. The application must be approved before registering for the
course.
Students should note that Critical Languages courses are hyphenated, meaning no credit is given for the
first semester until the second semester is successfully completed. Students must normally begin a course
in the fall semester. It cannot be taken Pass/Fail.
A Critical Languages course will be scheduled only if and when at least two students are accepted into
the course. Students planning to register for the course must attend an organizational meeting the first week
of the fall semester.
CRAB 201(F)-202(S) Arabic*
CRHE 201(F)-202(S) Hebrew* (This course is part of the Jewish Studies cluster.)
CRHI 201(F)-202(S) Hindi*
CRKO 201(F)-202(S) Korean*
CRSW 201(F)-202(S) Swahili*
ECONOMICS (Div. II)
Chair, Professor RALPH M. BRADBURD
Professors: R. BOLTON, BRADBURD, C. HILL*, MCFARLAND* MONTIEL, SCHAPIRO, S.
SHEPPARD, WINSTON. Associate Professors: HUSBANDS FEALING, W. JAEGER, ZIMMER-
MAN**. Assistant Professors: BAKIJA, BRAINERD**, CONNING**, CONSTANTINE**,
DVORAK, FRANKL, GEIREGAT, GOLLIN**, MEARDON, SHORE-SHEPPARD, SIEGLER*,
SWAMY. Visiting Professor Emeritus: BRUTON. Visiting Assistant Professor: SPENCE. Visiting
Lecturer: MYERS§§.
MAJOR
Economics 101 Introduction to Economics
One Economics course numbered 201 to 240
Economics 251 Price and Allocation Theory
Economics 252 Macroeconomics
One statistical methods course, Economics 253 or 255, or Mathematics and Statistics 243 and 346.
(This course should be taken before 401.)
Three Economics electives, of which at least two must be selected from advanced electives numbered
350 to 394. At least one elective must be selected from a list of courses designated by the department which
treat "Alternative Paradigms."
Economics 401 Senior Seminar
The primary objectives of the major are to develop an understanding of economic aspects of contempo-
rary life and to equip the student to analyze economic issues of social policy. The introductory course
stresses use of the basic elements of economic analysis for understanding and resolving such issues. In the
following semester the student normally chooses one of the 200-level courses, in which economic analysis
is applied within a particular field. The two required theory courses then provide a more thorough ground-
ing in economics as a discipline--by examining the strengths and weaknesses of the price system in allo-
cating economic resources, and by examining the aggregate processes which determine employment,
inflation, and growth. A course in statistical methods (253 or 255) equips the major to understand and
apply the basic tools of quantitative empirical analysis. Majors must take three electives, in two of which
they apply parts of the theory learned in the required theory courses. At least one elective must be a course
that requires students to consider alternative theoretical approaches to economics. In the senior seminar, the
student studies a series of current theoretical or policy problems, applying analysis and research methods.
The normal requirement that nine economics courses be taken at Williams will usually be waived only on
the basis of transferred college credit deemed acceptable by the department.
Prospective majors please note that instructors in all sections of Economics 251, 252, and 253 feel free
to use elementary calculus in assigned readings, lectures, problem sets, and examinations. By elementary
calculus is meant differentiation of single variable polynomial functions and conditions for a maximum or
Economics
­ 141 ­
minimum; it does not include integration or multivariable calculus. Instructors in advanced electives
(courses numbered 350-394) may also use elementary calculus in assigned readings, lectures, problem
sets, and examinations. Students interested in graduate study in economics should consider studying more
advanced mathematics; see your advisor for specific suggestions. Students are also reminded that some
courses now have specific mathematics requirements; see course descriptions.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN ECONOMICS
We encourage all majors who have at least a 3.5 GPA in economics courses to consider honors. To be
admitted to candidacy for honors in economics a student must complete a substantial piece of independent
research. Two routes to honors are open: the Specialization Route and the Thesis Route.
1) Specialization Route, consisting of these three units:
a. Development of a thesis proposal in the second module of Economics 401;
b. An honors winter study project (W030) in January of the senior year;
c. Economics 404 Honors Seminar.
Students who have notified the department of their interest in writing an honors thesis will use the se-
cond module of Economics 401 to develop a thesis proposal. Such proposals frequently build on research
papers completed for advanced electives, but this is not a requirement. If the proposal is accepted, the stu-
dent will be admitted to W030. The department provides a memorandum to majors with more details ev-
ery spring and fall.
2) Thesis Route (Economics 493-W031-494):
A few students each year will be accepted for year-long thesis research on a subject closely related to the
scholarly interests of a faculty member. A student who hopes to do such independent and advanced re-
search in close association with a faculty member should begin to work out a mutually satisfactory topic
early in the second semester of his or her junior year. Application to the department must be made before
the end of the junior year by submitting a detailed proposal for work under the supervision of the faculty
member. The WSP of the senior year is also spent on the thesis.
The College Bulletin states that students who wish to receive honors must take at least one course in
addition to the minimum number required for the major. Students who pursue a year-long thesis and there-
fore take both Economics 493 and 494 may substitute Economics 493 for an upper-level elective if they
wishto.StudentswhopursuetheSpecializationRouteto Honors may not substitute Economics 404 for an
upper- (or lower-) level elective requirement.
AFRICAN-AMERICAN STUDIES AND AREA STUDIES
A major in economics who concentrates in African-American or Area Studies may substitute the non-
economics courses in the concentration for one lower-level elective in the Economics major, but not for an
advanced elective (350-394).
Note on Course Numbers: Courses between 201 and 240 are lower-level electives and are open to first-
year students who have taken 101. Courses between 260 and 349 are intermediate electives which do not
build on specific prior experience, but do require some maturity, so they have any two economics courses
or permission of the instructor as prerequisites. Courses 350 and above are advanced electives primarily
designed for Economics and Political Economy majors and have theory prerequisites.
ECON 101(F,S) Introduction to Economics
An introduction to economic analysis that stresses its value in understanding current issues of social and
public policy. The central theme is how and why markets work, why they may fail to work, and the im-
plications for social policies of both their successes and failures. Among the markets to be examined are
the market for human labor that largely determines who is poor and who is affluent, the markets for goods,
the markets for clean air and water, and the market for national product that largely determines employ-
ment, inflation, and growth. The course emphasizes the basic elements of orthodox economic analysis, but
also includes discussion of the limitations to orthodox analysis and alternative ways in which economic
issues can be approached.
This course is required of majors and highly recommended for those non-majors interested in understand-
ing current economic, political, and social problems. The department recommends that students follow 101
with an economics course numbered from 201 to 240. These courses reinforce the concepts of the
introductory course and apply those concepts within a particular policy field.
Enrollment limited to 40 per section.
Hour: See Classroom Directory First Semester: BAKIJA, BRADBURD, HUSBANDS FEALING
See Classroom Directory Second Semester: FRANKL, SCHAPIRO
ECON 201T Cities (Same as Environmental Studies 207T) (Not offered 2000-2001)+
In some ways all cities are alike; in some ways every one is different. Economics can help one understand
both the common features and the differences. Topics may include the following: examples of the diversity
of economic bases that generate employment, including heavy and light industry, "high tech," defense,
tourism and amenities, government, and finance; racial and class segregation, land markets and transporta-
tion links, and how they shape patterns of land use, rents, density, building height, and household income;
dependence and competition between downtowns and suburbs; "edge cities"; problems of declining small
cities and towns and the "WalMart Problem." One or more of the short papers that each student writes may
Economics
­ 142 ­
apply the principles of the course to a particular city of his/her choice. Students will have the opportunity to
use computer mapping of urban conditions in one of their papers.
Each student will meet with the instructor and one other student on a weekly basis. Students will be ex-
pected to prepare a 6- to 8-page paper every other week and act as a discussant/critiquer for the other stu-
dent's paper on the "off" weeks. The tutorial will meet a few times as a whole.
Students' grades will be based on their contributions to the tutorial and the quality of their papers.
Prerequisite: Economics 101.
R. BOLTON
ECON 203 Gender in Economic Analysis (Same as Women's and Gender Studies 203) (Not
offered 2000-2001)
This course examines the impact of the economic roles of men and women in society at various stages of
economic development. Using the theoretical framework and tools developed for more conventional eco-
nomic analyses, theories and empirical tests of human behavior are analyzed in the context of perceived
and actual sexual differences. Particular attention is paid to analyzing the structure of the household, the
labor force, and the economy as a whole, with an emphasis on international comparisons and policy im-
plications.
Prerequisite: Economics 101. Enrollment limited to 40.
This course satisfies the Economics Department's alternative paradigms requirement.
ECON 204(S) Economic Development in Poor Countries (Same as Environmental Studies
234)*
This is an introduction to the economies and development problems of the poorer countries in Africa, Asia,
and Latin America. We shall discover both the roots and the extent of these problems, and explore possible
solutions. The course begins by investigating how different socio-historical environments have shaped
various third world economies. Then, keeping this in context, it attempts to get an idea of the best feasible
policies to tackle a whole range of critical development issues. These issues include poverty and its allevi-
ation, the population explosion, employment and migration patterns, raising education and health stan-
dards, and making agriculture and industry more efficient. Finally, we will consider some broader interna-
tional issues--like patterns of trade, foreign aid, and the international debt crisis.
Each student will be expected to study these issues for an individual country or region, attempting to get an
idea of the socio-economic context from reading examples of relevant third world literature.
Prerequisite: Economics 101. Enrollment limited to 40.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF SWAMY
ECON 205(S) Public Finance
This course examines the role of the government in a market economy. Three broad issues are considered:
when is government intervention in the economy appropriate? What is the most effective form of interven-
tion? What effects do government policies have on individual incentives? The course will cover issues in
both taxation and spending. Specific programs will be considered such as Social Security, Medicare,
education, and public assistance for the poor. We will also discuss rationales and strategies for reforming
the U.S. tax system.
Requirements will include two short policy memos, a midterm and a final.
Prerequisite: Economics 101. Students who have completed Economics 251 must have the permission of
the instructor. Enrollment limited to 40.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR, 2:35-3:50 MR BAKIJA, CONSTANTINE
ECON 206 Current Economic Problems (Not offered 2000-2001)
Topics may include: the United States government deficit--its causes, consequences, and proposed solu-
tions; the problem of unemployment; poverty in the United States and in the developing world; the eco-
nomics of the family (marriage, divorce, and births); crime; the U.S. educational system and environmental
issues. Issues will be examined within the framework of microeconomic theory, while recognizing the
constraints created by political realities.
Prerequisite: Economics 101. Enrollment limited to 40. Not open to students who have completed Econom-
ics 251 and 252.
ECON 208(F,S) Modern Corporate Industry
This course examines the role of the corporation in the American economy. Questions considered include
the following: Are our markets competitive? How do firms compete with each other and why? What do
we lose when monopoly exists? How does market structure affect advertising and technological progress?
Why regulate corporate behavior in the areas of advertising, product safety, pollution, and occupational
safety? Do we regulate effectively? What is the appropriate role of business in public policymaking?
Requirements will include one short paper, a midterm, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Economics 101. Students who have completed Economics 251 must have permission of the
instructor. Enrollment limited to 40.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR BRADBURD
ECON 209(S) Labor Economics
This course covers basic labor markets and the determination of wages in the U.S. The determination of
wages and employment levels through demand and supply of labor in competitive and non-competitive
Economics
­ 143 ­
markets is the basis for analyzing the wide range of outcomes we observe in the U.S. Differences in earn-
ings and employment are analyzed through a variety of mechanisms such as labor force participation, the
role of unions, human capital accumulation and occupational choices. Topics with important public policy
implications such as discrimination and affirmative action, minimum wages, and immigration will also be
presented. Theoretical models will be presented and critiqued with empirical evidence from U.S. labor
markets.
Grading will be based on a combination of exams and short policy papers.
Prerequisite: Economics 101. Enrollment limited to 40.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR BRAINERD
ECON 212(F) Sustainable Development (Same as Environmental Studies 212)*
This course examines questions of sustainability and sustainable development: Is sustainability incompat-
ible with economic development? Or is economic growth a prerequisite for achieving sustainability? Does
a more integrated global economy pose a threat to protecting the environment? This course appraises how
sustainability can be understood, measured and promoted, using economic tools of analysis to explain the
causes, consequences, and potential solutions to problems for environmental degradation in a changing,
and increasingly interdependent, world. Topics will include loss of biodiversity, tropical deforestation, pop-
ulation growth and global climate change. Our analysis will build on theories of externalities and public
goods, property rights, social choice, and the dynamics of institutions and technologies. Modules will in-
clude a) defining and strengths and limitations of the concept of sustainability, b) examining the process of
economic development, c) case studies and analysis of the causes for success or failure in managing com-
mon-pool resources, and d) an assessment of the relationship between trade, globalization, the WTO, and
the environment.
Requirements include exercises, midterm and final exam.
Prerequisite: Economics 101. Enrollment limited to 40.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR W. JAEGER
ECON 215(S) The World Economy
This course is an introduction to international trade and finance with an emphasis on issues of current inter-
est. Topics to be discussed may include: why we trade; theories of the pattern of trade; the effects of tariffs
and other trade barriers on national wealth and income distribution; the balance of payments, foreign ex-
change markets and the way they interact with the domestic macroeconomy; LDC's and the international
debt crisis.
Prerequisite: Economics 101. Students who have completed Economics 251 must have permission of
instructor. Enrollment limited to 40.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF SPENCE
ECON 218 Population Economics (Same as Environmental Studies 218) (Not offered
2000-2001)
This course will present an overview of the causes and consequences of population growth in the world's
poorer countries. One aim will be to understand how policy initiatives in combination with changes in
human behavior led to an explosion in the number of human beings from about 100 million in the early-
nineteenth century to over 5 billion today. We will study both sides of the population boom story: the vast
improvement in health conditions that resulted in a rapid decline in rates of death, and the much slower
reduction in rates of birth that have only recently begun to reach levels that will stabilize population size.
Following this we will examine two very important consequences of population growth: (1) migration and
urbanization--large scale movements of human beings from areas of limited opportunity to regions where
they believe they will have access to a better life, and (2) the impact of population growth on the environ-
ment--on greenhouse emissions, global warming and resource scarcity.
Prerequisite: Economics 101. Enrollment limited to 40.
ECON 220 American Economic History (Not offered 2000-2001)*
Economic history teaches that events of the distant past continue to shape our lives today. This course will
examine several important questions in American economic history from colonial times to the present. For
example, what factors account for the tremendous growth and development of the United States? Do we
know enough about the causes of the Great Depression to prevent another one? Did the New Deal save
American capitalism or undermine it? Other topics will include the legacy of slavery in the American
South, the changing economic role of women, the economic impact of immigration and trade, and the
changing distribution of income and wealth over time.
Course requirements include class participation, a research paper, and two exams.
Prerequisite: Economics 101. Enrollment limited to 25.
SIEGLER
ECON 223 Gender and Economic Development (Same as Environmental Studies 223 and
Women's and Gender Studies 223) (Not offered 2000-2001)*
Women are in particularly adverse circumstances in the developing world and their concerns are quite dis-
tinct and often in direct opposition to the concerns of men. This course will focus on women's issues in
developing countries. Issues covered will include women in the labor market, intra-household allocation,
marriage markets, population policy and reproductive choice, and gender differentials in schooling and
Economics
­ 144 ­
health. The aim will be to see how economic choices are affected by constraints to women's autonomy that
emerge from structures of patriarchy imbedded in cultural systems. Thus, in addition to readings from eco-
nomics, we will read some anthropology and sociology. This will lead to a discussion about how we may
be able to develop policy initiatives to improve the lot of women, as well as make existing policies more
gender sensitive.
Requirements: a midterm and a 20-page term paper.
Prerequisite: Economics 101. Enrollment limited to 40.
This course satisfies the Economics Department's alternative paradigms requirement.
ECON 225 Economics of Health and Health Care (Not offered 2000-2001)
This course analyzes the economics of health by applying standard microeconomic tools to the particular
problems of health and health markets. The course focuses on the inputs to health and the demand for
health care; on the particular problems of health insurance markets and how these can be corrected through
efficient contracts; the problems of rising cost and cost containment; and the interaction of the health insur-
ance market and the labor market. Much attention will be devoted to topics of current public concern, in-
cluding health insurance reform, the changing nature of health care provision, and changing public policies
in the Medicare and Medicaid programs. Other topics may include: the value of life, medical malpractice,
human organ markets and the economic impact of AIDS.
Requirements: several short papers, a midterm exam and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Economics 101. Enrollment limited to 40.
BRAINERD
ECON 226(S) Economic Development and Change in Latin America*
This course will examine competing explanations of several of the persistent problems of Latin-American
economic development and the role and limits of both the state and markets in addressing these problems.
Topics to be discussed include the colonial legacy, agrarian organization and land reform, the informal
urban economy, import substitution industrialization, populist and revolutionary experiments and reactions
against them, debt and currency crises, the design and consequences of macro stabilization and structural
adjustment programs, and recent experiences with state reform, decentralization, and targeted poverty al-
leviation programs.
Evaluation will be based on short essays, a term paper, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Economics 101. Enrollment limited to 40.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR CONNING
ECON 230(F) The Economics of Health and Health Care
This course analyzes the economics of health by applying standard microeconomic tools to the particular
problems of health and health care markets. The course focuses on three broad issues: the inputs to health
and the demand for health care, the structure and consequences of public and private health insurance, and
the supply of health care. Special attention will be devoted to topics of current public concern, including the
problems of rising costs and cost containment, health insurance reform, the changing nature of health care
provision, changing public policies in the Medicare and Medicaid programs, hospital competition, and the
determinants and consequences of technological change in medicine.
Requirements: several short papers, a midterm exam and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Economics 101. Enrollment limited to 40.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF SHORE-SHEPPARD
ECON 233(F) Transition Economies in Eastern Europe
Ten years of economic reforms in Eastern Europe have resulted in widely differing outcomes. This course
will examine these reforms and will endeavor to explain why some countries have been more successful
than others. Different approaches to macroeconomic stabilization, privatization, regulatory and legal re-
forms will be considered. From the diverse experiences in the region we will draw lessons for better poli-
cies and more effective reforms. We will apply these lessons to current developments and will predict some
of the challenges ahead.
Requirements: a research paper and two exams.
Prerequisite: Economics 101. Enrollment limited to 40.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF DVORAK
ECON 235(S) Urban Centers and Urban Systems
Cities, systems of cities, and the interactions between cities are the outcome of human decisions and reflect
their social structure and desire for interaction. The form of these urban areas is determined by the choices
made by the people who reside in, work in, and travel between cities. Economic forces influence and
constrain these choices, and economic models of decision-making can help us to explain and predict the
patterns that result. These models help us to comprehend the structure of urban areas. This course will
introduce the ideas and some of the analytic tools that assist in understanding the economic foundations of
urban centers and urban systems.Topics addressed in the course will include the determinants of land use,
location of firms, choice of transportation mode, flows of capital investment into real estate, housing prices
and housing availability and regulation of housing markets, movement of population from one city to
another, and public policies designed to deal with urban problems.
Economics
­ 145 ­
Students will be required to write two "policy memoranda" on assigned topics. Two exams will be given.
Prerequisite: Economics 101. Enrollment limited to 40.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR S. SHEPPARD
ECON 237 The Economics of Inequality and Poverty (Not offered 2000-2001)
This course is designed to deal with issues of equity in economic distribution. Topics covered will include:
(1) ethical issues in deciding upon a "just" distribution of income; (2) statistical analysis of the existing
distribution of income, with a primary focus on the United States; (3) theoretical models of and empirical
evidence on the determinants of inequality including discrimination; (4) the poor and anti-poverty policies,
and (5) a discussion of a range of policies designed to redistribute income and wealth.
Prerequisite: Economics 101. Enrollment limited to 40.
ZIMMERMAN
ECON 238(F) The Regions of America (Same as Environmental Studies 238)
Economic theory helps explain the economic characteristics and problems of regions in the U.S. and Cana-
da. We shall study both large multistate regions--like New England, the Southwest, the Great Plains, and
the Pacific Northwest, for example--and smaller distinctive regions, such as Appalachia, Silicon Valley,
the Central Valley of California, the U.S.-Mexico border strip, Quebec, and Hawaii. We shall deal with
important questions such as: How are regional specialization and prosperity and interregional trade shaped
by natural resources, transportation and communications infrastructure and technology, the decisions of
large firms, and public policies? Why are some regions dynamic seedbeds of new technology and others
lagging victims of global forces? Why do people move from one region to another, while others stay on
doggedly in depressed regions? Is immigration good or bad for destination regions? Why are there large
urban agglomerations (like Chicago, L.A., Miami, Seattle-Vancouver) and how do they affect their larger
regions? Why, even in North America, does agriculture continue to shape some large and small regions?
We'll use maps and slides, a computer mapping program, and insights from the disciplines of geography
and history, to supplement economic theory and economic data.
Each student will do independent work on a region of his/her choice.
Requirements: midterm, two papers, and problem sets.
Prerequisite: Economics 101. Enrollment limited to 40. This course satisfies the Economics Department's
alternative paradigms requirement.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF R. BOLTON
ECON 251(F,S) Price and Allocation Theory
A study of the determination of relative prices and their importance in shaping the allocation of resources
and the distribution of income. Subjects include: behavior of households in a variety of settings, such as
buying goods and services, saving, and labor supply; behavior of firms in various kinds of markets; results
of competitive and noncompetitive markets in goods, labor, land, and capital; market failure; government
policies as sources of and responses to market failure; welfare criteria; limitations of mainstream analysis.
Instructors may use elementary calculus in assigned readings, lectures, exams, and problems. In the spring
semester, section two of this course will employ a somewhat more mathematical exposition of microtheo-
ry.
Prerequisites: Economics 101 and any 200-level economics course.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR, 9:55-11:10 TR First Semester: S. SHEPPARD
1:10-2:25 TF, 2:35-3:50 TF Second Semester: SHORE-SHEPPARD
ECON 252(F,S) Macroeconomics
A study of macroeconomic theory and policy: the determinants of aggregate output, employment and
prices, and the tools of monetary and fiscal policy used by the government in attempts to promote growth
and limit inflation. The purpose is both to explain macroeconomics theory and to use it as a framework for
discussing the current state of the U.S. economy and for analyzing recent economic policy. Instructors may
use elementary calculus in assigned readings, exams, and lectures.
Prerequisites: Economics 101 and any 200-level course in economics.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR, 2:35-3:50 MR First Semester: GEIREGAT
1:10-2:25 MR, 2:35-3:50 MR Second Semester: MEARDON
ECON 253(F,S) Empirical Economic Methods
An introduction to applied quantitative economic analysis. The course will acquaint students with the em-
pirical dimension in economic research by familiarizing them with the basic empirical methods used by
economists and with their strengths and limitations. Emphasis throughout will be on the practical applica-
tion of the principles being developed. Computer work will be part of the course, but no previous training
in computers is expected. Instructors may use elementary calculus in assigned readings, exams, and lec-
tures. Students may substitute the combination of Mathematics 253 and 346 for Economics 253 or 255.
Prerequisites: two courses in economics.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF, 11:20-12:35 TR First Semester: SWAMY
8:30-9:45 MWF, 11:00-12:15 MWF Second Semester: DVORAK
ECON 255(S) Econometrics
An introduction to the theory and practice of applied quantitative economic analysis. This course familiar-
izes students with the strengths and weaknesses of the basic empirical methods used by economists to eval-
Economics
­ 146 ­
uate economic theory against economic data. Emphasizes both the statistical foundations of regression
techniques and the practical application of those techniques in empirical research. Computer exercises will
provide experience in using the empirical methods, but no previous computer experience is expected. Pre-
vious courses in statistics may prove helpful, but are not necessary. Highly recommended forstudentscon-
sideringgraduatetrainingineconomicsorpublicpolicy. Students may substitute the combination of Math-
ematics 253 and 346 for Economics 253 or 255.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 105 or equivalent plus two courses in economics.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR ZIMMERMAN
ECON 301(F) Analytical Views of Political Economy (Same as Political Economy 301 and
Political Science 333)
This course satisfies the Economics Department's alternative paradigms requirement.
(See under Political Economy for full description.)
ECON 317(S) Finance and Capital Markets
This course gives a survey of business finance, managerial decision-making, and the main capital markets
(stocks, bonds, etc.). We explore the role of capital markets in the flow-of-funds between savers and inves-
tors, their role in risk redistribution and in providing incentives to managers. Among the main topics are:
risk and return tradeoffs, models of stock and bond prices, the capital asset pricing model, financial deriva-
tives (options, futures, swaps), hedging, and "efficient markets" theories of financial markets.
Prerequisites: two courses in economics. Open to sophomores. Some basic knowledge of calculus and
descriptive statistics is required. Students are expected to use spreadsheets for assignments. Enrollment
limited to 25.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF GEIREGAT
ECON 319 Radical Political Economy (Not offered 2000-2001)
This course will discuss a number of approaches to political economy whose understanding of capitalism
differs fundamentally from that of mainstream economics. These approaches will include Marxian, lib-
ertarian, and other perspectives, including those that focus on gender and race. Topics covered may include
the nature of the State and its interaction with the economy; economic exploitation and predation; free
trade; freedom, economic coercion, and the manufacture of consent. Class participation will be an impor-
tant component of the course.
Grading will be based on a midterm, final exam and a short paper.
Prerequisites: Economics 101. Enrollment limited to 25. This course satisfies the Economics Department's
alternative paradigms requirement.
ADVANCED ELECTIVES
ECON 353 Decision-making and Judgment (Not offered 2000-2001)
Studies of decision-making suggest that most people substantially violate even undemanding models of
rationality. Are people truly irrational, and, if so, can anything be done about it? This course focuses on
normative decision-making (how we should make decisions under general conditions), descriptive deci-
sion-making (how we do make decisions under actual conditions), and the contrast between the two. We
proceed to a view of prescriptive decision-making, or how we might combine normative and descriptive
insights to improve decision-making and judgment. Topics include decision-analytic methods for improv-
ing decision-making rigor (e.g., decision trees); microeconomic concepts and tools for optimization prob-
lems; game theory as appropriate; insights from cognitive psychology on heuristics (short cuts) that some-
times help, but often distort, decision-making; integrated models of judgment that call for both analysis and
intuition; insights from the newly-emerging studies of judgment and wisdom.
Until a few years ago, this topic was given normative treatment in departments of engineering, statistics
and economics, and was separately taught as a descriptive science in departments of psychology. The ap-
parent value of combining the two into a single, prescriptive analysis of decision-making and judgment has
led to a recent wave of interdisciplinary approaches such as the one adopted in this course. Requirements:
multiple problems and case analyses, one project, final exam.
Prerequisites: Economics 101 and 251. Mathematics 140 or equivalent recommended, but not essential.
Enrollment limited to 25. This course satisfies the Economics Department's alternative paradigms require-
ment.
ECON 354 Perspectives on Economic Theory (Not offered 2000-2001)
This course is intended to put into perspective the basic economic theory taught in the department's re-
quired theory courses--Economics 251 and 252--by looking at the work of modern economists who are
critical of the shortcomings of conventional theory and are trying to identify and, if they can, to overcome
them. The concerns of some of these mainstream economists are remarkably similar to those of more radi-
cal critics of economic theory and of students first reading economic theory. Each year the course focuses
on a set of issues of concern to such authors (and the instructor). These have included: famine as a case in
which markets work too well, the role of imperfect information in the functioning of markets, a feminist
critique of Economics 251, rationality as a cornerstone of economic theory, positivist science as the econo-
mist's intellectual role model, moral behavior as product or precondition of market behavior, deception and
honesty in markets, the casual treatment of time in conventional theory, discounting the future, conflicting
Economics
­ 147 ­
and inconsistent preferences.
Seminar discussion, not lectures, will be the method of the class.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 and 252. Enrollment limited to 20. This course satisfies the Economics De-
partment's alternative paradigms requirement.
WINSTON
ECON 355 Feminist Economics (Not offered 2000-2001)+
Neoclassical economics appears not to have much to say about gender: its tools purport to be gender-neu-
tral and its framework universal. But a growing movement of feminist economists argue that this univer-
sality is illusory; neoclassical economics is based on a number of highly gendered assumptions that we
often take for granted. These assumptions affect how we choose what is considered valuable economic
activity, how we expect people to make decisions, and how we expect people to behave in different situa-
tions (for example, in the market versus at home). Recently, there has been a profusion of research, both
theoretical and empirical, challenging these assumptions. We will examine research by feminist econo-
mists on a variety of topics, including (but not limited to) household decision-making, women in develop-
ment, balancing paid and unpaid labor, gendered images in economics texts and articles, and welfare re-
form.
Requirements: several short reaction papers; a research paper; class participation and leading class discus-
sions.
Prerequisite: Economics 251 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limited to 20. This course satisfies
the Economics Department's alternative paradigms requirement.
ECON 356(F) Topics in World Economic History
This class will look at a wide range of economies throughout world history to examine the role of institu-
tions in economic activity. The general question addressed in this course is, "How do cultural norms or
historical circumstances change our ability to use standard economic models to understand economic
events?" Instead of attacking this question on a broad front, we will use historical case studies to get at
specific issues. First we will examine how cultural norms affected people's decisions to invest in education
in a variety of countries in the nineteenth century, including Japan and Sweden. Second, the contrast of
fourteenth century China and Industrial Revolution England will illustrate the role of institutions in techno-
logical innovation. Finally, we will look at the role of international and national institutions in the spread of
economic downturns by contrasting recessions of the late nineteenth and early twentieth century (including
the Great Depression) with the recent Asian Crisis.
Requirements: include a take-home midterm and a research paper.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 and 252, or permission of instructor. Enrollment limited to 20. This course
satisfies the Economics Department's alternative paradigms requirement.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR FRANKL
ECON 357T(F) The Strange Economics of College
The course is going to focus on current economic problems in U.S. higher education with the ambitious
intention of resolving--or at least illuminating--some of them in creative ways, using economic theory
and careful analysis to do it. An understanding of the economics of colleges and universities and higher
education that's emerged only recently makes that a non-unreasonable aim. Topics include questions of
access, choice and diversity of American higher education; economic and non-economic returns to higher
education investments; and differences between private institutional goals and that of society.
Prerequisite: 251. Enrollment limited to 3.
Hour: TBA SCHAPIRO
ECON 358 International Economics (Not offered 2000-2001)
This course will look at a variety of issues relating to the trade between nations in both goods and assets.
Different theories explaining the patterns of international trade will be compared. The effects and desirabil-
ity of commercial policy, tariffs, and other controls on trade, will be explored. What do recent theories
about "strategic trade policies" imply about the desirability of free trade? Other topics will include the ef-
fects of increased integration of financial markets internationally on the effectiveness of macroeconomic
policy in the U.S., and current events, such as the U.S. trade deficit and the LDC debt crisis.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 and 252. Enrollment limited to 20.
ECON 359(S) Economics of Higher Education
This seminar explores the economics and financing of colleges and universities, with a particular focus on
contemporary policy issues. A structured sequence of readings and case studies serve as the backbone of
the course. Course materials will apply economic theory to selected policy issues, including tuition and
financial aid, the individual and societal returns of higher education, and academic labor markets. The
course will also introduce students to the financial structure and management of colleges, including fund-
ing sources; budget processes; and policies and issues regarding the finance of higher education.
Grading will be based on several written case studies, student research project, final exam, and class dis-
cussion/participation.
Prerequisites: Economics 251, Economics 253 or 255 (or Mathematics 143). While significant back-
ground in economic theory and econometrics is preferred, non-economics majors are encouraged to con-
tact the instructor to discuss their interest in the course. Such students should be willing to devote the extra
Economics
­ 148 ­
time necessary to master the technical vocabulary and economic concepts included in some of the read-
ings. Enrollment limited to 15.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR MYERS
ECON 360(F) International Monetary Economics
This course studies the macroeconomic behavior of economies that trade both goods and assets with other
economies: international financial transactions, especially the buying and selling of foreign money, the role
of central banks and private speculators in determining exchange rates and interest rates, and the effects of
international transactions on the overall performance of an open economy. Additional topics may include
the "asset market approach" to exchange rate determination, the nature and purpose of certain international
institutions, and important current events.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 and 252. Enrollment limited to 20.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR, 2:35-3:50 MR MONTIEL
ECON 362(S) Global Competitive Strategies+
This course examines the ways in which a country's factor endowments, domestic market characteristics,
and government policies promote or impede the global expansion of its industries and corporations. First,
actual trade and investment decisions of multinational corporations are analyzed and compared to the pre-
dictions of international trade theory. Second, competitive strategies of indigenous and foreign rivals in
U.S., Pacific rim, and European markets are explored. Third, the efficacy of government policies in pro-
moting the competitiveness of industries in global markets is discussed. Case studies of firms, industries,
and countries will be utilized.
Requirements: a research paper and exam(s).
Prerequisite: Economics 251. Enrollment limited to 20.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR HUSBANDS FEALING
ECON 363(S) Money and Banking
This course consists of three broad areas of study. First, we will explore the role of money and its interac-
tion with other economic variables. Second, we will study the role of the central bank and the conduct of
monetary policy. Although special attention will be given to the organization and the operation of the Fed-
eral Reserve System, other monetary policy regimes will also be considered. Finally, we will look at the
role of financial intermediaries (especially banks) in the flow of funds between savers and investors.
Prerequisite: Economics 252. Enrollment limited to 25.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR GEIREGAT
ECON 365 Economic Reform in Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union (Not offered
2000-2001)
This course will examine the policy issues faced by formerly socialist countries engaged in major econom-
ic reforms. Topics covered will include: (1) `big bang' versus gradualist approaches to economic reform;
(2) stabilization programs to end high inflation; (3) strategies of privatization and enterprise restructuring;
(4) reform of social policy and welfare institutions; and (5) the appropriate role for the state in these new
economies.
Requirements: four short essays and a research paper.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 and 252 (one of these courses may be taken concurrently). Enrollment limit-
ed to 25.
BRAINERD
ECON 366 Forecasting Economic Performance: The U.S. Regional and International Outlook
(Not offered 2000-2001)
Over the course of the semester, we take a hands-on approach to predicting the movement of key economic
variables in the global economy. First, we will explore the fundamentals of forecasting, while simulating
best-case and worst-case scenarios of economic growth in the near term. Second, we will explore how the
nine U.S. regions follow unique paths of growth, and are affected differently by external shocks--such as
the Asian economic crisis. Third, we will turn our attentions abroad, to determine the paths of discovery for
Asian economies, and alternative trajectories for various Latin-American economies.
There will be a midterm, final exam, and economic policy paper.
Prerequisite: Economics 252, 253, or 255. Enrollment limited to 25.
HUSBANDS FEALING
ECON 369(S) Agriculture and Development Strategy (Same as Economics 512 and
Environmental Studies 369)
(See under Economics 512 for full description.)
ECON 370 Advanced Topics in Economic Theory (Not offered 2000-2001)
The purpose of this course is to introduce the student to mathematical methods and models of economic
theory at an advanced undergraduate level. In this economics course, a set of fundamental mathematical
tools will be presented and applied to study a variety of topics. The idea is to help the student develop
greater proficiency in the use of mathematics in economics and some sophistication regarding the power
(and limitations) of mathematical models as aids to intuition in economics. One of the aims of the course is
to expose the student to enough traditional and recent theoretical tools and applications so that many of the
Economics
­ 149 ­
professional articles in leading economics journals will be comprehensible. This course may be well-suited
to students interested in applications of mathematics to economics, students interested in further develop-
ing their analytical skills, and to students considering advanced study in economics. As a foundation, some
traditional uses of math in economics will be considered. Among the additional topics that may be ex-
plored are models of social security, growth theory, choice under uncertainty and insurance, asymmetric
information, modern approaches to money and macroeconomics, and game theoretic models of industrial
organization, bargaining, irrationality, and monetary policy.
Methods of evaluation will likely be two exams.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 and 252; Mathematics 104 or permission of instructor.Enrollment limited to
25.
CONNING
ECON 371(S) Economic Justice
A seminar examining normative and empirical aspects of economic justice, with special emphasis on
problems of income distribution. Discussion of systematic theories of distributive justice, including uti-
litarianism and welfare economics, libertarianism, Rawls' theory of justice as fairness, and Marxist/radical
theories. Applied problems examined vary from year to year and are chosen from such topics as: alterna-
tive incentive systems, effects of education on income distribution, income distribution and economic
growth, problems of inequality among nations, and government's role in redistribution income.
Prerequisite: Economics 251. Enrollment limited to 20. This course satisfies the Economics Department's
alternative paradigms requirement.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF, 8:30-9:45 MWF ZIMMERMAN
ECON 372 Dynamic Economic Analysis: Tools and Intuition (Not offered 2000-2001)
Most of the tools of traditional economics focus on one-time decisions: how much to spend, given a budget
constraint; or how much to produce, given prices and costs. Many important issues, however, involve deci-
sions that must be repeated over time or made sequentially. For example, we might be interested in how
best to use an exhaustible resource, or how to accumulate capital efficiently. More concretely, we might be
interested in how alternative social security policies would affect savings behavior. To address such ques-
tions, economists have increasingly drawn on a collection of mathematical tools--often called dynamic
optimization theory--to support economic institutions. This course will introduce students to the tool kit of
dynamic economic analysis. We will study the calculus of variations and optimal control theory, introduc-
ing as needed such tools as difference and differential equations and integral calculus. But although we will
approach these tools rigorously, we will strive constantly to link technique to economic intuition--and to
ask when and how these tools can help us to address economic problems. We will read some classic papers
applying dynamic tools to economic problems--relating to issues such as asset pricing, monopoly behav-
ior, labor demand, inflation-unemployment tradeoffs, and firm investment. We will also consider the li-
mitations of such stylized models.
Students will be evaluated on the basis of problem sets and exams.
Students with a background in computer programming may have the option to substitute some computa-
tional exercises for certain problem sets. This class is intended primarily for students with an interest in the
use of mathematics for economics, and for those students who are contemplating graduate study in
economics.
Economics 251 is a prerequisite for the class, along with Mathematics 104; Mathematics 105 is highly
recommended. Enrollment limited to 25.
GOLLIN
ECON 373(S) Open-Economy Macroeconomics (Same as Economics 513)
(See under Economics 513 for full description.)
ECON 374 The Practice of Econometrics (Not offered 2000-2001)
This course will provide students with the opportunity to apply the empirical tools developed in Economics
253/255. The essential objective is to let students use econometrics and, in so doing, to develop the skills of
a proficient applied economist. To that end, we will look at the derivation of various theoretical models
(e.g. the Capital Asset Pricing Model, cost and learning curves, Oaxaca decompositions for wage discrimi-
nation, etc.) and then estimate the implied relationships using a statistical program. The first class of each
week will typically be devoted to the relevant theory and the second class will be spent in the lab doing
applied work.
Requirements: two empirical research papers.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 or 252 and 253 or 255. Enrollment limited to 25.
ZIMMERMAN
ECON 376(S) The Economics of Labor
This seminar will explore the workings of U.S. labor markets with an emphasis on workers and their wa-
ges. Theoretical models and empirical research are used to explain the neoclassical economists' view of
how wages are determined within labor markets. Challenges to the neoclassical view will also be discus-
sed. The course will focus on the policy implications of the theories presented in class. Examples of the
types of topics to be covered include: wage differences by race and gender, minimum wages, discrimina-
tion, the effect of trade and immigration on U.S. workers' wages, income inequality, and the increasing
Economics
­ 150 ­
importance of higher education in determining earnings.
Requirements will include at least one exam, a research paper, and a class presentation.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 and 253 or 255 or permission of the instructor if student has not taken 253 or
255. Enrollment limited to 20. This course satisfies the Economics Department's alternative paradigms
requirement.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR CONSTANTINE
ECON 377(S) Environmental Policy and Natural Resource Management*
This course analyzes the economics of natural resources and the environment. The optimal allocation of
natural resources and environmental quality through space and time depends on many things and may
differ from the allocation generated by markets. In the first half of this course, we will examine the role for
policy intervention to affect environmental quality in the context of many of the archetypal problems in
environmental economics. These include polluting activity; the allocation of depletable, renewable, and
recyclable resources over time; harvesting problems; and the control of toxic substances. We will also con-
sider the policymaker's problem when information is less certain. The second half of the course will focus
on the use of contingent valuation methods (CVM) to value natural resources and environmental quality.
We will learn about the great CVM debate in economics --and then apply what we've learned to a contin-
gent valuation project of our own on a topic of local interest. Phases of the project will include survey
design, survey administration, and data analysis. Results of the project will be presented to the community.
Prerequisite: Economics 251. Mathematics 104 recommended. Enrollment limited to 25.
This course satisfies the Economics Department's alternative paradigms requirement.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF SPENCE
ECON 378(S) Public Finance (Same as Economics 514)
(See under Economics 514 for full description.)
ECON 382 Industrial Organization (Not offered 2000-2001)
This course consists broadly of the study of the price and efficiency performance of industries representa-
tive of various types of market structures and practices. Recent developments in game theory have proven
to be very useful in interpreting the facts of industrial economics in the U.S. Along with a consideration of
actual structure and performance, relatively simple game theoretic models of industrial organization will be
analyzed. Among the topics that will be analyzed may be: the role of a firm's reputation, tacit collusion,
sunk costs and barriers to entry, multimarket contact, patent races, strategic adoption of new technologies,
and wars of attrition.
Requirements: There will be several problem sets and exams throughout the semester. A paper will also
likely be required.
Prerequisite: Economics 251. Enrollment limited to 25.
ECON 384 Advanced Topics in Finance and Capital Markets (Not offered 2000-2001)
This course is similar to Economics 317, but it is at a more advanced level and is especially designed for
economics and political economy majors. Topics in business finance, managerial decision-making, and the
stock market, bond market, and options and futures markets. Capital markets' social function in allocating
resources, redistributing risk, facilitating investment, and evaluating managers and providing incentives for
them. The topics are similar to those in Economics 317, but this course pays more attention to options,
futures, and other derivative securities, and to statistical studies of price movements in securities markets. A
student may not receive credit for both 317 and 384.
Prerequisites: Economics 251, plus either 253 or 255. Enrollment limited to 25.
ECON 385(S) Games and Information
Game theory purports to provide a unifying framework with which to analyze and predict the emergence
and evolution of social behavior and organization in any of a wide variety of contexts in which human (or
plant or animal) agents interact. Economic applications include the analysis of firms' strategic behavior in
concentrated markets, the emergence of trust and cooperation out of anarchy, financial bubbles or panics,
and any of a number of other situations where individually rational behavior may or may not lead to social-
ly desirable outcomes. Asymmetric information economics and mechanism-design extend game theory by
exploring how the design of the rules of a game and the control of information affect equilibrium outcomes
and therefore how people might choose to set up the rules to govern their interactions. Questions addressed
include the design of compensation and incentive contracts; voting models and political-economic equilib-
ria; why insurance contracts specify deductibles and why so many people are uninsured in our society;
how firms choose their financial structure and why some firms are credit-rationed, etc.
Prerequisites: Economics 251; Mathematics 104 or permission from the instructor. Enrollment limited to
20.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR CONNING
ECON 386 The Economics of Inequality (Not offered 2000-2001)
Between 1968 and 1994, inequality in the U.S. increased 22 percent--more than wiping out the 7 percent
improvement which had occurred in the 1950s and 60s. The U.S. currently has the largest standard devi-
ation of earnings of any developed country, nearly double the combined average in those countries. Strik-
ing differences can be observed among groups defined by race, gender, age and education. Why? And
what are the effects of such marked differences between the haves and the have-nots in our society? Is there
Economics
­ 151 ­
a relationship between inequality and crime, health, or rate of economic development in a society? And
why is it that economists can still disagree among themselves about the extent of this problem? This course
is intended as a "hands-on" opportunity for economics majors to explore these issues in the literature and
then use some of the large micro-level data sets that describe individuals in the population over time. Stu-
dents will learn to use software for data manipulation and analysis, and will define and conduct indepen-
dent research topics using the data, working in close collaboration with the instructor. The course is particu-
larly appropriate for students interested in developing their own research capabilities, whether in prepara-
tion for undertaking a senior honors thesis, in anticipation of graduate school, or simply with an eye on the
job market.
Requirements: one semester-long research project, with a final paper and oral presentation.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 or 252, and 253 or 255 (253/55 may be concurrent). Enrollment limited to
20.
ECON 388(S) Beyond Markets: Institutions and Human Interests
The economics of institutions is concerned with the humanly-devised rules of a society that structure in-
centives and constrain and shape human interactions. In contrast to much of economics, which is con-
cerned with a single, exogenous institution (the market), institutional economics seeks to understand
broadly the rationale for, and evolution of, a range of institutional structures including private and common
property, firms, governments, customs and cultural norms, ethics and morals. In this course, we will ex-
amine the recently burgeoning field of institutional economics, the influence of which is indicated by three
recent Nobel Prizes to institutionalists--R. Coase, G. Becker, and D. North. The "new institutional eco-
nomics" stresses the importance of integrating individual choices within the constraints imposed on choice
sets by institutions at all levels. Linkages among institutions are important as well; indeed, market efficien-
cy depends to a large extent on the existence and effectiveness of other institutions. We will also examine
their dynamics--how institutions may arise and evolve in response to problems of limited information,
transaction costs, bounded rationality, and other social coordination problems. The course will stress the
implications of this dynamic, institutional perspective on individual and collective human interests, as well
as on the role of public policy.
Requirements: midterm and final exams.
Prerequisite: Economics 251. Enrollment limited to 20. This course satisfies the Economics Department's
alternative paradigms requirement.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR W. JAEGER
ECON 394(F) History of Economic Thought
The dominant theories, methods, and concerns of modern economists are rather different from those of
Adam Smith. How did the discipline get to where it is today? This course will tackle part of this question
by looking at the transformations in economic thought between Smith in the eighteenth century and Alfred
Marshall in the early years of the twentieth. Lectures and discussions will focus on readings from Smith,
Ricardo, Malthus, Mill, Marx, and Marshall.
Grades will be based on class participation, a series of short essays and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 and 252, or consent of the instructor. Enrollment limited to 25. This course
satisfies the Economics Department's alternative paradigms requirement.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF MEARDON
ECON 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
Students are invited to apply to undertake independent study on subjects of their own choosing. Interested
students should consult with a faculty member about designing an appropriate project well in advance of
spring registration.
With permission of the department, an approved project may count as one of the two advanced electives
required for the major.
Prerequisites: consent of an instructor and of the department chair.
Hour: Members of the Department
ECON 401(F) Senior Seminar+
The primary emphasis of this senior course is to strengthen the student's skill and sensitivity in applying
economic analysis and research methods to social policy problems and theoretical issues. A series of cur-
rent issues will be examined in seminars, with students carrying substantial responsibility in investigating
relevant theoretical analyses and empirical information, and conducting the seminar discussion.
Requirements: one long and one short paper, and an oral exam.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 and 252. Required of all senior majors. Incoming seniors should leave both
401 time slots open for maximum choice of modules.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF, 2:35-3:50 TF W. JAEGER, S. SHEPPARD, SPENCE
ECON W030-404(S) Honors Seminar
This course is a research seminar for candidates for honors in economics. Each candidate prepares an hon-
ors thesis. Candidates will meet as a group to discuss problems common to all of them (such as empirical
methods, data sources, and theoretical approaches) and each one will report on his/her work at various
stages for criticism by the group as a whole. Some work is required during the preceding semester.
Economics
­ 152 ­
Prerequisites: admission by the department, and for Economics 404, completion of Honors WSP. Re-
quired for honors in economics unless a student writes a year-long thesis.
BAKIJA
ECON 493(F)-W031-494(S) Honors Thesis
A year-long research project for those honors candidates admitted to this route to honors.
Prerequisite: admission by the department in the spring of the junior year.
ECON W030 Honors Winter Study Project
This course is to be taken by all candidates for honors by the "Specialization Route."
GRADUATE COURSES IN DEVELOPMENT ECONOMICS
Juniors and seniors majoring in Economics or Political Economy may, with the permission of the
instructor, enroll in graduate courses given by the Center for Development Economics (described below).
A Center course may substitute for an advanced elective in the major with permission of the chair of the
department.
ECON 501(F) Development Economics I*
The course examines concepts, tools, and models in contemporary economic theory that have proved rele-
vant to development problems, and their application in economic policymaking. Topics include growth
processes and structural change; investment and sources of saving; capital, labor, and technological prog-
ress; policies for public, private, and foreign enterprises; policymaking and negotiation in governments;
and policies for reducing poverty and inequality.
Undergraduate enrollment limited and only accepted with instructor's permission. This course satisfies the
Economics Department's alternative paradigms requirement.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF BRUTON
ECON 502(S) Development Economics II*
This course explores further aspects of economic theory and policy analysis which are most relevant to
development problems. Topics include technological change and innovation; human capital accumulation,
employment and labor markets; income distribution; agricultural and industrial development and develop-
ment strategies; and the role of the government versus the role of the market in economic development.
Undergraduate enrollment limited and only accepted with instructor's permission.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF SWAMY
ECON 507(F) International Trade and Development
This course explores foreign exchange problems of developing countries and possible means to deal with
them; evolving theories of comparative advantage and their relevance to trade policy; strategies of import
substitution and export promotion and their consequences for employment, growth, and income distribu-
tion; foreign investment, external debt, IMF stabilization programs, and the world financial system.
Undergraduate enrollment limited and only accepted with instructor's permission.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR MEARDON
ECON 509(F) Money and Public Finance
This course looks at financial aspects of development programs. Consideration is made of the role of fi-
nance in macroeconomic equilibrium, and fiscal and monetary policies in inflation and development of
financial markets. The course examines the principal kinds of tax instruments, their impacts on investment
and saving, resource allocation, stabilization, and the progressivity of tax burdens.
Undergraduate enrollment limited and only accepted with instructor's permission.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR MONTIEL
ECON 511(F) Statistics/Econometrics
This course focuses on basic methods of bringing economic theory and data together to provide empirical
guidance for policy formulation, including use of computers in econometric analysis. This course covers
techniques of econometric analysis using a more mathematical exposition.
Admission to 511 depends on previous background in statistics and mathematics.
Undergraduate enrollment limited and only accepted with instructor's permission.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF SHORE-SHEPPARD
ECON 512(S) Agriculture and Development Strategy (Same as Economics 369)
This course examines the role of agriculture in the development process, and the effects of government
policy on the agricultural sector. Topics will include the economics of farm households as producers and
consumers, effects of policy on agricultural growth, linkages between agriculture and non-agricultural sec-
tors, trade-offs between cash and food crop production; pricing criteria for agricultural products, food secu-
rity issues, and whether or not food self-sufficiency is a reasonable goal of government policy.
Undergraduate enrollment limited and only accepted with instructor's permission.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR GOLLIN
Economics, English
­ 153 ­
ECON 513(S) Open-Economy Macroeconomics (Same as Economics 373)
A study and discussion of the following topics: effects of the real exchange rate on the trade balance, deval-
uation and inflation, managing external shocks, external borrowing and debt management, and structural
adjustment and growth.
Undergraduate enrollment limited and only accepted with instructor's permission.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR DVORAK
ECON 514(S) Public Finance (Same as Economics 378)
Public finance is the branch of economics concerned with government expenditure and taxation, focusing
primarily on microeconomic aspects of these activities. It provides tools for understanding the effects of
government policies, as well as a useful conceptual framework for analyzing normative questions such as
"what is a good policy?" This seminar will present the basic principles for public finance, and apply them
to topics of particular importance in developing countries. The course will begin by considering the effi-
ciency of market economics, and rationales for government intervention in the market, such as public
goods, externalties, information-based market failures, and equity. Applications include environmental
policy, education, health care, aid to the poor, and social security. We then move on to the economics of
taxation, considering what kinds of taxes are used in developing countries, the economic and distributional
effects of taxation, questions of administration and evasion, and options for reform such as the value added
tax. Time permitting, we may also address topics such as pubic enterprises, political economy, and decen-
tralization.
Undergraduate enrollment limited and only accepted with instructor's permission.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF BAKIJA
ECON 515(S) Environmental Policy and Natural Resource Management (Same as
Environmental Studies 377)*
This seminar addresses the problems of environmental protection as an element of development policy and
planning. It is an application of environmental and natural resource economics to the developing country
context. The theory will include market failure, externalities, common property resources and public
goods, and intertemporal equity and discounting. Topics will include the use of market-based versus com-
mand-and-control policy instruments, property rights regimes, renewable and non-renewable resource
management, measurement of environmental benefits and costs, benefit-cost analysis, institutional and
policy constraints to sustainable development, and global externalities.
The focus of the seminar will be on country-specific cases and the application of analytical techniques to
questions of resource management and pollution control, given the trade-offs (or possibly complementari-
ties) between environmental and economic development objectives.
Prerequisite: Economics 251. Enrollment limited to 25.
Undergraduate enrollment limited and only accepted with instructor's permission. This course satisfies the
Economics Department's alternative paradigms requirement.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR W. JAEGER
ECON 520(S) Research Studies
In this course, each Fellow carries out an individual research study on a topic in which he or she has partic-
ular interest, usually related to one of the three seminars. The approach and results of the study are reported
in a major paper. Research studies are analytical rather than descriptive and in nearly all cases include
quantitative analyses. Often the topic is a specific policy problem in a Fellow's own country.
ENGLISH (Div. I)
Chair, Professor STEPHEN FIX
Professors: I. BELL*, R. BELL, BUNDTZEN, FIX, S. GRAVER, KNOPP, LIMON, PYE*,RAAB**, J.
SHEPARD, D. L. SMITH*, SOKOLSKY, SWANN, TIFFT. Sterling Brown Visiting Professor:
AWKWARD§. Margaret Bundy Scott Visiting Professors: MUÑOZ§, K. NEWMAN§§. Visiting Pro-
fessor: L. GRAVER . Associate Professors: CASE, KLEINER, MURPHY*, ROSENHEIM. Assistant
Professors:CARTER-SANBORN, FARRED*, KENT*. Visiting Assistant Professors: DE GOOYER,
PETHICA, SANBORN. Senior Lecturer: GLÜCK***. Lecturer: CLEGHORN. Visiting Lecturer:
CHAKKALAKAL. Part-time Lecturer: K. SHEPARD§. Mellon Postdoctoral Fellow: SEE.
COURSES AND COURSE-NUMBERING
The course offerings in English enable students, whether majors or non-majors, to explore literature in a
variety of ways, and to satisfy their interests in particular authors, literary periods, and genres. They empha-
size interpretive skills, systematic and critical thinking, and careful attention to the generic, cultural, and
historical contexts of literature written in English.
100-LEVEL COURSES
At the introductory level, the department offers a range of writing-intensive 100-level courses which
focus on interpretive skills--techniques of reading--as well as skills in writing and argumentation, and
English 150, Expository Writing, a course focusing on rudimentary writing skills. All 100-level courses are
designed primarily for first-year students, although they are open to interested sophomores, juniors, and
English
­ 154 ­
seniors. A 100-level course other than 150 is required for admission to most upper-level English courses,
except in the case of students who have placed out of the introductory courses by receiving a score of 5 on
the Advanced Placement examination in English Literature.
200-LEVEL COURSES
Most 200-level courses are designed primarily for qualified first-year students, sophomores, and junior
and senior non-majors, but they are open to junior and senior majors and count as major courses. Several
200-level courses have no prerequisites. For 2000-01, these include: English 202: Modern Drama; English
204: The Feature Film; English 207: Arthurian Literature; English 219: Literature by Women. 200-level
Gateway courses are designed for first- and second-year students who are considering becoming English
Majors, or who are interested in pursuing upper-level course work in the department.Beginning with the
Class of `03, completion of a Gateway course will normally be a prerequisite for any 300-level course.
ADVISING
The English Department does not assign majors to specific departmental advisors, since we feel that
doing so would prove unnecessarily constraining. Instead, we encourage students, both majors and non-
majors, to seek advice from departmental faculty with whom they are studying or have studied. Majors
who would like to have a regular departmental advisor to help plan a particular program of study from
among the diverse offerings of the department are encouraged to ask a faculty member they know to serve
in that capacity. Such arrangements can also be set up with the help of the department chair. Majors consid-
ering graduate work should consult with the department's Graduate Advisor about appropriate course
choices.
Non-majors who wish to discuss English Department offerings are invited to see any faculty member or
the department chair.
MAJOR
Majors are urged to select a balance of intermediate and advanced courses and to choose classes from
both the American and British traditions. Each student can fashion his or her own sequence of study within
a basic pattern that insures coherence and variety. This pattern comprises at least nine courses.
Majors are urged to select a balance of intermediate and advanced courses and to choose classes from
both the American and British traditions. They are also urged to elect collateral courses in subjects such as
art, music, history, literary studies, philosophy, religion, theatre, and foreign languages with a view to sup-
porting and broadening their studies in literature. In particular, the study of classical and modern languages,
as well as of foreign literatures in translation, is strongly recommended.
Requirements
This year, the department is introducing a number of changes in its requirements. Because these
changes are being variously phased-in, majors and prospective majors should be attentive to the re-
quirements applicable to their year of graduation.
The nine courses required for the major must include the following:
1) Any 100-level English class except English 150. Students exempted by the department from 100-lev-
el courses will substitute an elective course.
2) Beginning with the class of `02: At least two courses dealing primarily with literature written before
1700 (identified in parentheses at the end of the course description). On-going majors (class of `01): At
least three courses dealing primarily with literature written before 1800 (identified in parentheses at the end
of the course description).
3) Beginning with the class of `02: At least two courses dealing primarily with literature written between
1700 and 1900 (identified in parentheses at the end of the course description). On-going majors (class of
`01): At least one course dealing primarily with literature written between 1800 and 1900 (identified in
parentheses at the end of the course description).
4) Beginning with the class of `02: At least one course dealing primarily with literature written after
1900 (identified in parentheses at the end of the course description).
5) At least one "criticism" course (identified in parentheses at the end of course description). A course
fulfilling the criticism requirement entails a sustained and explicit reflection on problems of critical meth-
od, whether by engaging a range of critical approaches and their implications or by exploring a particular
method, theorist or critic in depth. Please note that when a criticism course also deals with literature satisfy-
ing a historical distribution requirement (pre-1700, 1700-1900, etc.), the course may be used to satisfy ei-
ther the criticism or the chronological requirement, but not both.
6) Beginning with the class of `03: At least one 200-level Gateway course (listed at the end of the
200-level course descriptions). Gateway courses are designed for first- and second-year students contem-
plating the major or intending to pursue more advanced work in the department; these courses focus on
analytical writing skills while introducing students to critical methods and historical approaches that will
prove fruitful as they pursue the major.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN ENGLISH
The English Department offers three different routes toward honors: a creative writing thesis, a critical
thesis, and a critical specialization. The requirements of each are described below. Candidates for the pro-
gram should normally have at least a 3.5 average in courses taken in English, but admission will not de-
English
­ 155 ­
pend solely on course grades. Formal application to pursue honors must be made to the director of honors
by April of the junior year. For the Class of 2001, the Director of Honors is Professor Alison A. Case.
All routes require honors students to take a minimum of TEN regular-semester courses (rather than the
nine otherwise required for the major), and to devote their senior year winter study course to their honors
projects. More specifically:
Students doing a creative writing thesis must, by graduation, take at least nine regular-semester courses,
and, in addition, take English 497 (Honors Independent Study, fall) and English 031 (Honors Thesis, win-
ter study) during senior year.
Students writing a critical thesis must, by graduation, take at least eight regular-semester courses, and, in
addition, take English 497 and English 498 (Honors Independent Study, fall and spring) and English 031
(Senior Thesis, winter study) during senior year.
Students pursuing a critical specialization must, by graduation, take at least eight regular-semester
courses, and in addition, take English 497 and English 498 (Honors Independent Study, fall and spring)
and English 030 (Honors Colloquium: Specialization Route, winter study) during senior year.
A student who is highly-qualified to pursue honors, but who, for compelling reasons, is unable to pursue
a year-long project, may petition the department for permission to pursue a critical thesis or critical special-
ization over one semester and the winter study term. Since the norm for these projects is a full year, such
permission will be granted only in exceptional circumstances. If granted, the standards for admission and
for evaluating the final project would be identical to those that apply to year-long honors projects.
All students who wish to apply to the honors program are required to consult with a prospective faculty
advisor, as well as with the director of honors, before April of the junior year. In early-April, candidates
submit a 1-page preliminary proposal that provides as specific a description as possible of the proposed
project. The director of honors reviews proposals with the faculty advisor, and then makes a recommenda-
tion to the whole department. Students whose proposals are accepted receive provisional admission to the
program at this time. Students not admitted to the honors program are advised, when appropriate, about
other possible ways of pursuing their interests (e.g., independent studies, regular departmental courses).
Admitted students must consult with their advisors before the end of the spring semester of junior year
to discuss reading or work pertinent to writing the formal honors prospectus. This prospectus, due in early
August before the fall semester of senior year, is a decisive factor in final admission to the program. Two
copies of the formal prospectus must be submitted--one to the director of honors, and the other to the
student's advisor. After reviewing the prospectuses and consulting with advisors, the department's honors
committee determines final admission to the program. Applicants are notified during the first week of the
fall term.
While grades for the fall and winter study terms are deferred until both the honors project and review
process are completed, students must do the equivalent of at least B+ work to continue in the program.
Should the student's work in the fall semester not meet this minimal standard, the course will convert to a
standard independent study (English 397), and the student will register for a regular winter study project. A
student engaged in a year-long project must likewise perform satisfactorily in winter study (English 030 or
031) to enroll in English 498 in the spring semester. When such is not the case, the winter study course will
be converted to an independent study or "99."
Students are required to submit to their advisor, on the due dates specified below, three final copies of
their written work. While letter grades for honors courses are assigned by the faculty advisor, the recom-
mendation about honors is made by two other faculty members, who serve as readers of the student's
work. These readers, after consulting with the faculty advisor, report their recommendation to the whole
department, which awards either Highest Honors, Honors, or no honors. Honors of any kind are contin-
gent upon satisfactory completion of courses in the major during the spring semester of the senior year.
Highest honors are normally awarded only to students whose performance in both the honors program and
regular courses in the major has been exceptional. All students who are awarded honors participate in a
series of informal presentations at the end of the spring term in senior year.
Creative Writing Thesis
The creative writing thesis involves the completion of a significant body of fiction or poetry during the
fall semester and winter study of the senior year. (With permission of the honors committee, the thesis may
be undertaken during the winter study period and the spring semester of the senior year.) Since a student
will most likely include in the thesis writing done in earlier semesters, a creative writing thesis usually
involves only the fall semester and the winter study period, rather than the full year allotted to complete the
critical essay.
Requirements for admission include outstanding work in an introductory and an advanced workshop, a
recommendation from one of the creative writing teachers (who will then act as thesis advisor), a brief
preliminary proposal, and the approval of the departmental honors committee. The formal prospectus con-
sists of a 1-page description of the project, including its relation to work completed and in-progress. Stu-
dents must also submit a writing sample. A creative writing thesis begun in the fall is due on the last day of
winter study. The methods of evaluation are identical to those for critical projects (but their page limits do
not apply).
English
­ 156 ­
Critical Thesis
The critical thesis involves writing a substantial scholarly and/or critical essay during both semesters as
well as the winter study period of the senior year. The formal prospectus, a 2- to 3-page description of the
thesis project, should present a coherent proposal indicating the range of the thesis, the questions to be
investigated, the methods to be used, and the arguments likely to be considered, along with a brief bibliog-
raphy.
Significant progress on the thesis, including a substantial amount of writing (to be determined by student
and advisor), is required by the end of the fall semester. A first draft of the thesis must be completed by the
end of the winter study period. The spring semester is to be devoted to revising and refining the work and to
shaping its several chapters into a unified argument. Ideally, the length of the honors essay will be about
15,000 words (roughly 45 pages). In no case should the thesis be longer than 25,000 words, including
notes. The finished thesis is due on the second Friday following spring break.
Critical Specialization
The critical specialization route is intended to provide students with an opportunity for making a series
of forays into an area of interest that is both broad in scope and related to work undertaken in at least two
courses. At least one of these courses must be in the English Department, and both need to have been taken
by the end of fall term in senior year. The critical specialization must be united by a common area of inter-
est, such as a given literary form or historical period, a topic that cuts across several periods, an issue in
literary theory, a topic that connects literary and cultural issues, a comparative literature or interdisciplinary
topic. Students are encouraged to propose specialization topics of their own devising. The following exam-
ples are meant only to suggest the kinds of topics appropriate to a critical specialization: lyric traditions,
postmodern narrative, magic realism, Dante and modern literature, Freud and literature, the poet as citizen,
new historicist approaches to literature, feminist film criticism.
In addition to reading primary works, the student is expected to read secondary sources, which describe
or define issues critical to the area of specialization. The formal prospectus, a 2- to 3-page description of the
project, should specify the area and range of the study, the issues likely to be explored, and the methods to
be used for their investigation. This prospectus should also describe the relation between previous course
work and the proposed specialization, and include a brief bibliography of secondary works. The pursuit of
the specialization route requires the following: (1) writing a set of three essays, each about ten pages long (a
page being approximately 250 words), which together advance a flexibly-related set of arguments. The
first two essays are due by the end of the fall semester, and the third by the end of winter study; (2) develop-
ing an extended annotated bibliography (about four to five pages long) of selected secondary sources, ex-
plaining their importance to the area of specialization (due mid-February); (3) meeting with the three facul-
ty evaluators (one of whom is the advisor) during the last two weeks in February to discuss the trio of
essays and the annotated bibliography; (4) writing a fourth essay of ten to twelve pages, the purpose of
which is to consider matters that arose during the faculty-student discussion and to reflect on the evolution
and outcome of the intellectual journey undertaken by the student. This final essay is due on the second
Friday after spring break.
The same three faculty members are involved throughout the assessment process, and the standards and
methods of evaluation are the same as for other kinds of honors projects, with the following exception: For
the specialization route, the evaluation will also include the student's performance in the discussion with
the three faculty readers, and that discussion will include not only the student's writing but also secondary
sources.
COURSES
100-LEVEL COURSES (except English 150)
Through small class discussions (limited in size to 19 students per section) and frequent writing assign-
ments, 100-level English courses ask students to develop their skills as readers and as analytical writers.
Each course assigns 15-20 pages of writing in various forms. These courses are prerequisites for taking all
other English courses except English 150, 202, 204, 207, and 219. Students who receive a 5 on the AP
English Literature exam may take upper-level courses without first taking a 100-level.
ENGL 105(F) Poetry and Magic+
Ancient Celtic texts--Irish and Welsh--associate the poet (meaning any creator of fiction) with powerful
magic--with shape-shifting, access to the otherworld, and visions of transcendent authority and truth. Pla-
to, in his famous condemnation of poetry in the Republic, also associates poetry with magic, but for him
magic is a con game, a sleight-of-hand trick. This course will establish a theoretical framework by compar-
ing Plato with selected Celtic texts, and considering both in relation to contemporary theories of magic
from anthropology to the popular entertainment stage. We will then focus on the representation of poetry
and magic in a variety of literary works from the Middle Ages to the twentieth century. Texts will include
Chaucer's Friar's Tale and Franklin's Tale (where the poet-figures are a devil and a student of magic);
Book I of Spenser's Faerie Queene (the poet-figure is an evil magician); Marlowe's Doctor Faustus (the
poet-figure sells his soul to the devil for magical power); Shakespeare's Midsummer Night's Dream and
Tempest (the poet-figures are fairies and a good magician); and short poems by Coleridge, Keats, Tenny-
son, and Yeats.
English
­ 157 ­
Class format: This is a discussion course, with emphasis on close reading and intensive writing.
Requirements: There will be weekly writing assignments, both formal and informal, with use of a class
listserver and required electronic journal postings. Students will do about 20 pages of writing and will be
evaluated on writing and class participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 19. Two sections.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF, 11:00-12:15 MWF KNOPP
ENGL 113(F) "Literary" Reading+
What determines a text's "meaning"? Is it something fundamental to the text itself? Is it the circumstances
in which we encounter it? Or is it the preoccupations and interests we ourselves bring to it--in other words
the "way" we read it? And what makes a text "literary"? This course will focus on key skills and issues
involved in reading literature. It will be organized around a series of fundamental questions such as: What
characterizes "interpretation"? What do literary texts expect of us? What pleasures and parameters are es-
tablished by the way(s) we read? Where does meaning come from: author, reader, text? How does the form
or genre of a work influence our interpretation of it? How is our understanding of a text shaped by the
contexts in which we encounter it, or by the literary traditions in which it was written? We will address
these questions by reading and interpreting literary texts (mainly short fiction and poetry) and pertinent
critical and theoretical essays. Our readings will invite increased self-consciousness about literary form, the
functions of criticism, and the process of reading and interpreting. In the last weeks of the course, we will
bring this self-consciousness to bear on some longer texts: a play (Brian Friel's Translations), a movie
(Thelma and Louise), and a novel (A. S. Byatt's Possession). The course is intended both to develop your
skills in reading, writing about and discussing literary texts, and to complicate your understanding of the
potential pleasures and profits of critical interpretation.
Requirements: four papers ranging from 3-7 pages, several short journal-style writing assignments, and
active participation in discussion.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 19. Two sections.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF, 10:00-10:50 MWF PETHICA
ENGL 114(F) The Art of Memory+
An introduction to the close reading of poetry, fiction, drama, and autobiography through the study of texts
that are concerned with the theme and art of memory. We will explore the complexities of understanding
and narrating self and history, look at how different texts and contexts mold our visions of individual and
collective pasts, shape what we remember and how we remember it. Questions to be pursued include the
following: How does memory shape individual communal and national identity? What are the relation-
ships between memory and the languages we use to recover it; between memory and different kinds of
lyric and narrative modes? The readings include a wide variety of poems and short stories, Samuel Beck-
ett's Krapp's Last Tape, Toni Morrison's Beloved, and Tim O'Brien's The Things They Carried. Overall,
the course is designed to develop the student's ability to understand and respond to works of literature
through regular class discussion, and the frequent writing of critical essays and journal entries.
Requirements: four 3- to 5-page essays, a reading journal, and regular, active participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 19.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR S. GRAVER
ENGL 123(F) Contemporary American Short Fiction+
An examination of the very recent history and development of the form of the short story in America.
Writers to be considered will include Raymond Carver, Mary Robison, Tobias Wolff, Annie Proulx, Andre
Dubus, Mary Gaitskill, Lydia Davis, Denis Johnson, Robert Stone, Lorrie Moore, Steven Millhauser, Junot
Diaz, Ron Hansen, Amy Hempel, Rick Moody, Rick Bass, and David Foster Wallace.
Requirements: three short exercises and four short papers.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 19.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF J. SHEPARD
ENGL 124(S) Exemplary Lives (Same as American Studies 124)+
From the Puritans onward, Americans have relied on biographies and memoirs to give our culture order
and direction. This course explores the uses of exemplary lives at different moments in American history,
looking in particular at the changes in these stories in the last twenty years. Are we still a culture that looks
to biography for instruction and beauty? How has technology altered the way we use lives--often quite
ordinary lives--to understand ourselves and to shape the culture we inhabit? Materials for the course will
include such traditional forms as the Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin and Ralph Waldo Emerson's
Representative Men, as well as the films of Errol Morris and Ross McElwee, and the radio essays of Ira
Glass.
Requirements: three short critical essays, and two exercises in biography: the first a brief personal memoir,
the second an audio portrait. Students will also be required to participate in a series of seminars with film
and audio essayists.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 28.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR KLEINER and ROSENHEIM
ENGL 125(F,S) After The Tempest+
In the past few decades it has become common to see The Tempest as a play about appropriation and con-
trol. Ironically, however, the play itself has been the victim of numerous appropriations over the past four
English
­ 158 ­
centuries by surprisingly different kinds of writers. The play has served as a starting point for all kinds of
literary and cinematic works--romantic, feminist, post-colonial and post-modern, even science fiction. In
fact The Tempest has had a long and varied afterlife; we can hear the imaginative echo of its themes and
images throughout western and non-western literature. Why has the play proven so fascinating and so con-
tinually relevant? How do different interpretations and adaptations interact with Shakespeare's play? What
happens when a writer transforms the play by adapting it to a new genre or a new medium? We will begin
the course with a close reading of the play, an examination of its sources and critical history, and then set off
on an exploration of its literary legacy. Among other works we will probably look at Browning's Caliban
upon Setebos, Ernst Renan's Caliban, Auden's The Sea and the Mirror, George Lamming's The Pleasures
of Exile, Aime Cesaire's Une Tempête. We will also look at a few films, including the 1956 science fiction
classic, The Forbidden Planet, and recent adaptations like Peter Greenaway's Prospero's Books.
Requirements: three short papers (5-7 pages) and several shorter writing assignments, as well as active
participation in class.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 19. Two Sections.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR First Semester: DE GOOYER
8:30-9:45 TR Second Semester: DE GOOYER
ENGL 126(S) Stupidity and Intelligence+
Stupidity fascinates authors, and they do not merely despise it--they feel it and make us feel it. Why?
Around the same time that psychologists began measuring and ranking intelligences--and stupidity, under
various names, of course occupied the space below (average) intelligence--literary authors were finding
types of stupidity within intelligence. What is literary stupidity? (Can one be specifically a bad reader not
just of books but of life?) And why can't it stay sequestered? We shall be reading stories, novellas, and
novels by these authors (and others): Flaubert, Conrad, Melville, Nabokov, and Henry James; and we shall
be viewing such films as Forrest Gump and (conceivably) Mr. Death.
Requirements: active class participation, five papers totaling 15-20 pages.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 19. Two sections.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR, 9:55-11:10 TR LIMON
ENGL 131(F) Writing Short Fiction; Writing about Short Fiction+
A course--half literary analysis, half creative writing--designed to address the skills necessary for articu-
late writing, reading and editing. To develop those analytic skills, class members will write short responses
to published close readings of fiction; write their own responses to published fiction; write their own short
fiction, and write editorial responses to their own and their classmates' fiction. The emphasis will be on
exploring all aspects of the writing process, and on coherently communicating that exploration. Students
will meet with the instructor in one-on-one tutorials throughout the semester.
Requirements: two short essays; two short fiction exercises; editorial responses to student fiction; 10 pages
of fiction.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 18. Two sections.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR, 9:55-11:10 TR K. SHEPARD
ENGL 133(F) The Frontier in American Literature and Film (Same as American Studies
133)+
An analysis of the cultural significance of the American frontier, that strange, mobile, usually vertical line
that simultaneously divides the familiar from the alien and binds the two terms uncomfortably in a new
shared space. Because our time is short and our subject is large, we will restrict ourselves (for the most part)
to a relatively narrow focus: the frontier in the nineteenth-century American West, as it first entered the
cultural marketplace and as it underwent revision in twentieth-century literature and film. After a quick
introduction to current versions of frontier narratives, we will trace the genealogy of some of the images
that recur most often in representations of the nineteenth-century West, and conclude with a reconsidera-
tion of the relationship between the nineteenth-century Western frontier and twenty-first century American
life. Authors include Mark Twain, Willa Cather, Zane Grey, and Leslie Marmon Silko; films include My
Darling Clementine, The Wild Bunch, and Unforgiven.
Requirements: pre-class responses and four short papers.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 19. Two sections.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF, 2:35-3:50 TF SANBORN
ENGL 135(F) African-American Literary Lives (Same as American Studies 135)+*
Given the central importance of the autobiography to the development of African-American literature, this
course aims to explore the ways in which this form has come to influence the writing of African-American
fiction in the twentieth century. Beginning with James Weldon Johnson's Autobiography of an Ex-
Coloured Man, arguably the first "modern"African-American novel and a work that explicitly crosses both
generic and racial categories, the course will explore figurations of blackness, passing, African identity,
assimilation and segregation through the subsequent fictional/autobiographical writings of Richard
Wright, Ralph Ellison, Nella Larsen, James Baldwin, Toni Morrison, Octavia Butler and Gayl Jones.
Requirements: 20 pages of writing, in the form of short papers.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 19. Two sections.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR, 2:35-3:50 TF CHAKKALAKAL
English
­ 159 ­
ENGL 150(F) Expository Writing+
This is a course in basic problems of expository writing. It is not designed for students interested in writing
prose fiction or in simply polishing their style. Its goal is to teach students how to write a clear, well-argued,
intelligible paper. Readings will be taken from a writing handbook and a collection of essays.
A substantial amount of writing will be assigned. Regular class meetings will be supplemented by individ-
ual conferences.
No prerequisites. Since only students who take the diagnostic examination administered during First Days
are eligible for admission, students should not preregister. Enrollment limited to 12.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF CLEGHORN
ENGL 150(S) Expository Writing+
This is the same course as English 150(F), except that admission to the course in the spring semester is
determined not by diagnostic examination, but by the permission of the instructor.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 12.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR CHAKKALAKAL
ENGL 201(F,S) Shakespeare's Major Plays
A consideration of about eight to ten of Shakespeare's major plays, with particular attention to his uses of
language, his developing powers as a dramatist and poet, and the critical and theatrical possibilities of his
works.
Requirements may vary by section, but usually include two papers, sometimes a midterm exam, and a final
exam.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 25 per section. Five sections.
(Pre-1800/Pre-1700)
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR, 11:20-12:35 TR, 2:35-3:50 TF First Semester: BUNDTZEN, KLEINER
2:35-3:50 TF, 1:10-2:25 MR Second Semester: DE GOOYER, KNOPP
ENGL 202(F) Modern Drama (Same as Theatre 312)
An introduction to some of the major plays of the late-nineteenth and twentieth centuries: such works as
Ibsen's The Wild Duck and Hedda Gabler; Chekhov's Three Sisters; Wilde's The Importance of Being
Earnest; Shaw's Heartbreak House; Pirandello's Six Characters in Search of an Author; O'Neill's A Long
Day's Journey Into Night; Brecht's Mother Courage; Beckett's Waiting for Godot; and Stoppard's Arcadia.
The course will be taught by a combination of lecture and discussion.
Requirements: two 4- to 5-page papers, a scheduled final exam, and regular, active participation in class
discussion.
No prerequisites. (Post-1900)
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR L. GRAVER
ENGL 203(F) Literary Genres: The Nature of Narrative (Same as Literary Studies 202)
(See under Literary Studies for full description.)
ENGL 204(F) The Feature Film
An introduction to film narrative. The major emphasis will be on the formal properties of film as a medium
for telling stories, but attention will also be given to theoretical accounts of the nature of cinema and of the
viewer's relation to it, to genre, and to significant developments in the history of cinema. Students will
view films by such directors as Keaton, Eisenstein, Welles, Renoir, Kurosawa, Hitchcock, and Scorsese.
A lecture course, supplemented with occasional discussion classes. Critical readings will be assigned.
Requirements: two papers, a midterm exam, and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 80, with preference to students as follows: (1) English majors; (2)
sophomores; (3) junior non-majors; (4) senior non-majors; (5) first-year students. (Post-1900)
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR ROSENHEIM
ENGL 207(F) Arthurian Literature
A study of the origins of the Arthurian story in Welsh history and folklore and a survey of its development
and transformations in the romance literature of England and the Continent, from Chrétien de Troyes to
Thomas Malory, circa 1100-1500. We will pay special attention to the ways in which British/English na-
tionalism, Celtic magic, French courtly values (those connected with love and chivalry in particular), and
Christian morality combine and recombine to produce ever-new meaning in familiar elements of the plot:
Arthur's birth and establishment as king, the fellowship and adventures of his followers, the adulterous
love triangle, the Quest for the Holy Grail, and, finally, Arthur's death.
Requirements: several short papers or electronic journal postings, two 5- to 7-page papers, and a final
exam.
No prerequisites. (Pre-1800/Pre-1700)
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR KNOPP
ENGL 209(F) American Literature: Origins to 1865 (Same as American Studies 209)
American literature from "Origins to 1865," especially as taught in New England, once meant a single
tradition, beginning with Puritan writers and culminating with Emerson and Whitman. We shall certainly
pay close attention to this tradition: towards the start of the course, we will read such Puritan writers as the
poets Anne Bradstreet and Edward Taylor, and the theologian Jonathan Edwards; towards the end, we will
read the canonical authors of the American Renaissance (Poe, Emerson, Thoreau, Hawthorne, Melville,
English
­ 160 ­
Whitman, Dickinson). But we will complicate the assumption of a single tradition by reading some
pre-1620 works translated into English (e.g., Columbus, Native-American trickster tales), some writing
from the South (e.g., Jefferson), and African-American writing (e.g., Harriet Jacobs, Frederick Douglass).
Requirements: one 4- to 5-page paper, one 6- to 8-page paper, a final exam, and class participation.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 40. (Pre-1800/1700-1900)
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR LIMON
ENGL 210(S) American Literature: 1865-Present (Same as American Studies 210)
This course is designed to provide an introduction to American literature from the post-Civil War period to
the present. Beginning with Mark Twain, we will read a series of influential American texts--both fiction
and poetry. We will situate these works not only within the literary movements of the time (e.g., realism,
modernism, and postmodernism), but also within other important historical and cultural occurrences (e.g.,
immigration and migration, civil rights, commodity culture). Throughout, the emphasis will be on the di-
verse, sometimes conflicting traditions that make up the American literary canon. Readings may include
works by such authors as Henry James, Chopin, Chesnutt, Stevens, Hughes, Hurston, Faulkner, Ellison,
Ginsburg, Pynchon, Morrison, and Cisneros.
Requirements: two papers, midterm and final exams.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 40. (Post-1900)
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF CLEGHORN
ENGL 211(F) British Literature: Middle Ages through the Renaissance
A survey of the major figures and movements of English literature through the first part of the seventeenth
century: Chaucer, Marlowe, Spenser, Shakespeare, Donne, and others.
Requirements: several short papers, two 5- to 7-page papers, an hour test, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 25. (Pre-1800/Pre-1700)
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF KLEINER
ENGL 212(S) Restoration through the Nineteenth Century
A survey of the major figures and movements of English literature from the mid-seventeenth century
through the nineteenth century.
Requirements: two papers, an hour test, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 25. (Pre-1800/1700-1800)
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR S. GRAVER
ENGL 216(S) Introduction to the Novel
A team-taught lecture course on the development of the novel as a literary form. Texts include: Henry
Fielding's Tom Jones; Jane Austen's Emma; Charles Dickens' Great Expectations; James Joyce's A Por-
trait of the Artist as a Young Man; William Faulkner's The Sound and the Fury; Vladimir Nabokov's Loli-
ta; and Toni Morrison's Song of Solomon. Occasional sessions will be scheduled during the term for infor-
mal discussions and questions.
Requirements: midterm and final exams, and occasional short writing exercises.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF R. BELL and FIX
ENGL 218(F) Introduction to U.S. Latina and Latino Writing (Same as American Studies
218)*
This course will introduce the student to a diverse body of work by Latino and Latina writers in the United
States. Latino and Latina literatures share a history of conflict, resistance, and cultural mestizaje, or mix-
ture, and this course will examine the ways in which a select group of authors acknowledge that history and
attempt to shape it to their own personal, literary and political ends. For some understanding of context, we
will turn to the facts and pressures of immigration, exile, assimilation, bilingualism, and political and eco-
nomic oppression, as those factors variously affect the means and modes of the particular literary produc-
tions we're concerned with. At the same time, the course will emphasize the invented nature of Latino/a
literary and cultural "traditions," and it will investigate the place of those inventions in the larger frame-
work of Latino and Latina political projects such as anti-colonialism, civil rights, and feminism. The read-
ing list will include such authors as Piri Thomas, Julia Alvarez, Cristina García, Americo Paredes, Luis
Valdéz, Cherríe Moraga, Sandra Cisneros, Ana Castillo, Junot Díaz, and Oscar Hijuélos.
Requirements: participation in class discussion, three essays, and participation in a web-based forum.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 25. (Post-1900)
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF CARTER-SANBORN
ENGL 219(F) Introduction to Literature by Women (Same as Women's and Gender Studies
219)
This course will consider literary works written by women as occasions where women acknowledge and
confront both each other and a literary culture which has traditionally defined feminine identity and ex-
cluded female voices. While including a wide range of women, the course may study in greater depth such
writers as Elizabeth Barrett Browning, Emily Dickinson, Virginia Woolf, Adrienne Rich, Sylvia Plath,
Margaret Atwood, and Audre Lorde.
English
­ 161 ­
Requirements: one 4- to 5-page essay, one 6- to 8-page essay, midterm, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 40.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF CASE
ENGL 220(S) Introduction to African-American Writing (Same as American Studies 220)*
This course will examine texts by some of the most influential African-American writers, analyzing the
common themes and narrative strategies that constitute what may be defined as an African-American liter-
ary tradition. Authors to be considered include: W. E. B. DuBois, Langston Hughes, Zora Neale Hurston,
Richard Wright, Ralph Ellison, Toni Morrison, and Ishmael Reed.
Requirements: a series of quizzes, three short papers, and possibly a final exam.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 35. Two sections. (Post-1900)
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR, 1:10-2:25 TF SANBORN, CHAKKALAKAL
ENGL 231T(F,S) Literature of the Sea (Same as American Maritime Studies 231T)
(Offered only at Mystic Seaport.)
(See under American Maritime Studies for full description.)
GATEWAY COURSES
200-level "Gateway" courses are designed for first- and second-year students contemplating the major or
intending to pursue more advanced work in the department; these courses focus on analytical writing skills
while introducing students to critical and historical approaches that will prove fruitful as they pursue the
major.
ENGL 222(F) Studies in the Lyric+
This discussion course is designed to introduce students considering the major to the study of lyric poetry
by raising three fundamental questions: How does one read a lyric? How does one talk about a lyric? How
does one write about a lyric? In the first half of the course, we will read groups of poems from a range of
historical periods in order to examine the various elements that make a poem a poem (tone, image, rhetori-
cal persuasion, lyric audience, versification, form). In the second half of the semester we will focus on three
writers, a Renaissance poet (John Donne), a Romantic poet (John Keats), and a modern poet (Elizabeth
Bishop), to see how an individual poet uses and adapts lyric conventions to develop a distinctive style and
vision. Students will also have an opportunity to analyze lyric criticism, and to put it to use in their final
essay.
Requirements: active classroom participation, frequent short writing assignments, and a final 7-page paper.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 19. (Criticism)
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR R. BELL
ENGL 224(S) Tragedy and Dramatic Theory (Same as Theatre 316)+
In this course we will explore the genre of tragedy as a theatrical form. Is it useful to compare the form and
emotional effect of plays from such diverse historical periods as Sophocles' Oedipus Rex and Shake-
speare's Macbeth? Or Racine's Phèdre and Arthur Miller's Death of a Salesman? In what ways do tragic
theorists like Aristotle, Nietzsche, and Northrop Frye agree and disagree on the constitutive elements of the
tragedy? We will read--and when possible, view video performances of--several tragedies by authors
such as Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripedes, Shakespeare, Racine, Ibsen, Sartre, Eugene O'Neill, Tennessee
Williams, Arthur Miller, and Samuel Beckett. In addition, we will probably include one or two screenings
of films by such directors as Robert Bresson, Ingmar Berman, Michelangelo Antonioni, or Bernardo Ber-
tolucci. We will discuss these works in the context of critical writings by theorists such as Aristotle,
Nietzsche, Rapin, Frye, Bradley and Olson.
Requirements: class participation, four essays varying in length from 2-3 pages to 6-8 pages, and several
250-word responses to questions for class discussion.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150, or permission of instructor. Enrollment limited to 19.
Two sections. (Criticism)
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR, 2:35-3:50 MR BUNDTZEN
ENGL 225(F) Romanticism and Modernism+
The literature of Europe in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries was dominated by two aesthetic move-
ments, Romanticism and Modernism, respectively. While Modernism is often thought to mark a decisive
break with Romanticism--in part because both movements presented themselves as "new," a radical de-
parture from what had gone before--there are important continuities and affinities as well as breaches be-
tween the two movements. This course will investigate the nature of Romanticism and Modernism, and
the relation between them. We will study major works from each period, including polemics, poetry, nov-
els, and short stories by Wordsworth, Coleridge, Percy and Mary Shelley, Yeats, Eliot, the French Symbol-
ist poets, Wilde, Joyce, and Woolf. We will explore each movement's engagement with a range of topics
and issues: for example, the subjective experience of time and memory; the nature of symbolization, and
the role of "feeling" in art; the relation of the individual mind to social life; the conflicted appeal for the
artist of "common" language and experience, on the one hand, and avant-garde forms of expression, on the
other. Our broader aim will be to invite potential English majors to think critically about the principles that
underlie the ordering of literary history into aesthetic movements and "periods."
English
­ 162 ­
In this writing-intensive course, we will regularly attend in class to analytic procedures and the framing of
arguments; once or twice during the semester, classes will be replaced by tutorial sessions, in which stu-
dents will meet in pairs with the instructor.
Requirements: four or five short essays, including at least one revision.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 18. Two sections.
(1800-1900/1700-1900 or Post-1900)
(This course is part of the Critical Reasoning and Analytic Skills Initiative.)
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR, 1:10-2:25 TF SWANN, TIFFT
ENGL 226(S) Irish Revivals+
This course will focus on Irish literature and literary criticism of the last two centuries as a case study in the
way history, culture and politics interact in the construction of a distinctive literary tradition. We will begin
with a brief survey of representative writings from the Irish Revival of 1800-1830, in which the problems
of cultural and national self-definition in a colonial context--the effort to construct or assert "Irishness" as
an identity distinct from Englishness--first became sharply outlined. Readings from this period will in-
clude Lady Morgan's influential novel The Wild Irish Girl and the poetry and illustrations to Thomas
Moore's popular Irish Melodies. Our principle focus will be on the Irish Renaissance of c.1890-1930, dur-
ing which Irish writing in the English language became firmly identified as a canon distinct from the En-
glish tradition. Readings will include drama, poetry, fiction, and non-fiction prose by Yeats, Synge, Somer-
ville and Ross, Joyce, George Moore, George Bernard Shaw, Lady Gregory and O'Casey. We will fore-
ground key fault-lines of the period: competing constructions of Irishness and visions of Irish Nationalism;
conflict over the role of literature in promoting a separatist cultural politics; debate over the propriety of
writing in English, or for an English audience; the writing of "self-exiles" like Shaw and Joyce, versus the
work of writers who stayed in Ireland; the legitimacy of drawing on English literary traditions; and the
inevitable ideological and political tensions between the concerns of Irish Catholics and Protestants, land-
owners and tenants. The course will conclude with consideration of post-independence literature, and of
the extraordinary literary Revival currently under way in Ireland, with reading of works by Brendan Be-
han, Frank McGuinness, Seamus Heaney, and Neil Jordan's film "The Crying Game." Key considerations
here will be the ways traditional Nationalist concerns have recently been reinflected by contemporary
sexual politics, and the effort to reconceive both Ireland's literary past and its present in terms of post-colo-
nial theory.
Requirements: four papers (3-4 pages for the first, rising to 6-8 pages for the last), several short journal-
style writing assignments, and active participation in discussion.
Prerequisites: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 19. (1800-1900/1700-1900)
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF PETHICA
ENGL 230(S) Introduction to Literary Theory+
This course will introduce students to some of the most significant and compelling trends in modern criti-
cism--such as gender theory, deconstruction, new historicism, and psychoanalytic criticism--in an ap-
plied, hands-on way. The course will consider a few primary texts from different eras--a Shakespearean
play, a nineteenth-century novel, a contemporary film, for example--each in terms of a variety of theoreti-
cal approaches. Can King Lear be read as a feminist text? a site of class struggle? a staging of the relation-
ship between language and the unconscious? The course aims both to make familiar some of the critical
methods students are likely to encounter in the field of literary studies these days, and to show how such
methods can transform our understanding of a text, opening surprising possibilities even in familiar works.
In the process, the course will also raise broader questions about the imperatives and usefulness of literary
theory, even about what it means to be engaged in the discipline of literary analysis.
Requirements: 15-20 pages of writing in the form of short papers, and participation in a web-based forum.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 19. (Criticism)
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR CARTER-SANBORN
NOTE: 300-level courses are open to sophomores, juniors, and seniors. They are normally not open to
first-year students, although in exceptional cases first-year students may enroll in a 300-level course with
consent of the instructor.
ENGL 304 Dante (Same as Literary Studies 317) (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered
2001-2002)
A study of Dante's works emphasizing The Divine Comedy. All readings in translation.
Requirements: five short papers, three exams, and a 10-page final paper.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 25. (Pre-1800/Pre-1700)
ENGL 305(S) Chaucer
A study of The Canterbury Tales in their literary, linguistic, and historical contexts.
Combination lecture and discussion with practice reading Middle English aloud.
Requirements: frequent quizzes on vocabulary and comprehension, two 5- to 7-page papers, a midterm,
and a final exam.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 25. (Pre-1800/Pre-1700)
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR KLEINER
English
­ 163 ­
ENGL 312(S) Inventing the Renaissance (Same as Literary Studies 312)
This course explores the invention of the Renaissance as a cultural formation and as part of the western
cultural imaginary. We will consider the so-called discovery of "man," the recovery of the classical past,
the production of scriptural identity or the "bibliographic ego," the formation of the early modern state and
the discovery of the "new world." Readings will include texts by Petrarch, Machiavelli, Castiglione, Eras-
mus, More, Montaigne, Rabelais, du Bellay, Sidney, Shakespeare, Jonson and Donne.
Requirements: two shorter papers and a self-scheduled final exam.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 25. (Pre-1800/Pre-1700)
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W K. NEWMAN
ENGL 313(F) Seventeenth-Century Poetry
A study of selected poets and poetry from the seventeenth century, up to and including a few Restoration
writers. In addition to close readings of the poems, we will give special attention to literary genre and cul-
tural background. Among the poets we will read are Jonson, Lanyer, Donne, Herbert, Herrick, Milton,
Carew, Suckling, and Marvell.
Requirements: two short essays (4-5 pages) and one 10-page essay; occasional short informal writing as-
signments.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 25. (Pre-1800/Pre-1700)
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF DE GOOYER
ENGL 315 The Poetry of Milton (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
A study of several of Milton's major works, emphasizing his development as a poet. Readings will include
"On the Morning of Christ's Nativity," "L'Allegro," "Il Penseroso," "Lycidas," Paradise Lost, some son-
nets, and some passages from "Areopagitica."
Requirements: two 5-page essays, and a 10-page final essay.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. (Pre-1800/Pre-1700)
ENGL 318(S) Histories of the Early Modern Body, 1543-1750
This seminar will consider the production of knowledge about the body in the early modern period: the
institution of the scientific; how the emerging science of the body was visualized, the relations among dis-
courses of the erotic, the scientific and the religious, and uses of the body in varied cultural performances
including the practice of anatomy, the blason, devotional texts, the monarchical portraiture, and the theatre.
Texts will include both recent theoretical work on gender and sexuality and early modern materials such as
anatomies, conduct manuals, erotica, devotional and confessional literature, and engraving. Texts by Areti-
no, Marot, Nashe, Shakespeare, Spenser, and Donne.
Requirements: one short (5 pages) and one longer paper (10-12 pages).
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 25. (Pre-1800/Pre-1700)
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR K. NEWMAN
ENGL 321(F) Samuel Johnson and the Literary Tradition
Johnson has been exceptionally influential not only because he was a distinguished writer of poems, es-
says, criticism, and biographies, but also because he was the first true historian of English literature, the first
who sought to define its "tradition." We will read Johnson's own works and Boswell's Life of Johnson to
discover Johnson's talents, tastes, and standards as an artist, as a moral and literary critic, and as a man. We
next will use Johnson's Preface to Shakespeare and Lives of the English Poets to examine how this great
intelligence assessed writers from the Renaissance through the eighteenth century. While reading his com-
mentary on Shakespeare and his critical biographies of Milton, Dryden, Pope, Swift, and Gray, we will
analyze selected works by these writers so as to evaluate Johnson's views and to sharpen our understand-
ing of the relationships between his standards and our own.
Requirements: two papers and a final exam.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 25. (Criticism or
Pre-1800/1700-1900)
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR FIX
ENGL 331(S) What is Romanticism?
This class will revisit the old critical question, "What is Romanticism?" We will read a range of British
Romantic-era texts: poetry and prose of the canonized Romantic poets (Blake, Wordsworth, Coleridge,
Byron, Shelley, and Keats) together with work by their popular contemporaries, including poets Charlotte
Smith and Felicia Hemans, and essayists Mary Robinson, William Hazlitt and Thomas DeQuincey. We
will ask: to what extent are at least some of these authors self-consciously shaping the literary movement
we now call "Romanticism"? How do they seek to define this movement, and what might they be defining
it against? In what ways do "Romantic" aesthetics and ideology shape and/or react to the broader political,
social and economic culture of early-nineteenth-century England?
Requirements: two 5-page papers and one 10-page paper.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 25. (1800-1900/1700-1900)
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF SWANN
English
­ 164 ­
ENGL 332 Literature and Madness (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
This course explores the intersection of "literature" and "madness" in a range of British texts from the
mid-eighteenth to the mid-nineteenth century. Readings will include literature of and about madness (case
studies, medical, philosophical and sociological accounts); literary treatments of "mad" subjects (in works
by Johnson, Coleridge, Shelley, Tennyson); poetry written by melancholic or insane but otherwise highly-
regarded poets (Cowper, Smart, Clare); period philosophical writing about the mind and the imagination
(Locke, Smith, Hartley, and Coleridge); and contemporary theory (including Freud, Klein, Foucault, Al-
thusser). The course focuses on a period that, according to French theorist Michel Foucault, saw the devel-
opment of distinctly modern ways of describing, classifying, and explaining madness--for example, as a
disease that can be diagnosed through the careful interpretation of symptoms. Yet, in much literature of the
period, the mad person--systematizer par excellence, interpreter gone amok--at once evades and mocks
explanatory systems. We will explore this and other paradoxes, working toward speculative accounts of
why "madness" becomes so closely linked to literary production during the period.
Requirements: two 4- to 6-page essays and one 10-page essay; occasional short informal writing assign-
ments; and one group oral project.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. (1800-1900/1700-1900)
ENGL 333(S) Nineteenth-Century British Novel
A study of major works from what is often considered the Golden Age of the novel. A central focus of the
course will be on the evolution of the realist novel, and the aesthetic and social implications of realism as a
method, but we will also look at alternative strains in fiction of the period, such as the Gothic and "sensa-
tion" novels. Probable texts will include Austen's Persuasion, Bronte's Wuthering Heights, Dickens's
Bleak House, Trollope's The Warden, Braddon's Lady Audley's Secret, Eliot's Middlemarch, and Forster's
A Room With A View.
Requirements: heavy reading load; flexible writing requirement: options include short papers, journal, final
exam, and a 12- to 15-page final paper.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 25. (1800-1900/1700-1900)
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF CASE
ENGL 338(S) Literature of the American Renaissance (Same as American Studies 338)
In the years leading up to the Civil War, American literature became a profitable large-scale business and a
recognizable art form. Like so many other contemporary institutions, it simultaneously expanded and
centralized. Lower printing and transportation costs helped to increase the supply of books; the desire of an
increasingly large, heterogeneous, and mobile population for information, stimulation, and consolation
helped to increase the demand for books. At the same time, however, the channels of supply were nar-
rowed by the consolidation of the publishing industry and the channels of demand were narrowed by the
popular anticipation of writing that would embody, flatteringly, the true national character. In this course,
we will study in depth the distinctive and lastingly powerful literature that emerged under these conditions.
Some of the authors we will be reading have been valued by literary critics ever since the mid-nineteenth
century (Emerson, Hawthorne, Whitman), some ever since the early-twentieth century (Melville, Dickin-
son, Poe), some only in the last twenty-five years (Stowe, Douglass, Wilson). Despite their obvious differ-
ences, all these authors wrote for a literary marketplace that had been shaped by the processes of expansion
and centralization, and they all asked their readers to reflect in some way on the implications of those pro-
cesses. Reflecting on those reflections, appreciating their force and form, will be the principal business of
this course.
Requirements: pre-class email responses to readings, two short papers, and one longer paper.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 25. (1800-1900/1700-1900)
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF SANBORN
ENGL 341 American Genders, American Sexualities (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered
2001-2002)
This course investigates how sexual identities, desires, and acts are represented and reproduced in Ameri-
can literary and popular culture. Focusing on two culturally rich periods--roughly 1880-1940 (when the
terms "homosexual" and "heterosexual" came to connote discrete sexual identities), and the contemporary
context of the "postmodern" 1980s and 1990s--we will explore what it means to read and theorize "queer-
ly." Among the questions we will ask: What counts as "sex" or "sexual identity" in a text? Are there defin-
ably lesbian, gay, bisexual or queer writing styles or cultural practices? What does sexuality have to do with
gender? How are sexual subjectivities intertwined with race, ethnicity, class, and other identities and identi-
fications? And why has "queerness" proven to be such a powerful and sometimes powerfully-contested
concept? We will also explore what impact particular historical events, such as the rise of sexology, the
Harlem Renaissance, and the AIDS pandemic have had on gay/lesbian cultural production. Readings may
include works by Freud, Foucault, Stein, Johnson, Fitzgerald, Allison, Moraga, Rich, and Riggs.
Requirements: regular journal entries, two short papers, and one longer final paper.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. (Criticism)
ENGL 342 Postcolonial Literature (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)*
In this course we will explore the ways in which the condition of postcolonialism--the process by which
former European colonies obtained national sovereignty--affected the literature of societies in the Carib-
bean, Africa, the Asian subcontinent, and such metropolises as London and New York. Postcolonial litera-
English
­ 165 ­
ture grapples with the possibilities and problems of decolonization, and we will engage such issues as the
narrative construction of the new "nation," the optimism of that project, the ways in which the economic,
cultural, and symbolic links to the metropolitan power (in this course, mainly Britain) survived the end of
colonial rule, the failures of the postcolonial state, and the relationship between gender and postcolonial-
ism. We will read a variety of texts, ranging from Sam Selvon's 1950s work The Lonely Londoners--an
account of the difficulties experienced by Caribbean immigrants in England--to the more contemporary
and provocative novels of Salman Rushdie--the ways in which The Satanic Verses is a critique of metro-
politan racism and xenophobia. The experience of (im)migration, making community in a geographically
and culturally alien space, and an on-going negotiation with the concept of "home," will constitute the
focus of this course.
Requirements: three papers.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. (Post-1900)
ENGL 344 Imagining American Jews (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
Jewish life in America has been the subject of some of the most interesting and highly regarded works of
recent literature. Focusing on novels and stories by such writers as Abraham Cahan, Henry Roth, Saul
Bellow, Bernard Malamud, Grace Paley, Philip Roth, Cynthia Ozick, Louis Begley, Art Spiegelman and
Allegra Goodman, the course will study the changing images of the Jew in fiction from 1917 to the present.
Requirements: two 4- to 5-page papers, occasional student presentations in class, active participation in
discussion, and a scheduled final exam.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. (Post-1900)
ENGL 346 Women of Color in the U.S.: Public and Private Cultures (Same as American
Studies 346 and Women's and Gender Studies 346) (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered
2001-2002)*
This course will explore cultural production and consumption by "women of color" in the U.S., with a
focus on the way various groups have negotiated the presumed gap between private experience and public
or political form. Historical, social, and cultural connections and disjunctions between African-American,
Arab-American, Asian-American, Native-American, Latina, and other women will be examined, espe-
cially in the context of feminism and cultural nationalism; and we will explore the varied ways in which
family, labor, and leisure practices can place women of color in social positions which themselves blur the
distinction between private and public culture.
Requirements: active participation, several short assignments, and a longer final paper.
Prerequisite: American Studies 201, a 100-level English course, except 150, or Women's and Gender
Studies 101. (Criticism)
ENGL 347(S) Henry James
This course will be devoted to the work of Henry James, considered by many to be the greatest novelist in
English. His brilliant, demanding innovations of prose style and his acute psychological and ethical explo-
rations mark the shift from the nineteenth-century to the modern novel. James writes about what it meant
for American and European societies around the turn of the century to be mutually exposed to, and by, one
another. In so doing, he raises questions about what it means to be civilized, to be smart, and to be rich. We
will consider how the drama of consciousness is played out in his characters' struggles with love and con-
science, and in his own preoccupation with capturing stylistically the narrative logic of the passions. We
will read the novellas Daisy Miller, The Beast in the Jungle, The Aspern Papers, and The Turn of the
Screw; the novels Portrait of a Lady, The Bostonians, The Ambassadors, and The Golden Bowl; and as-
sorted critical writings.
Requirements: one 5- to 7-page and one 8- to 10-page paper.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 25. (1800-1900/1700-1900)
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR SOKOLSKY
ENGL 351(F) Queer Theories
This course offers students a survey of the emergent critical discourse known as queer theory. We will
consider different genealogies of the discourse that will include French feminisms (Wittig, Irigaray), post-
structuralism (Foucault, Barthes), writing by radical women of color (Moraga, Anzaldua, Lorde) and queer
activism (ACT-UP, Queer Nation, Lesbian Avengers). These readings in theory will be applied to literary
texts by James Baldwin, Djuna Barnes, Dennis Cooper, Henry James, Audre Lorde, Cherrie Moraga and
Gertrude Stein. Time will be spent on early anthologies and special issues of journals that played a large
part in the codification of queer theory. The different methodologies under consideration include psycho-
analysis, social theory and theories of performance and performativity. The course's final section will look
at recent queer critique that attempts to understand sexuality within an intersectional paradigm that is also
attentive to other modes of difference including race and class.
Requirements: a total of 20 pages of writing in papers of various lengths.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 25. (Criticism or Post-1900)
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF MUÑOZ
ENGL 353(F) Modern Poetry
In this course, we will explore the tangled and controversial means by which poets writing chiefly between
the two World Wars tied the political, social, and intellectual ferment of the era to the fate of poetry. Both
English
­ 166 ­
dire and admiring accounts of these poets' work point to a central impulse to aestheticize political and
philosophical problems. Considering issues such as occultism, Irish nationalism and unrequited love in the
poetry of W. B. Yeats; pedantry, religious conversion and baby-talk in that of T. S. Eliot; and cosmopolitan-
ism, isolationism and insurance in that of Wallace Stevens, we will consider the ways in which these poets'
work both plays out and eludes accusations of self-reflexive lyricizing. We will examine the roles of aristo-
cratic bias, abstruse erudition, and proto-fascism in their work, as well as critics' tendencies to equate these
impulses. Although we will focus chiefly on the work of these three poets, we will also refer to the poetry
of William Carlos Williams, Ezra Pound, Robert Frost, Marianne Moore and Langston Hughes, consider-
ing whether the populism and comparative stylistic accessibility of some of these poets is an antidote to, or
another means to formulate, the concerns of so-called "high modernism."
Requirements: one short and one long paper.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 25. (Post-1900)
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR SOKOLSKY
ENGL 354(S) Contemporary American Poetry
A study of recent American poetry concentrating on individual volumes by Theodore Roethke, Robert
Lowell, Elizabeth Bishop, John Berryman, Stephen Dunn, Louise Glück, Tony Hoagland, Marie Howe,
and others.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 25. (Post-1900)
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR RAAB
ENGL 356T(S) Dead Poets' Society
Ted Hughes's publication of Birthday Letters in January, 1998, was portrayed in the press and reviews as
breaking a 35-year silence on his wife Sylvia Plath's suicide in 1963. What made this volume of poems a
best-seller was its confessional and biographical drama. Hughes addresses his dead spouse and returns to
all of the major events in their shared life, simultaneously exposing his feelings and intuitions about what
went wrong in their marriage and why Plath was driven to take her life. Less evident to the general reading
public was that Birthday Letters extends a dialogue between Plath and Hughes on the nature of poetry and
poetic identity that began in their courtship. Plath felt that Hughes initiated her into a strong feminine voice,
and she, in turn, was responsible for introducing the young British Hughes's work to an American au-
dience. Many of Plath's Ariel poems are written on the reverse side of Hughes's poems and are often in
heated exchange with them; Hughes was the editor of Plath's posthumous publications and could be said to
have `authored' Ariel because of his power over selecting poems for this volume; in addition, Hughes has
written several critical assessments of Plath's work that presume final authority on how her work should be
understood and received. Birthday Letters, with its frequent borrowing of titles and images from Plath's
poems and its revisiting of incidents she describes in her letters, journals, and fiction, prolongs a conversa-
tion and collaboration between two poets that began in 1956 and may still be heard whenever they are read
together. This tutorial will explore the Plath-Hughes marriage, both biographically and poetically. Topics
may include: the conflict between Plath's confessional sensibility and Hughes's modernist aesthetic and
questions about the literary merits of baring one's soul; the role of biography generally in literary inter-
pretation; the controversies surrounding posthumous publication of Plath's work; and the extent to which
some of Hughes's final publications constitute `having the last word' on both personal and poetic disagree-
ments with his dead wife.
Students will meet with the instructor in pairs for an hour each week; they will write a 5- to 7-page paper
every other week, and comment on their partners' papers in alternate weeks. Emphasis will be on develop-
ing skills not only in reading poetic texts, but also in constructing critical arguments and cogently respond-
ing to them in written and oral critiques.
Prerequisites: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 10. (Criticism or Post-1900)
Hour: TBA BUNDTZEN
ENGL 357 Contemporary American Fiction (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered
2001-2002)
A study of recent American fiction since World War II. The main topic will be the shift from late modern to
postmodern narration. We shall read Vladimir Nabokov's Pale Fire, Thomas Pynchon's The Crying of Lot
49, Toni Morrison's Beloved, and four or five other novels by such writers as Philip Roth, Ishmael Reed,
Donald Barthelme, Don DeLillo, Maxine Hong Kingston, and Joseph Heller.
Requirements: class participation, a 4- to 6-page paper, a 6- to 8-page paper, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. (Post-1900)
ENGL 358(S) Black Heroes in American Literature (Same as American Studies 358)*
While popular representations of black heroes--from Nike's incorporation of Michael Jordan to Samuel
Jackson's Shaft--clearly abound, how and who confers this label onto certain individuals has yet to be
determined. How do we know when to recognize the black hero as such? Who is not a black hero? Can a
woman be such a hero? This course seeks to explore the category of the black hero through a study of
literary texts that explicitly confront the terms of heroship through their portrayal of black characters. By
considering the position and representation of black heroes in works by Harriet Beecher Stowe, Mark
Twain, Frederick Douglass, Martin Delany, Zora Neale Hurston, Chester Himes, Ralph Ellison and Toni
Morrison, we will attempt to define the terms of the black hero and examine how this figure has been
reproduced and packaged to serve specific sociopolitical, rather than purely literary, functions.
English
­ 167 ­
Requirements: two 8- to 10- page papers and one oral presentation with a written summary to be handed in
for grading.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 25. (Post-1900)
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF CHAKKALAKAL
ENGL 360(S) James Joyce's Ulysses
We will devote the semester to one extraordinarily demanding and rewarding text, James Joyce's Ulysses,
and to various critical perspectives upon it. Early sessions will take up questions traditionally asked of nov-
els, regarding characterization, themes, style, structure, setting, and narration. Soon, though, we will turn to
more complex and problematic issues peculiar to this vexing text: the status of the author and authority,
tension between sacred and profane, multiplicity and confusion of perspectives, the melange of genres and
styles, the mix of high purpose and low antics, the significance of popular culture, the politics of gender,
and the competition among the novel's traditional, modernist, and post-modernist instincts.
In the second half of the semester, students will confer individually with the instructor and pursue indepen-
dent research projects. The heart of the course is a substantial paper, exploring Ulysses from some interpre-
tive vantage point, such as biographical, feminist, post-structuralist, religious, or humanist. In the last few
weeks, the class will reconvene to discuss each paper and to work toward a deeper understanding of the
sources, nature, and variety of critical debate.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 20. (Post-1900)
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF R. BELL
ENGL 361 Nabokov and Pynchon (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
After a brief comparative study of their short stories, the course will focus on selected novels by each au-
thor. Texts include: Pnin, Lolita, and Pale Fire by Nabokov; and, by Pynchon, The Crying of Lot 49, and
Gravity's Rainbow (to which a substantial portion of the latter part of the course will be devoted).
Requirements: two papers and a final exam.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. (Post-1900)
ENGL 365(S) Studies in Dramatic Literature: Samuel Beckett and Harold Pinter (Same as
Theatre 313)
A comparative study of two of the foremost contemporary playwrights. We will set Pinter's The Birthday
Party and The Dumb Waiter alongside Beckett's Waiting for Godot; The Homecoming next to Endgame;
Happy Days and Play near Old Times and Betrayal. Attention will also be given to some of the short plays
that Beckett and Pinter have written for the stage, radio, and television: Krapp's Last Tape, The Collection,
All That Fall, Not I, Rockaby, A Kind of Alaska, Catastrophe, and One for the Road. The works will be
considered as both literary and theatrical texts, and at different points may be connected to projects under-
taken by Williamstheatre and in Theatre Department courses.
Requirements: one 4- to 5-page paper, and an independent project of each student's own devising that will
result in an essay of 15-20 pages.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 25. (Post-1900)
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF L. GRAVER
ENGL 366(F) Modern British Fiction
This course focuses on British and Irish novels from the early decades of the twentieth century. We will
study the emergence of innovative stylistic and narrative forms and practices characteristic of Modernism
and consider the ways in which such innovations affect the works' capacity to address questions of history,
politics, sexuality, epistemology, and aesthetics. Readings will include such works as Conrad's Heart of
Darkness, Joyce's Ulysses, Woolf's To the Lighthouse, Forster's A Passage to India, and Ford's The Good
Soldier.
Requirements: two papers and regular, active participation in class discussions.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 25. (Post-1900)
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF TIFFT
ENGL 367(F) Treacherous Terrain: Asian American Literary and Cultural Production (Same
as American Studies 367)*
How do particular stereotypes of Asian Americans rely on the figures of the spy and the turncoat? How
have Asian American writers mobilized tropes of betrayal, and to what effect? In what ways have accusa-
tions of race betrayal united and divided Asian American communities and readerships? This course fo-
cuses on the many ways in which treachery has emerged as a prominent motif in Asian American texts
(fiction, poetry, drama, and videodocumentary). We will investigate the intersections between gender, race,
sexuality, and nation. As such, we will begin by considering two highly sexualized, foundational icons of
betrayal in American culture: Pocahontas and La Malinche. Together with the literary texts at hand, we
also will discuss relevant legal decisions and historical events like institutional racism, exclusion, coloniza-
tion, and internment. Topics related to betrayal include: assimilation, miscegenation, identity and identifi-
cation, translation, exile, immigration, generational conflict, labor exploitation, and nationalism. Authors
may include: Sui Sin Far / Edith Maude Eaton, Chang Rae Lee, Bharati Mukherjee, David Henry Hwang,
Loni Ding, Lonny Kaneko, Jade Snow Wong, Maxine Hong Kingston, John Okada, Jessica Hagedorn,
Ralph Pena, Lawson Inada, Lois-Ann Yamanaka, and R. Zamora Linmark.
English
­ 168 ­
Requirements: one class presentation, several reader responses, one short paper, and one longer paper.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 25. (Post-1900)
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF SEE
ENGL 369(F) Queer Worldmaking in Literature, Film and Performance (Same as Theatre
314)*
Why does cultural production matter? What is its relevance to queers and other minoritarian groups? This
course will attempt to answer these large questions by considering the world-making capacities of queer
cultural productions--vanguard literary, cinematic, and performance productions all sharing a common
political urgency. Novels by Samuel Delaney, John Rechy and Achy Obejas will be viewed as testaments
to actually existing queer cultures. Film and video, ranging from narrative to experimental, by Isaac Julien,
Ela Troyano, Richard Fung, Kimberly Pierce and others will be screened as interventionist counter-public-
ity. The performance work Carmelita Tropicana, Marga Gomez, Jack Smith and others will be studied in
relation to the utopian project of imagining a time and a place outside of heteronormativity. Much of this
course will pay special attention to the cultural work of queers of color.
Requirements: a total of 20 pages of writing in papers of various lengths.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 25. (Post-1900)
Hour: 7:00-9:30 p.m. T MUÑOZ
ENGL 370T(S) Narrative into Film
This course will study the phenomenon of adaptation--that is, the translation of literary work into film. By
reading narrative against film, and film against narrative, students will gain new analytical perspectives on
these artistic forms. We will interest ourselves in the kinds of visual and narrative problems the act of
adaptation presents for the filmmaker and screenwriter, as well as the way in which shifts in historical,
political, social, and technological context can complicate their projects. Students will take up these issues
in two ways. First, they will write and present to each other analytical essays about particular questions in
film adaptation that present themselves when a novel or story is read alongside its film version. These pre-
sentations will alternate with sessions in which students will adapt a scene or section of a chosen narrative
(preferably, one that has not yet been adapted for film) for presentation and critique. Note: this is not a
course in screenwriting. These adaptations are exercises meant, as with the critical work, to engage actively
the analytical processes set in motion by the juxtaposition of text and film. Texts and films studied may
include Emma, Clueless, Dracula, Heart of Darkness, Apocalypse Now, Beloved, Les Liaisons Danger-
euses, The Island of Dr. Moreau, and selected shorter works by Edgar Allan Poe, Nathaniel Hawthorne,
Junot Díaz, and Raymond Carver.
At the end of the semester, students will work in teams of two on a final project: a longer screenplay
adaptation. The tutorial format will require students to meet in pairs with the professor for 75 minutes once
a week; each student will produce either a critical analysis or adaptation every other week, and comment
on their partner's work in alternate weeks. The last two weeks of the semester will be devoted to the longer
adaptation. Students in the course will be graded on the portfolio model: they will receive brief comments
and a check, check-plus, or check-minus for their work in each week's meeting, and at mid-term a more
thorough written evaluation and a letter grade representing their performance up to that point.
Prerequisite: 100-level English course, except 150. A prior Criticism course is suggested. Enrollment limit-
ed to 10. (Criticism)
Hour: TBA CARTER-SANBORN
ENGL 371(F) Feminist Theory and the Representation of Women in Film
Woman's position as the "object of the gaze" is the focus of much recent critical film theory. Central to
these theoretical writings is a psychoanalytically-based (Lacanian) perspective that endows men with ac-
cess to subjectivity as viewers and agency within narrative, and assigns woman a role as fantasized object
within a male economy of desire. This perspective, which we find in the work of Laura Mulvey, Jacqueline
Rose, Stephen Heath, and Mary Ann Doane, is complemented by a more socio-ideological approach in the
work of E. Ann Kaplan, Tania Modleski, and Teresa de Lauretis. We will attempt first to understand the
theoretical texts in which the feminine figures as a central term for aesthetic discourse and ideological con-
troversy. Second, we will analyze films, applying and testing these critical perspectives. Questions con-
cerning the problematic subjectivity of the female spectator will be primary, and we will be especially con-
cerned with the ways in which various kinds of works--from those considered to be highly conventional-
ized or "classical" to those deemed "avant-garde" or subversive in the way they treat convention--address
themselves to a male versus a female spectator. Finally, we will evaluate the interpretive possibilities af-
forded by psychoanalytic and socio-ideological methods both separately and together. In addition to read-
ing selections from film theorists and critics, we will look at such films asThe Last Seduction, Aliens, Now,
Voyager, Thelma and Louise, Vertigo, and Bound.
Requirements: active participation in class discussions, one 4- to 5-page paper, one 8- to 10-page paper,
and a take-home final exam.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 25. (Post-1900 or Criticism)
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR BUNDTZEN
ENGL 373(S) Modern Critical Theory
What assumptions govern our modes of interpreting texts? What sorts of power dynamics inform our most
seemingly judicious critical acts, and what are their political consequences? We will examine rhetorical
English
­ 169 ­
theory from the New Critics to Semiotics and Deconstruction, as well as feminist and queer theoretical
responses to poststructuralism, in our attempt to answer these questions. We will also consider writings by
such political interpreters as Benjamin and Foucault, and works by New Historicists and popular culture
analysts. We will refer continuously to literary and cinematic texts.
Requirements: two 8- to 10-page papers.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 25. (Criticism)
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF SOKOLSKY
ENGL 376(S) Documentary Technologies (Same as ArtS 384)
This course will investigate the paradoxical ways new media technologies are used to ground notions of
the real in contemporary culture. Through a series of readings and workshops we will explore the ways that
different documentary modes (such as digital photography, news footage, medical imaging, and home vid-
eo) inflect our understanding and narration of the world. Topics include: media recycling and culture jam-
ming; the loss of referentiality; changing thresholds of evidence; and strategies for responding to the global
media archive. Experience with photography, film history, or web design is helpful, but not necessary.
Requirements: exercises in recording and manipulating sound and images; two short writing assignments;
and the creation of two audio documentaries.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150, or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limited to
19. (Post-1900)
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR ROSENHEIM
ENGL 377 Suicides and Survivors (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
Adrienne Rich and Sylvia Plath were contemporaries, vying in the 1950s for the same poetry prizes and
recognition as "obedient daughters" to a literary tradition that prized craft and impersonality as poetic vir-
tues over confession or politics. Both poets have become feminist heroines for their disobedience, each
diverging radically and in her own way from this tradition in the 1960s. As biographer Janet Malcolm puts
it: "Women honor Plath for her courage to be unpleasant" about being a "good girl" in the 1950s and about
a philandering husband in the 1960s. Her suicide in 1963 was immediately followed by analyses of her
poems in Ariel that directed critical interest toward her life as an explanation of her craft. Her survivors
have battled strenuously but ineffectually to preserve the secrets of her life from "the voyeurism and busy-
bodyism" of eager biographers and readers. Rich's life competes with her poetry for critical interest and
approval because of its political shape; its dedication to feminism. The wife and mother of the 1950s be-
came the political activist of the 1960s; the lesbian feminist of the 1970s. As expressions of a survivor and
heroine of these movements for change, her life and art trace the forces, both political and ideological, that
have affected the lives of American women. This course will explore the lives of each poet and the impact
an understanding of their lives has on critical recognition of their art. We will be reading from the fiction,
poetry, journals, biographies, essays and correspondence of Plath and Rich, together with interviews and
reviews that have shaped critical reception of their work.
Requirements: one 4- to 5-page essay, one 6- to 8-page essay, a field trip to the Smith College Plath archive,
and a take-home final exam.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Students who have taken Women's and Gender Stud-
ies 101, but not the English prerequisite, may enroll in this course with permission of the instructor. (Criti-
cism)
ENGL 378(S) The Artist in Society
This course explores the complex interrelationship between individual artistic creation and the social role
of the artist in Victorian England. The dynamic interplay between aesthetic, social, political, and personal
concerns will be approached in two ways: by reading nineteenth-century poems, essays, and novels; and
by considering late-twentieth-century inquiries into the relation between aesthetics and ethics, literature
and public life, art and ideology. The Victorian authors to be studied include Alfred Tennyson, Robert
Browning, Matthew Arnold, Elizabeth Barrett Browning, John Ruskin, George Eliot, and Oscar Wilde.
We will discuss how connections and tensions between literary, moral, and social values shaped the form,
technique, and content of their writings, and the author's attitude toward the reader. Our reading will also
serve as a lens through which to consider present-day debates concerning art and morality, authorial
agency, readerly responsibility, cultural politics, and the role of imagination in public life. Campus visits by
one or two prominent contemporary poets or novelists whose own work engages such issues will be inte-
grated into the course, along with some of their writings. The poet, Robert Pinsky, will visit during the
course of the semester.
Requirements: two papers, a final exam, and regular active participation in class discussion.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 25, with preference given to
English majors and Leadership Studies concentrators. (1800-1900/1700-1900)
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF S. GRAVER
ENGL 380(S) The Art of Modern Crisis
The first half of the twentieth century was marked by extraordinary social and political upheaval. The same
era witnessed a feverishly creative revolution in the nature and strategies of artistic representation. In this
course we will examine what these two kinds of crisis have to do with one another: how a wide range of
startling innovations in literary and cinematic art may be seen as responses to the particular pressures of the
historical crises they represent. Focussing mainly on Britain, we will study such diverse historical crises as
English
­ 170 ­
the spread of anarchism around the turn of the century; the sensational advent of a public discourse of
homosexuality in the trials of Oscar Wilde; the Irish and the Bolshevik revolutions; the woman's suffrage
movement and the emergence of the so-called "New Woman"; and the global traumas of World Wars I and
II. Novels, plays, poems and films will be studied for their distinctive, often dazzling aesthetic strategies for
representing these crises, and will include such works as Conrad's The Secret Agent, Bely's Petersburg,
Woolf's Mrs. Dalloway, Forster's Howards End, O'Casey's The Plough and the Stars, poems of Yeats and
Owen, Ford's Parade's End, Eisenstein's Potemkin, and Heller's Catch-22.
Requirements: active participation in class discussions, two papers, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: 100-level course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 25. (Post-1900)
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF TIFFT
ENGL 386(S) Asian American Women's Writing (Same as American Studies 386)*
In this course, we begin by examining the ways in which Asian American feminism and cultural national-
ism often are constructed as mutually exclusive projects. For example, in the contentious debates on au-
thenticity in Asian American literature that followed the 1976 publication of Maxine Hong Kingston's The
Woman Warrior, the determination of what constituted "real" as opposed to "fake" Asian American litera-
ture often fell along gendered, sexualized lines. We will focus on some of the following topics: memory
and history, memory and writing, homophobia and heterosexism, cultural nationalism, feminisms, racial
mixture, nostalgia and the "homeland," stereotypes of Asian women in America, and the shifting (il)legal
status of Asian immigrant women. Authors may include: Diana Son, Lynda Barry, Jade Snow Wong, Sui
Sin Far/Edith Maude Eaton, Maxine Hong Kingston, Fae Myenne Ng, Elsa E'der, Sigrid Nunez, Sara Sul-
eri, Angel Shaw, Nora Keller, and Ameena Meer, Hisaye Yamamoto, and Theresa Hakyung Cha. While
our discussions will be grounded in close readings of the texts at hand, we will also read a few critical
essays by feminists of color i.e. Kimberle Crenshaw, Norma Alarcon, Elaine Kim, Sauling Wong, Kamala
Visweswaran, and Lisa Lowe.
Requirements: several reader responses, one short paper, and one longer paper.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 25. (Post-1900)
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR SEE
ENGL 389 The Fiction of Virginia Woolf (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
"Let us record the atoms as they fall upon the mind in the order in which they fall, let us trace the pattern,
however disconnected and incoherent in appearance, which each sight or incident scores upon the con-
sciousness. Let us not take it for granted that life exists more fully in what is commonly thought big than in
what is commonly thought small" ("Modern Fiction"). Virginia Woolf's fiction represents a self-conscious
and highly experimental challenge to the conventions of Victorian and Edwardian fiction. This course will
explore the development of her innovative narrative techniques, and her efforts to bridge the gap between
experience and its representation in language. Accompanying concerns will be Woolf's challenges to
stable gender roles, her conception of the relationship of gender to creativity, and the ways in which her
powerful lyric impulses are reflected in her fiction. We will read most of the major novels, including The
Voyage Out, Jacob's Room, Mrs. Dalloway, To the Lighthouse, Orlando, The Waves, and Between the Acts,
together with selected short fiction and critical essays. This course will be taught largely by discussion.
Requirements: weekly journal entries, one 5- to 7-page paper, and one 10- to 12-page paper.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. (Post-1900)
ENGL 391(F) Kafka and His Descendants (Same as Literary Studies 391)
Possibly the most widely influential writer of the twentieth century was Franz Kafka; this course will be
about that assertion. We shall begin by reading (in translation) three works by Kafka himself: Metamor-
phosis, The Trial, and The Castle. Then we shall consider his influence on three writers of the next genera-
tion who determined the separation of postmodernism from modernism: Nabokov, Beckett, and Borges.
Finally, we shall consider such living (and disparate) writers as Pinter, Barth, and Roth. The question of the
course will be how a rather unworldly and almost unpublished minor writer from Prague helped to invent
our contemporary sense of absurdity, exile, and self-alienation.
Requirements: two papers (5-7 pages and 6-8 pages).
Prerequisite: 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 25. (Post-1900)
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR LIMON
ENGL 395(F) Screening Black Words: Contemporary film adaptations of Afro-American
Narratives*
The differences between movies and literature as modes of storytelling are perhaps most clear in film
adaptations of literary texts. While avoiding, or at least being conscious of the interpretive limitations of,
the blanket judgments that are typically made about film adaptations ("the movie was horrible because it
didn't match my sense of what the book should look and sound like"), we will investigate--and
compare--how readers and audiences make meaning out of literature's reliance on words and film's ca-
pacity to utilize seemingly more expansive vocabularies (images, words, and sounds more generally). If, as
film and literature scholars insist, changes--sometimes significant ones--are inevitable when stories
move from the page to the screen, what are the specific thematic and ideological implications of such alter-
ations when Afro-American-authored stories are distributed by television and movie studios? We will be
examining, among other pairs of narratives, Beloved, The Color Purple, Go Tell It on the Mountain, and
The Autobiography of Miss Jane Pittman.
English
­ 171 ­
Requirements: pre-class e-mail responses to readings, two short papers, and one longer paper.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limited to 25. (Post-1900)
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR AWKWARD
ENGL 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
Prerequisites: unusually qualified and committed students who are working on a major writing or research
project may confer with the English Department about possible arrangements for independent study.
ENGL 497(F), 498(S) Honors Independent Study
Required of all senior majors pursuing departmental honors.
CASE, Director of Honors
ENGL W030 Honors Colloquium: Specialization Route
Required during winter study of all seniors admitted to candidacy for honors via the specialization route.
ENGL W031 Senior Thesis
Required during winter study of all seniors admitted to candidacy for honors via the thesis route.
MAJOR SEMINARS
Major Seminars are small discussion classes oriented around a long final paper and focusing in depth on
a particular set of literary or representational issues. Because they entail the kind of sustained, independent
work required for a longer paper, Major Seminars are particularly suitable to students contemplating Hon-
ors or graduate work in English. But they should also be attractive to any student looking for intensive
intellectual engagement in the context of a small discussion class.
Because space is limited, all students--majors and non-majors--must register for a Major Seminar
through the English Department during April preregistration (although space may remain available at later
points). Preference for admission to Major Seminars will go to junior and senior English majors who have
not taken such a course before. Thereafter, preference will be given to non-majors for whom a seminar
would fulfill a requirement of a College program or department.
ENGL 310(S) Shakespeare and Spenser
On the surface, Spenser's dream-like allegory The Faerie Queene (1590 and 1596) seems quite distant
from the more familiar and more scrutinized dramatic art of Shakespeare. But in fact the preoccupations of
both poets overlap in striking and revealing ways. The cross-dressed heroines who complicate the trajecto-
ries of desire in As You Like It (1599) and Twelfth Night (1601) have a provocative counterpart in the cross-
dressed female knight who dominates Books 3 and 4 of the FQ. Shakespeare's duplicitous protean villain
Iago ("I am not what I am") (1604) has counterparts in both Archimago and Duessa ("I, that do seeme not
I, Duessa am") in Book 1 of the FQ, as does his powerful effect on the imagination of the hero. The status
of imagination in the poetic enterprise itself comes under scrutiny in Midsummer Night's Dream (1595)
and The Tempest (1611) on the one hand, and Books 1 and 6 of the FQ on the other. It is no accident that
both associate poetry with fairies and magicians, but why? And what does it mean? This seminar will focus
on the plays mentioned above and Books 1, 3, 4, and 6 of the Faerie Queene. It will explore how the
dramatic strategies of Shakespeare and the allegorizing narrative strategies of Spenser complement and
illuminate one another--and how the shared preoccupations of these two great poets deepen our under-
standing of the early modern period itself.
Requirements: several short papers and presentations (class will be for the most part student-driven) and a
final long seminar paper (15-20 pages).
Major Seminar. Permission of English Department chair required: see information above. Enrollment lim-
ited to 15. (Pre-1800/Pre-1700)
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR KNOPP
ENGL 334(S) William Blake
In this course we will study the illuminated works of the poet and printmaker William Blake. Our texts will
include Songs of Innocence and Experience, The Marriage of Heaven and Hell, Visions of the Daughters
of Albion, America, Europe, and Jerusalem, all of which we will read in facsimile editions. We will also
read a range of historical and critical materials. Our discussions will attempt to articulate and explore the
particular ways in which Blake's books challenge us as readers of literature, as consumers of cultural prod-
ucts, and as political thinkers.
Requirements: one short essay, one group presentation, and a 15-page term paper.
Major Seminar. Permission of English Department chair required: see information above. Enrollment lim-
ited to 15. (1700-1900/1800-1900)
Hour: 7:00-9:30 p.m. T SWANN
ENGL 336 Femme Fatales and New Women (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered
2001-2002)
This course explores two bold fictional modes that developed in nineteenth-century England: Sensation
novels of the 1860s and New Woman fiction of the 1880s and l890s. Both were notorious for portraying
strong-minded, independent heroines, who flouted Victorian ideals of proper womanhood by claiming
sexual and/or intellectual agency. The issues to be explored include the representation in fiction of female
sexuality, woman's mental powers, and male homosocial bonds; the deployment of social and literary con-
English
­ 172 ­
ventions; the use of innovative narrative techniques; the cultural fears, frustrations, and desires to which a
transgressive subject matter gave expression. The readings include novels and short stories, as well as pri-
mary historical sources (conduct manuals, medical treatises, periodical essays), and recent critical and
theoretical essays written from a variety of perspectives (biographical, historical, formal, psychoanalytic,
Marxist, feminist and gender theory). The fictional texts include Mary E. Braddon's Lady Audley's Secret,
Wilkie Collins's Armadale, Olive Schreiner's Story of an African Farm, Thomas Hardy's Jude the Ob-
scure, Bram Stoker's Dracula, and selected short fiction by fin-de-siècle women writers.
Requirements: periodic writing exercises, one short paper, two seminar presentations, and a 12- to 15-page
term paper.
Major Seminar. Open only to English majors and to qualified non-majors, with a preference to concentra-
tors in Women's and Gender Studies; permission of English Department chair required; see information
above. Enrollment limited to 15. (1800-1900 or Criticism)
ENGL 340(F) Reading American Reading
"Take heed what you read!" Sojourner Truth warned her audience; and Frederick Douglass described the
mixed blessing that reading was for him--helping him to attain his freedom, but also heightening his sense
of enslavement. Together, these writers signal a strong American awareness of the promises and dangers of
reading. While it's often clear that we are, culturally speaking, what we read, it's not always clear how the
process of digestion works. A central aim of this course is to give an account of the reciprocal relations
between reading, consciousness and action for a wide range of American writers. We will make sense of
the ways in which reading is shaped by our social and cultural locations, even as we, through a variety of
largely unconscious strategies, use texts to transform ourselves and the world. (We might escape into the
world of a romance novel, or find reading to be "a drug," as did Richard Wright. Or we might intentionally
read "against the grain" of a book's ostensible purpose.) Beginning with theoretical accounts of reading
(psychoanalytic, marxist, poststructuralist), we will trace how a range of American writers forged their
literary identities from the books they read and misread. We will then complicate these autobiographical
accounts by reading works of "pulp fiction" and by studying how critics, cultural historians, and sociolo-
gists have thought about popular reading practices (Harlequin romance, detective fiction, science fiction).
We will be especially interested to discover how readers use textual encounters to cross boundaries of race
or ethnicity, gender, class and sexual orientation. Finally, we will consider some implications of the new
computer technologies for readers and critics: does hypertext give rise to hyperreading? Authors may in-
clude Harold Bloom, Roland Barthes, Eudora Welty, Richard Wright, Richard Rodrigues, Mark Twain,
Hermann Melville, Alice Walker, Nicolson Baker, Gertrude Stein.
Major Seminar. Permission of English Department chair required: see information above. Enrollment lim-
ited to 15. (Criticism or Post-1900)
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR CLEGHORN
ENGL 349(S) American Modernism of the 1920s
From one point of view, it does not make much sense to isolate American modernism: American writers
(some of them living in London or Paris) participated in literary and philosophical movements pointedly
not defined by national boundaries. From another point of view, not only were American writers deeply
engaged in discovering the meaning of American art, but they were also engaged in a radical reevaluation
of what it means to be an American in the first place. In fact, some of the canonical works that we value for
their stylistic virtuosity are engaged in overt or covert redefinitions of America in terms of race, ethnicity,
and sexuality. So the issue of the course is the relation of style and American-ness as defined at the begin-
ning of the twentieth century. We shall look primarily at writers of novels (e.g., Fitzgerald, Hemingway,
Faulkner, Dos Passos, Cather) and prose of indeterminate genre (Stein, Toomer).
Requirements: a short paper, a long seminar paper (15-20 pages), and class participation.
Major Seminar. Permission of English Department chair required; see information above.Enrollment lim-
ited to 15. (Criticism or Post-1900)
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W LIMON
ENGL 364(S) Classical Hollywood Comedy
The 1930's and 1940's have come to be known as the "Golden Age" of Hollywood cinema, because dur-
ing this era Hollywood set the stylistic and narrative norms for mainstream cinema and turned out more
films, of an arguably higher general quality, than at any other time in its history. In this seminar, we will
explore one of the crucial genres of classical Hollywood cinema: comedy, whose varied resources inspired
Hollywood's foremost directors and stars to make many of the finest films of the classical era. The diversi-
ty of these works--ranging from the brilliant slapstick and pathos of Chaplin and Keaton, through the reso-
nant social and cultural allegories of Hawks's and Capra's screwball comedy, to the witty urbanity of Lu-
bitsch and the zany subversiveness of Sturges--will permit us to engage a wide array of questions. Among
other matters, we will be concerned with issues of fate and victimization in slapstick comedy, with the
social conflicts arising from class and gender difference and their possible conciliations, with travesties and
rediscoveries of one's identity, with the nature of romantic fidelity and betrayal, and with the volatile comic
rapport between reason and the unconscious, sexuality and moral constraint. Because of the emergence in
screwball comedy of a new type of female protagonist, the importance to American popular culture of
female film stars, and the prominence of feminist perspectives in theorizing the nature of cinema generally,
we will be steadily concerned with issues of gender and the representation of women.
English
­ 173 ­
Requirements: active participation in class discussions, two short papers, and a long final paper incorporat-
ing earlier work.
Major Seminar. Permission of English Department chair required: see information above. Students are
urged (but not required) to take English 204 before enrolling in this seminar. Enrollment limited to 15.
(Post-1900)
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W TIFFT
ENGL 381(F) Melancholy and History
We will explore the literary uses of melancholy, considering it not as a pensive retreat from history, but as a
series of dynamic transactions with it. We will examine a range of conflicting impulses toward a lost past in
texts written during periods of political, social, or economic upheaval, whose crises are often figured in the
guise of female characters' psychic traumas. In such texts, melancholy provides a logic by which we inter-
pret and represent history, and a mode of social and cultural critique. The course will be divided into three
parts: "The Melancholy State," "Hypochondria and the Body Politic," and "Mania and Charisma." Read-
ings will be drawn from Jane Austen's Persuasion, George Eliot's Daniel Deronda, Vladimir Nabokov's
Ada, or Ardor, Tom Stoppard's Arcadia, and Tony Kushner's Angels in America, as well as poetry by
Gray, Keats, and Dickinson. We will also consider representations of the Great Depression in such screw-
ball comedies as My Man Godfrey and Nothing Sacred. Theoretical texts will be drawn from the work of
Freud, Melanie Klein, Kristeva, Burke, Marx, Weber and Benjamin.
Requirements: two 10-page papers or one 20-page paper.
Major Seminar. Permission of English Department chair required; see information above. Enrollment lim-
ited to 15. (Criticism or 1800-1900/1700-1900)
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR SOKOLSKY
CREATIVE WRITING COURSES
Students interested in taking a creative writing course should preregister and be sure to attend the first
class meeting. Class size is limited; final selections will be made by the instructor shortly after the first class
meeting. Preregistration does not guarantee a place in the class. Students with questions should consult
the appropriate instructor.
ENGL 281(F,S) The Writing of Poetry
A workshop in the writing of poetry. Weekly assignments and regular conferences with the instructor will
be scheduled. Students will discuss each other's poems in the class meetings.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 15. Selection will be based on writing samples and/or conferences
with the instructor. Preference to students who have preregistered.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR First Semester: GLÜCK
2:35-3:50 TF Second Semester: RAAB
ENGL 283(F,S) Introductory Workshop in Fiction
A course in basic problems that arise in the composition of short fiction. Individual conferences will be
combined with workshop sessions; workshop sessions will be devoted to both published and student work.
Considerable emphasis will be placed on the process of revision.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 15. Interested students should preregister for the course and attend
the first class. Selection will be based on writing samples.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR First Semester: J. SHEPARD
2:35-3:50 MR Second Semester: J. SHEPARD
ENGL 286(F) Intermediate Expository Writing: Workshop in Memoir
A course in the basic problems and possibilities that arise in the composition of memoir. Individual meet-
ings with the instructor will be available. Class sessions will be devoted to the discussion of both published
and student work. Students will receive written critiques from other students as well as the instructor.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, critiques of classmates' work, and the successful comple-
tion of several writing exercises and at least 30 pages of memoir.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 16. Interested students should preregister for the course and attend
the first class. Selection will be based on writing samples.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W K. SHEPARD
ENGL 382(F) Advanced Workshop in Poetry
This course will combine individual conferences with workshop sessions at which students will discuss
each other's poetry. Considerable emphasis will be placed upon the problems of revision.
Prerequisite: English 281 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limited to 15. Candidates for admis-
sion should confer with the instructor prior to registration and submit samples of their writing.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W GLÜCK
ENGL 384(S) Advanced Workshop in Fiction
A course that combines individual conferences with workshop sessions. Workshop sessions will be de-
voted to both published and student work. Considerable emphasis will be placed on the process of revision.
Prerequisite: English 283 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limited to 15. Interested students
should preregister for the course and attend first class. Selection will be based on writing samples.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR J. SHEPARD
­ 174 ­
ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES
Director, Professor HENRY W. ART
Professors: ART, K. LEE. Research Associates: FOX, GARDNER.
MEMBERS OF THE CENTER
HENRY W. ART, Professor of Biology
DONALD deB. BEAVER, Professor of History of Science
ROGER E. BOLTON, Professor of Economics
MICHAEL F. BROWN, Professor of Anthropology
JAMES T. CARLTON, Adjunct Professor of Biology and Professor of Marine Science
RONADH COX, Assistant Professor of Geosciences**
EILEEN CRIST, Assistant Professor of Anthropology
DAVID J. DESIMONE, Lecturer in Geosciences
DAVID P. DETHIER, Professor of Geosciences
RICHARD D. DE VEAUX, Associate Professor of Mathematics
GEORGES B. DREYFUS, Assistant Professor of Religion*
JOAN EDWARDS, Professor of Biology*
ANTONIA FOIAS, Assistant Professor of Anthropology*
WILLIAM T. FOX, Professor of Geosciences, Emeritus and Research Associate in Environmental Studies
SARAH S. GARDNER, Research Associate in Environmental Studies
DOUGLAS GOLLIN, Assistant Professor of Economics**
WILLIAM K. JAEGER, Associate Professor of Economics
MARKES E. JOHNSON, Professor of Geosciences
PETER JUST, Associate Professor of Anthropology
BIRGIT G. KOEHLER, Assistant Professor of Chemistry
KAI N. LEE, Professor of Environmental Studies
KENDA B. MUTONGI, Assistant Professor of History*
FRANCIS C. OAKLEY, Professor of History
SHEAFE SATTERTHWAITE, Lecturer in Art and Planning Associate in Environmental Studies
CHERYL SHANKS, Assistant Professor of Political Science
DAVID C. SMITH, Senior Lecturer in Biology**
DAVID L. SMITH, Professor of English*
JOHN W. THOMAN, Jr., Professor of Chemistry
BRADFORD VERTER, Visiting Assistant Professor of Religion
CRAIG S. WILDER, Assistant Professor of History
CONCENTRATION IN ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES
The Environmental Studies Program, within the liberal arts mission of Williams College, provides stu-
dents with an opportunity to explore how humans interact with the environment, including physical, bio-
logical, philosophical, and social elements. The program is designed so that students will grow to realize
the complexity of issues and perspectives and to appreciate that many environmental issues lack distinct,
sharp-edged boundaries. Our goal is to aid students in becoming well-informed, environmentally-literate
citizens of the planet who have the capacity to become active participants in their communities ranging in
scale from the local to the global. To this end, the program is designed to develop abilities to think in inter-
disciplinary ways and to use holistic-synthetic approaches in solving problems while incorporating the
knowledge and experiences they have gained from majoring in other departments at the College.
The concentration in Environmental Studies allows students to focus some of their elective courses in an
integrated, interdisciplinary study of the environment--that is, the natural world, both in itself and as it has
been modified by human activity. The purpose of the program is to provide the tools and ideas needed to
engage constructively with the environmental and social issues brought about by changes in population,
economic activity, and values. Environmental controversies typically call upon citizens and organizations
to grasp complex, uncertain science, contending human values, and ethical choices--in short, to deal with
matters for which the liberal arts are a necessary but not sufficient preparation. Environmental Studies ac-
cordingly includes courses in natural sciences, social sciences, humanities, and the arts, in order to equip
students with the broad educational background needed to analyze complex environmental matters and to
fashion pragmatic, feasible solutions.
The program is administered by the Center for Environmental Studies (CES), located in Kellogg House.
Founded in 1967, CES is one of the oldest environmental studies programs at a liberal arts college. In
addition to the academic program, CES is the focus of a varied set of activities in which students lead and
participate, often with other members of the Williams community. The Matt Cole Memorial Library at
Kellogg House holds a substantial collection of books, periodicals, unpublished documents, maps, and
electronic media. Kellogg House also houses a new Geographic Information System laboratory as well as
study and meeting facilities available to students and student groups. The Center administers the Hopkins
Memorial Forest, a 2430-acre natural area northwest of campus, where field-study sites, a laboratory, and
Environmental Studies
­ 175 ­
passive-recreation opportunities may be found in all seasons. CES also operates an environmental analysis
laboratory at the Science Center.
The Environmental Studies Program has three overlapping components:
 In order to earn the concentration in Environmental Studies, students must complete a set of seven
courses.
 All students are strongly encouraged to meet the Four Places goal.
 Students are encouraged to pursue honors in Environmental Studies by planning a senior thesis.
Concentration Requirements
Seven courses are required: four are core courses to be taken by all students earning the concentration;
three are distribution courses to be selected from the lists below.
Core courses
101 Humans in the Landscape
203 Ecology
302 Environmental Planning and Design Workshop
402 Senior Seminar
The core courses are intended to be taken in sequence, although there is some flexibility allowed. Envi-
ronmental Studies (ENVI) 101 is a broad introduction to the field, emphasizing the humanities and social
sciences. ENVI 203 is a course in ecology, offered in Biology, that provides a unified conceptual approach
to the behavior of living things in the natural world. ENVI 302 (Environmental Planning) puts teams of
students to work on planning projects of immediate importance in the Berkshires. ENVI 402, the senior
seminar, is an opportunity for concentrators majoring in a wide variety of disciplines to draw together their
educational experiences and provide a personal accounting of how they understand the interdisciplinary
character of environmental studies and its connections to their future lives and careers. The core course
structure affords students freedom to explore and to specialize in diverse fields of study, while sustaining a
focus on environmental questions throughout their time at Williams.
An interdisciplinary course emphasizing field science, ENVI 102 (Introduction to Environmental Sci-
ence), is strongly recommended for all students interested in the concentration. Note that enrollments in
ENVI 102 are limited. In order to assure enrollment, students should consult with one of the instructors
during autumn semester. ENVI 102 must be taken before the junior year.
Distribution Courses
In order to earn the concentration a student must take one course from each of the following three
groups. Courses may be counted both toward the concentration in Environmental Studies and toward a
disciplinary major.
The Natural World
American Maritime Studies 211/Geosciences 210 Oceanographic Processes
American Maritime Studies 311/Biology 231 Marine Ecology
Biology/Environmental Studies 134 The Tropics: Biology and Social Issues
Biology/Environmental Studies 220 Field Botany and Plant Natural History
Biology 302/Environmental Studies 312 Communities and Ecosystems
Biology/Environmental Studies 333 The Ecology of Biological Resources
Biology 402T/Environmental Studies 404T Current Topics in Ecology
Chemistry/Environmental Studies 304 Instrumental Methods of Analysis
Chemistry 308/Environmental Studies 328 Toxicology and Cancer
Environmental Studies 102 Introduction to Environmental Science
Geosciences 101/Environmental Studies 105 Biodiversity in Geologic Time
Geosciences/Environmental Studies 103 Environmental Geology and the Earth's Surface
Geosciences/Environmental Studies 104 Oceanography
Geosciences/Environmental Studies 200 Weather and Climate Change
Geosciences 201/Environmental Studies 205 Geomorphology
Geosciences/Environmental Studies 206 Geological Sources of Energy
Geosciences/Environmental Studies 208 Water and the Environment
Geosciences/Environmental Studies 214 Remote Sensing and Geographic Information Systems
Williams-Oxford 245 Geography: The Geographical Environment: Physical
Humans in the Landscape
American Maritime Studies 201/History 255 History of the Sea
American Maritime Studies/English 231T Literature of the Sea
ANSO 214/Environmental Studies 224 The Rise and Fall of Civilizations
Anthropology 102/Environmental Studies 106 Human Evolution: Down from the Trees, Out to the
Stars
Anthropology/Environmental Studies 209 Human Ecology
ArtH/Environmental Studies 201 American Landscape History
ArtH/Environmental Studies 252 Campuses
ArtH 302/Environmental Studies 320 Three Cities (Deleted 2000-2001)
Environmental Studies
­ 176 ­
ArtH/Environmental Studies 303 Countryside Planning (Deleted 2000-2001)
ArtH 304/Environmental Studies 324 American Transport History (Deleted 2000-2001)
ArtH/Environmental Studies 305 North-American Suburbs
ArtH 306/Environmental Studies 326 North-American Dwellings
ArtH 307/Environmental Studies 327 The North-American Park Idea
ArtH/Environmental Studies 310 American Agricultural History
Economics 201T/Environmental Studies 207T Cities
Economics/Environmental Studies/Women's and Gender Studies 223 Gender and Economic Devel-
opment
Environmental Studies/American Studies 405 Automobiles and American Civilization
History 102 (formerly 116)/Environmental Studies 116 Environmental History of Africa
History 392 (formerly 220)/Environmental Studies 222 Nature: The History of an Idea
History of Science 305/History 292 Technology and Culture
Philosophy/Environmental Studies 23 Environmental Philosophy
Religion/Anthropology/EXPR 273 Sacred Geographies
Religion/Environmental Studies 276 Grounding the Sacred: Religion and Ecology in the United
States
Religion/Environmental Studies 287 Inhabiting Nature: Religious, Philosophical, and Sociological
Perspectives (Deleted 2000-2001)
Sociology 308T Property: A Social Analysis of Material Goods (Deleted 2000-2001)
Williams-Oxford 246 Geography: Human Geography
Environmental Policy
American Maritime Studies/Environmental Studies 351 Marine Policy
Economics 204/Environmental Studies 234 Economic Development in Poor Countries
Economics/Environmental Studies 212 Sustainable Development
Economics/Environmental Studies 218 Population Economics
Economics/Environmental Studies 238 The Regions of America
Economics/Environmental Studies 369 Agriculture and Development Strategy
Economics/Environmental Studies 377 Environmental Policy and Natural Resource Management
Environmental Studies 211 Global Trends, Sustainable Earth
Environmental Studies/Economics 228 International Population Issues (Deleted 2000-2001)
Environmental Studies/History 393 (formerly 306) Urban Theory
Environmental Studies 307/Political Science 317 Environmental Law
Environmental Studies/Political Science 308 Environmental Policy
Variations from the requirements of the concentration must be approved in writing by the director of the
program. Students are urged to consult with program faculty and the director as soon as they develop an
interest in the concentration.
In addition to courses fulfilling the concentration requirements, the following electives and related elec-
tives are offered:
Environmental Studies 397, 398 Independent Study of Environmental Problems
Environmental Studies 493-W031-494 Senior Research and Thesis
ArtS 329 Architectural Design II
Winter study courses play an important role in the program, offering opportunities to experiment in
fields unfamiliar to the student, and for interdisciplinary topics to be developed by faculty working alone
and in teams. Students are urged to review each year's winter study offerings bearing in mind their interests
in the environment.
Rationale for Course Numbering
The numbering sequence of the four required courses reflects the order in which they should be taken,
although Environmental Studies 302 may be taken in the senior or sophomore year if a student is away
junior year. Cross-listed courses are assigned the same number as the departmental number whenever pos-
sible.
Four Places--A Goal
The human place in natural landscapes is intrinsically geographic, and learning about humans in partic-
ular places is an essential part of environmental studies. By the time each student in Environmental Studies
graduates, she or he should have developed intellectual insight into and personal experience of four places:
"Home"; "Here"--the Berkshires; "There"--an alien place; and "The World"--a global perspective. For
practical purposes, There is a place where the geography is unusual in the student's experience (e.g., devel-
oping country, inner city, arctic), so are the socioeconomic circumstances (for example, per capita income
might be a small fraction of a year's tuition at Williams), and the working language is not standard English.
Although this goal is not a requirement for the concentration, it is a significant aspect of the program, and
CES resources are aimed in part at enabling all students to meet this goal. For example, students are en-
couraged to pursue summer internships in their "Home" communities, or to do semester or winter study
courses at locations outside the temperate zones ("There"); field courses in natural science or history
Enrvironmental Studies
­ 177 ­
courses emphasizing New England can deepen familiarity with "Here." Students concentrating in Envi-
ronmental Studies should plan winter study courses and summer work or study experiences with the Four
Places goal in mind, particularly the experiences "There" and at "Home." Courses not in the list of elec-
tives for the concentration may be considered as substitutes, on a case-by-case basis, if they also meet the
Four Places goal in a way not otherwise available in the program. Students should see the program director
for further information.
Honors in Environmental Studies
A student earns honors in Environmental Studies by successfully completing a rigorous, original inde-
pendent research project under the supervision of two or more members of the faculty, including at least
one member of the CES faculty. The research project should be reported and defended both in a thesis and
orally. A student may undertake an honors thesis and submit it to both his or her major department and
Environmental Studies; petitions for a joint honors project should be approved by the department chair and
the director of the program no later than the beginning of the student's senior year. Students who pursue
honors in Environmental Studies alone should enroll in Environmental Studies 493-W031-494, Senior Re-
search and Thesis, in addition to completing the requirements for the concentration.
Because most research requires sustained field, laboratory, or library work that is difficult to combine
with conventional coursework, students are strongly encouraged to spend the summer before senior year
doing honors research. Funds to support student research are available from restricted endowments of the
Center, and an open competition is held each spring, to allocate the limited resources. Some departments
also provide limited support for summer thesis research. Students and their faculty sponsors should plan
the thesis with the possibility of summer research in mind.
A faculty recommendation for honors in Environmental Studies will be made on the basis of the aca-
demic rigor, interdisciplinary synthesis, independence, and originality demonstrated by the student and in
the completed thesis. In contemplating an honors thesis, students should take into account their mastery of
the basic materials and skills (often in more than one academic discipline), their ability to work indepen-
dently, and their commitment and desire to pursue a sometimes arduous but typically rewarding process
that combines intellectual achievement with tests of character and fortitude.
ENVI 101(F,S) Humans in the Landscape
A survey of basic topics, aimed at putting environmental questions into the contexts of natural and social
science and the arts and humanities. By the end of the term, the student should be able to recognize and to
interpret the natural, economic, and industrial bases of daily life; investigate that which seems interesting or
problematic in his or her environment, at levels ranging from local to global; and be able to make judg-
ments about which aspects of that environment are worth additional time, effort, or commitment. These
skills, particularly the last, are necessary but not sufficient for developing a stance toward environmental
quality as an element of civilized life.
Principal means of evaluation will be two quizzes (testing detailed recall), written exercises (testing ability
to grasp and make use of ideas important to the course), and a final exam; attentive participation in class
and conference discussions will also count. Attendance at field trips, films, and the like is strongly encour-
aged.
Satisfies one semester of Division II requirement.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF First Semester: K. LEE
9:00-9:50 MWF Second Semester: K. LEE
ENVI 102(S) Introduction to Environmental Science
Environmental Science is an interdisciplinary approach to the study of environmental issues. This course
stresses the scientific methods used by biologists, chemists and geologists to analyze and measure changes
in the environment. Current environmental problems affecting the Williamstown area are used as a basis
for exploring issues of global importance, including air pollution, endangered species, solid-waste dispos-
al, water quality and the effects of land-use changes on environmental quality.
This course meets four times a week, including three one-hour morning sessions and a three-hour after-
noon period. Morning sessions are divided between lectures and discussion, and we spend afternoons in
the field or laboratory.
Evaluation is based on reports of field and laboratory projects, participation in discussion, and an indepen-
dent research project.
Preference given to first-year students. This course is designed for students who have a strong interest in
environmental science. Enrollment limited to 36.
Satisfies one semester of Division III requirement.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-5 M, T, W ART, DESIMONE and KOEHLER
ENVI 103(F) Environmental Geology and the Earth's Surface (Same as Geosciences 103)
(See under Geosciences for full description.)
ENVI 104(S) Oceanography (Same as Geosciences 104)
(See under Geosciences for full description.)
ENVI 105(F) Biodiversity in Geologic Time (Same as Geosciences 101)
(See under Geosciences for full description.)
Environmental Studies
­ 178 ­
ENVI 106(F) Human Evolution: Down from the Trees, Out to the Stars (Same as
Anthropology 102)
(See under Anthropology for full description.)
ENVI 116 Environmental History of Africa (Same as History 102) (Not offered 2000-2001)*
(See under History for full description.)
ENVI 134 The Tropics: Biology and Social Issues (Same as Biology 134) (Not offered
2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
(See under Biology for full description.)
ENVI 200(F) Weather and Climate Change (Same as Geosciences 200)
(See under Geosciences for full description.)
ENVI 201(F) American Landscape History (Same as ArtH 201)
(See under Art for full description.)
ENVI 203(F) Ecology (Same as Biology 203)
(See under Biology for full description.)
ENVI 205(F) Geomorphology (Same as Geosciences 201)
(See under Geosciences for full description.)
ENVI 206 Geological Sources of Energy (Same as Geosciences 206) (Not offered 2000-2001;
to be offered 2001-2002)
(See under Geosciences for full description.)
ENVI 207T Cities (Same as Economics 201T) (Not offered 2000-2001)+
(See under Economics for full description.)
ENVI 208(S) Water and the Environment (Same as Geosciences 208)
(See under Geosciences for full description.)
ENVI 209(S) Human Ecology (Same as Anthropology 209)*
(See under Anthropology for full description.)
ENVI 211(F) Global Trends, Sustainable Earth
This course examines the possibility of a sustainability transition, a future in which material prosperity may
be combined with preservation of the life-support systems of the human and natural world. Over the past
200 years the human presence on the planet has changed dramatically, as seen in long-range trends of envi-
ronmental modification, population growth, and economic change. Although human population growth is
slowing, this is but one ingredient of a sustainable long-term relationship between humans and nature. Oth-
er important aspects, including loss of biodiversity, consumption and a globalizing economy, and techno-
logical change will be reviewed, in an effort to illuminate the idea of a transition toward sustainability and
the challenges implied by its ambitions and hopes.
Course objectives: 1) Students should understand the idea of a sustainability transition, including the
strengths and weaknesses of this social-learning approach to environment and social action. 2) Students
should be able to explore long-term, large-scale phenomena, calling upon a variety of disciplinary methods
and drawing together information about both human activities and the natural world.
Requirements: there will be two research exercises, an in-class midterm, and a final exam.
No prerequisites.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR K. LEE
ENVI 212(F) Sustainable Development (Same as Economics 212)*
(See under Economics for full description.)
ENVI 214(S) Remote Sensing and Geographic Information Systems (Same as Geosciences 214)
(See under Geosciences for full description.)
ENVI 218 Population Economics (Same as Economics 218) (Not offered 2000-2001)
(See under Economics for full description.)
ENVI 220 Field Botany and Plant Natural History (Same as Biology 220) (Not offered
2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
(See under Biology for full description.)
ENVI 222 Nature: The History of an Idea (Same as History 392) (Not offered 2000-2001)
(See under History for full description.)
ENVI 223 Gender and Economic Development (Same as Economics 223 and Women's and
Gender Studies 223) (Not offered 2000-2001)*
(See under Economics for full description.)
ENVI 224 The Rise and Fall of Civilizations (Same as ANSO 214) (Not offered 2000-2001)*
(See under Anthropology/Sociology for full description.)
ENVI 230 International and Environmental Justice Issues (Not offered 2000-2001; to be
offered 2001-2002)
Environmental Studies
­ 179 ­
ENVI 234(S) Economic Development in Poor Countries (Same as Economics 204)*
(See under Economics for full description.)
ENVI 237(S) Environmental Philosophy (Same as Philosophy 237)
(See under Philosophy for full description.)
ENVI 238(F) The Regions of America (Same as Economics 238)
(See under Economics for full description.)
ENVI 252 Campuses (Same as ArtH 252) (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
(See under Art for full description.)
ENVI 276 Grounding the Sacred: Religion and Ecology in the United States (Same as Religion
276) (Not offered 2000-2001)
(See under Religion for full description.)
ENVI 302(F) Environmental Planning and Analysis Workshop
This course will challenge students to incorporate disparate perspectives and methodologies as they partic-
ipate in the analysis of environmental problems. While the course serves as an introduction to the theories
and practices of environmental planning, it also draws upon the student's past curricular and extracurricular
experiences in working on a contemporary project. The course commences with case studies that exempli-
fy various methodologies of environmental analysis and then proceeds to hands-on participation in an en-
vironmental design project. The approach will be to assemble diverse teams of students who together will
undertake an interdisciplinary process in exploring alternative outcomes to a specific environmental prob-
lem.
Requirements: midterm exam, short written exercises, workshop presentations, and a final group project.
Prerequisites: Environmental Studies 101 and Biology/Environmental Studies 203, or permission of
instructors. Open only to juniors and seniors. Required course for students wishing to complete the Envi-
ronmental Studies Program.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR Lab: 1-4 T, R ART and R. BOLTON
ENVI 304(S) Instrumental Methods of Analysis (Same as Chemistry 304)
(See under Chemistry for full description.)
ENVI 305 North-American Suburbs (Same as ArtH 305) (Not offered 2000-2001; to be
offered 2002-2003)
(See under Art for full description.)
ENVI 307(F) Environmental Law (Same as Political Science 317)
In the past twenty years, environmental law has emerged as an important aspect of how we govern the use
of public and private property. This course introduces students to the study of law from the perspective of a
litigator and legislator, and takes up both the common law of nuisance, which is the foundation for environ-
mental governance in the Anglo-American tradition, and an array of statutory law, which has profound
implications for our ideas about property and how we put those ideas into practice. In our society, and
increasingly around the world, these ideas are central to civil order and to our efforts to maintain a balance
between our individual wishes and our commitment to our communities.
Prerequisites: Political Science 110 and Environmental Studies 101. Environmental Studies 308 (Same as
Political Science 308) is strongly recommended; this is the companion course to Environmental Studies/
Political Science 308 (Environmental Policy). Students are not required to register for both courses, but
they are team-taught and coordinated, so that the benefit of taking them both is intended to be greater than
the sum of parts. The courses may be taken in either order.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR TBA
ENVI 308(S) Environmental Policy (Same as Political Science 308)
Over the past generation, environmental policy has emerged as a new and important aspect of the gover-
nance of the natural world and private property in the U.S. This course introduces students to the study of
public policy and its politics from the perspective of the constellation of professionals, managers, and ac-
tivists involved in the implementation and formulation of policy. We will take up the organizational forms
and politics that underlie governing in the post-industrial political economy, and survey the array of poli-
cies that has transformed that governance for natural resources, property, and ecosystem services. Environ-
mental policy is a response to the complexities of the contemporary economy, and its technical and social
challenges strain long-accepted notions of democratic representation and rationality. These challenges, in
turn, raise far-reaching issues in societies in which responsible action by individuals and organized collecti-
vities lies at the center of the civil order.
Prerequisites: Political Science 110 and Environmental Studies 101; Environmental Studies 307 (Same as
Political Science 317) is strongly recommended; this is the companion course to Environmental Studies
307/Political Science 317 (Environmental Law). Students are not required to register for both courses, but
they are team-taught and coordinated, so that the benefit of taking them both is intended to be greater than
sum of the parts. The courses may be taken in either order.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR K. LEE
ENVI 310(S) American Agricultural History (Same as ArtH 310)
(See under Art for full description.)
Environmental Studies
­ 180 ­
ENVI 312(S) Communities and Ecosystems (Same as Biology 302)
(See under Biology for full description.)
ENVI 326(S) North-American Dwellings (Same as ArtH 306)
(See under Art for full description.)
ENVI 327 The North-American Park Idea (Same as ArtH 307) (Not offered 2000-2001; to be
offered 2002-2003)
(See under Art for full description.)
ENVI 328(S) Toxicology and Cancer (Same as Chemistry 308)
(See under Chemistry for full description.)
ENVI 333 The Ecology of Biological Resources (Same as Biology 333) (Not offered
2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
(See under Biology for full description.)
ENVI 351(F,S) Marine Policy (Same as American Maritime Studies 351) (Offered only at
Mystic Seaport.)
(See under American Maritime Studies for full description.)
ENVI 369(S) Agriculture and Development Strategy (Same as Economics 369)
(See under Economics for full description.)
ENVI 377(S) Environmental Policy and Natural Resource Management (Same as Economics
515)*
(See under Economics for full description.)
ENVI 393 Urban Theory (Same as History 393) (Not offered 2000-2001)
(See under History for full description.)
ENVI 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study of Environmental Problems
Individuals or groups of students may undertake a study of a particular environmental problem. The proj-
ect may involve either pure or applied research, policy analysis, laboratory or field studies, or may be a
creative writing or photography project dealing with the environment. A variety of nearby sites are avail-
able for the study of natural systems. Ongoing projects in the College-owned Hopkins Forest include eco-
logical studies, animal behavior, and acid rain effects on soils, plants, and animals. Students may also
choose to work on local, national, or international policy or planning issues, and opportunities to work with
town and regional planning officials are available. Projects are unrestricted as to disciplinary focus. Stu-
dents should consult with faculty well before the start of the semester in which they plan to carry out their
project.
Prerequisite: approval by the director of the Center.
Members of the Center
ENVI 402(S) The Environment, the Individual, and Society
It is generally recognized that our contemporary society is the product of cultural evolution over historical
time. This course will explore through readings and class discussion the relationships among the individu-
al, society, and the natural environment. Questions about past, present, and possible future value systems as
they influence individual and social interactions with the natural environment will be raised. Students will
be asked to become explicitly aware of their own values and will have an opportunity to justify them in a
major synthesis paper.
The principal means of evaluation will be class participation and a major paper.
Prerequisite: Environmental Studies 302.
Required course for students wishing to complete the Environmental Studies Program.
Hour: 7:00-9:30 p.m. T K. LEE
ENVI 404T Current Topics in Ecology (Same as Biology 402T) (Not offered 2000-2001; to be
offered 2001-2002)+
(See under Biology for full description.)
ENVI 405 Automobiles and American Civilization (Same as American Studies 405) (Not
offered 2000-2001)
The automobile has exercised a profound role in American life and culture: the rise of new industries--in
notably automobile manufacture, petroleum, and road construction; in the design of cities and the structure
of the economy; in shaping personal finances and self-image; and, not least, in defining the scope and scale
of the environmental impact of Americans' consumption and work lives. In short, cars and their associated
technological systems and social institutions offer approaches to American culture and history rich in in-
sight and diverse perspectives.
This course is the initial offering of a research seminar on the roles of the automobile in American civiliza-
tion, together with discussion of the potential transformations of those roles in light of environmental and
social considerations and technological feasibility.
The scope of the automobile's influence defies conventional ideas of cost versus benefit. Yet, as other
countries achieve prosperity, the influence of the auto and its culture takes on global significance. Efforts to
Environmental Studies, First-Year Residential Seminar, Geosciences
­ 181 ­
move automotive design and transportation engineering toward more environmentally-sustainable paths
will be examined, in light of the historical and cultural place of the automobile in American society.
Students enrolling in the course will develop a research proposal and a complete draft of a research paper.
The final version of the research project may be completed during winter study, when a presentation of the
project will be offered in a public forum.
K. LEE
ENVI 493(F)-W031-494(S) Senior Research and Thesis
FIRST-YEAR RESIDENTIAL SEMINAR
The First-Year Residential Seminar is part of a program designed to help students explore new ways of
integrating their social and intellectual lives. Students who elect this seminar live together in the same resi-
dential unit. They take the seminar together during the fall semester, and enrollment in the seminar is re-
stricted to students in the program. The seminar explores topics and issues that can be expected to promote
lively discussions both in and out of class. It may be team-taught and may contain interdisciplinary subject
matter.
All entering first-year students have the opportunity to express interest in participating in this program; if
more students are interested than there are spaces available (approximately 23), selection is done randomly.
Participants must commit themselves to taking FRS 101.
FRS 101(F) Introduction to Religion
This course examines the structure and dynamics of certain aspects of religious thought, action, and sensi-
bility-employing psychological, sociological, anthropological, and philosophical modes of inquiry. We
will begin with a survey of stances toward religion that have come to dominate the century's view of the
place and the truth of religion. These include the phenomenological, Mircea Eliade's Sacred and the Pro-
fane; the psychoanalytic, Sigmund Freud's Civilization and Its Discontents; the sociological, Emile Durk-
heim's Elementary Forms of Religious Life; the anthropological in the works of Clifford Geertz, Victor
Turner, Claude Levi-Strauss and Carolyn Bynum; and finally the theological in the works of Paul Tillich
and Mary Daly. With the tools we develop in the first half of the course we then turn to the study of some
religious traditions: Hinduism, Buddhism, Confucianism, Judaism and Christianity. In this portion we will
read such world classics as the Bhagavad Gita, Hebrew Scriptures, Gospel of Matthew, and Kierkegaard's
Fear and Trembling.
Emphasis on class discussion and the writing of interpretive papers.
Requirements: weekly 1-page papers in response to assigned questions, including visits to art museums
and religious services. Writing these papers should help discussions, both in the classroom and in the dorm.
Midterm paper and self-scheduled final. FRS students in the past have greatly appreciated having an entry-
full of companions to talk with as they thought about how to respond to the course materials. This luxury is
provided only within the framework of FRS.
Enrollment limited to FRS students.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR DARROW
GEOSCIENCES (Div. III)
Chair, Professor DAVID P. DETHIER
Professors: DETHIER, M. JOHNSON, KARABINOS***, WOBUS**. Assistant Professor: COX**.
Assistant Professor of Marine Science for the Williams-Mystic Program: MCKENNA. Part-time
Lecturer: DESIMONE. Research Associates: BAARLI, BACKUS, BRANDRISS.
MAJOR
The Geosciences major is designed (1) to provide an understanding of the physical and biological
evolution of our planet and its interacting global systems, (2) to help us learn to live in harmony with our
environment, and (3) to appreciate our place within the vastness of earth history. Forces within the earth are
responsible for the development of mountain ranges and ocean basins. Waves, rivers, and glaciers have
shapedthesurfaceoftheearth,providingthelandscapesweseetoday. Fossils encased in sedimentaryrocks
supply evidence for the evolution of life and help to record the history of the earth.
Students who graduate with a major in Geosciences from Williams can enter several different fields of
geoscience or can use their background in other careers. Students who have continued in the geosciences
are involved today, especially after graduate training, in environmental fields ranging from hydrology to
earthquake prediction, in the petroleum and mining industries, federal and state geological surveys, geo-
logical consulting firms, and teaching and research in universities, colleges, and secondary schools. Gradu-
ates who have entered business or law have also found many applications for their geoscience background.
Other graduates now in fields as diverse as art and medicine pursue their interest in the out-of-doors with a
deeper appreciation for the natural world around them.
The Geosciences major sequence includes, after any 100-level course, five designated advanced
courses, two elective courses, and either Geosciences 212 (Invertebrate Paleobiology) or Geosciences 303
(Igneous and Metamorphic Petrology).
Geosciences
­ 182 ­
Sequence Courses (required of majors)
201 Geomorphology
202 Mineralogy and Geochemistry
301 Structural Geology
302 Sedimentation
401 Stratigraphy
Elective courses may be clustered to provide concentrations in selected fields. Suggested groupings are
listed below as guidelines for course selections, but other groups are possible according to the interests of
the students. Departmental advisors are given for the different fields of Geosciences.
I Environmental Geoscience. For students interested in surface processes and the application of geolo-
gy to environmental problems such as land use planning, resource planning, environmental impact analy-
sis, and environmental law. Such students should also consider enrollingin thecoordinate program of the
Center for Environmental Studies.
103 Environmental Geology and the Earth's Surface
104 Oceanography and/or
200 Weather and Climate Change
206 Geological Sources of Energy or
208 Water and the Environment
214 Remote Sensing and Geographic Information Systems
(Students interested in Environmental Geosciences should consult with Professor Dethier.)
II Oceanography, Stratigraphy and Sedimentation. For students interested in the study of modern
and ancient sedimentary environments and the marine organisms that inhabited them.
101 Biodiversity in Geologic Time
104 Oceanography
206 Geological Sources of Energy
212 Invertebrate Paleobiology
(Students interested in Oceanography, Stratigraphy, and Sedimentation should consult with Professors
M. Johnson or Cox.)
III The Solid Earth. For students interested in plate tectonics, the processes active within the earth, the
origin and deformation of rocks and minerals, and mineral exploration.
102 An Unfinished Planet
105 Geology Outdoors
303 Igneous and Metamorphic Petrology
(Students interested in The Solid Earth should consult with Professors Wobus or Karabinos.)
With the consent of the department, certain courses at the 200 level or higher in Biology, Chemistry,
Mathematics, or Physics may be substituted for elective courses in the major. Credit may be granted in the
Geosciences major for American Maritime Studies 211/Geosciences 210 (Oceanographic Processes) or
American Maritime Studies 311/Biology 231 (Marine Ecology) taken at Mystic Seaport.
Students considering graduate work in the Earth Sciences should also take courses in the allied sciences
and mathematics in addition to the requirements of the Geosciences major. The selection of outside courses
will depend on the field in which a student intends to specialize. Most geoscience graduate schools require
Chemistry 101, 102, and Mathematics through 105. For those going into Environmental Geoscience,
courses in the Environmental Studies Program are recommended. For those considering Oceanography,
Stratigraphy, and Sedimentation, Biology 102 and Biology 203 are suggested. For students entering Solid-
Earth fields, Physics 131 and 132 are recommended.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN GEOSCIENCES
In order to be recommended for the degree with honors, a student is expected to have completed at least
two semesters and a winter study project (031) of independent research culminating in a thesis which dem-
onstrates outstanding achievement of an original and innovative nature. The principal considerations in
admitting a student to a program of independent research are mastery of fundamental material and skills,
ability to pursue independent study successfully, and demonstrated student interest and motivation.
Further advice on the major can be obtained from the department chair.
GEOS 101(F) Biodiversity in Geologic Time (Same as Environmental Studies 105)
Is planet Earth now undergoing the most severe mass extinction of species ever to have occurred during its
4.5-billion-year history? By some calculations, the expanding population of a single species is responsible
for the demise of 74 species per day. This provocative question is addressed by way of the rock and fossil
record as it relates to changes in biodiversity through deep geologic time before the appearance of Homo
sapiens only 250,000 years ago. Long before human interaction, nature conducted its own experiments on
the complex relationship between evolving life and changes in the physical world. This course examines
ways in which wandering continents, shifting ocean basins, the rise and fall of mountains, the wax and
wane of ice sheets, fluctuating sea level, and even crashing asteroids all shaped major changes in global
biodiversity. Particular attention is drawn to the half dozen most extensive mass extinctions and what fac-
tors may have triggered them. Equal consideration is given to how the development of new ecosystems
Geosciences
­ 183 ­
forever altered the physical world. How and when did the earliest microbes oxygenate the atmosphere? Do
the earliest multicellular animals from the late Precambrian portray an architectural experiment doomed to
failure? What factors contributed to the explosive rise in biodiversity at the start of the Cambrian Period?
What explanation is there for the sudden appearance of vertebrates? How and when did plants colonize the
land? What caused the demise of the dinosaurs? Is the present dominance of mammals an accident of na-
ture? The answers to these and other questions are elusive, but our wise stewardship of the planet and its
present biodiversity may depend on our understanding of the past. Concepts of plate tectonics and island
biogeography are applied to many aspects of the puzzle.
Lectures three hours per week; one two-hour laboratory per week (some involving field work); plus one
all-day field trip to the Helderberg Plateau and Catskill Mountains of New York, and a half-day trip to the
Geology Museum at Amherst College.
Evaluation is based on weekly quizzes and lab work, a midterm exam, and a final exam.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-3 M, T M. JOHNSON
GEOS 102(S) An Unfinished Planet
The Earth is a work-in-progress, an evolving planet whose vital signs--as expressed by earthquakes, vol-
canic eruptions, and shifting plates--are still strong. In a geological time frame, nothing on earth is perma-
nent: ocean basins open and close, mountains rise and fall, continental masses accrete and separate. There
is a message here for all who live, for an infinitesimally brief time, on the moving surface of the globe. This
course uses the plate tectonics model--one of the fundamental scientific accomplishments of this centu-
ry--to interpret the processes and products of a changing Earth. The emphasis will be on mountain sys-
tems (on land and beneath the oceans) as expressions of plate interactions. Specific topics include the rocks
and structures of modern and ancient mountain belts, the patterns of global seismicity and volcanism, the
nature of the Earth's interior, the changing configurations of continents and ocean basins through time, and,
in some detail, the formation of the Appalachian Mountain system and the geological assembly of New
England. Readings will be from a physical geology textbook and primary source supplement, selected
writings of John McPhee, and references about the geology of the Northeast.
Lectures, three hours a week; labs (several involving field work), two hours a week; one required all-day
field trip to the Connecticut Valley, and the highlands of western Massachusetts.
Evaluation will be based on two hour-tests, weekly lab work, and a scheduled final exam.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-3 W, R WOBUS
GEOS 103(F) Environmental Geology and the Earth's Surface (Same as Environmental
Studies 103)
Limitations imposed by the physical environment have become increasingly important as population ex-
pands. Geologic materials such as soil, sediment, and bedrock, and geologic processes involving earth-
quakes, volcanic activity, and running water often pose constraints on land use. This course examines the
nature of geologic materials, the physical processes that continuously change the surface of the earth, and
how these processes affect human activity. Topics include volcanic and earthquake hazards, surface-water
erosion and flooding, landslides, groundwater, solid waste disposal, resource issues, global climate change,
and the importance of geologic information to land-use planning. Laboratories emphasize field and class-
room studies of surface processes and discussion of their application to planning.
Lectures and discussions, three hours per week; one two-hour laboratory a week; local field trips.
Evaluation will be based on two hour exams, weekly labs, and a final exam.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF Lab: 1-3 M, W DETHIER and DESIMONE
GEOS 104(S) Oceanography (Same as Environmental Studies 104)
This course will present an integrated introduction to the oceans. Topics covered will include formation
and history of the ocean basins; ocean chemistry; oceans through time; currents, tides, and waves; oceans
and climate; coastal processes and ecology; productivity in the oceans; and resources and pollution. Coast-
al oceanography will be investigated on an all-day field trip to the New England coast.
Lectures and discussions, three hours per week. One two-hour laboratory in alternate weeks. One all-day
field trip.
Evaluation will be based on two hour exams, lab work, participation in the field trip, and a final exam.
Enrollment limited, with preference to first-year students.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF Lab: 1-3 M, T COX
GEOS 105(F) Geology Outdoors+
An introduction to geology through student field projects. The mountains, lakes, rivers, and valleys of the
Williamstown area provide unusual opportunities for learning geology in the field. Student projects will
include the study of streams as active agents of erosion and deposition, the effects of glaciation on the New
England landscape, and the history of mountain building in the Appalachians. Following several group
projects introducing the techniques of field geology, students will pursue independent projects on subjects
of particular interest to them. This course departs from the standard science course format of three lectures
and a required lab each week. Instead, emphasis is placed on learning through active participation in field
projects and presentation of results through high-quality writing. The class will meet two afternoons each
week from 1:00 to 3:45 p.m. There will be one all-day field trip to the Connecticut Valley and one weekend
trip to New Hampshire.
This course is designed for students who have a serious interest in geology or other natural and environ-
Geosciences
­ 184 ­
mental sciences, the outdoors, and writing.
Evaluation will be based on participation in field work and discussions, five papers based on field projects,
and an oral presentation of independent project results.
Open only to first-year students; Enrollment limited to 12. No previous knowledge of geology is required.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 TR KARABINOS
GEOS 200(F) Weather and Climate Change (Same as Environmental Studies 200)
Our planet's atmosphere, oceans, biosphere, and lithosphere are complexly linked to regulate climate;
changes in these systems are the causes of natural variations in climate. Natural and human agents for cli-
mate change will be studied during this survey of the earth's climate over recent geological and historical
time. The role of organisms, oceanic circulation, and tectonic changes on climate can be illuminated using
examples from the past. Ecological response to climatic change, particularly the telling impact on hominid
evolution and later changes during episodic ice ages, complete this examination of climate in a geological
framework. Climatic variations including the Little Ice Age and the El Nino/Southern Oscillation during
historical time offer insights into how our climate system might fluctuate in the near future. How will hu-
man induced climate change intersect these natural and cyclic changes? The accuracy of climate models so
widely used today for policy decisions must be assessed and tested against this known climate history.
Does our recent climatic past reveal our near-term future?
Lectures, three hours per week. There will be one evening video on hominid evolution.
Evaluation will be based on hour exams, a final exam, and 2-3 weather forecasting exercises.
Enrollment limited to 40, with preference given to first- and second-year students.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF DESIMONE
GEOS 201(F) Geomorphology (Same as Environmental Studies 205)
This course is designed for geosciences majors and for environmental studies students interested in surfi-
cial geologic processes and their importance in shaping the physical environment. The course emphasizes
the nature and rates of constructional, weathering, and erosional processes and the influence of climatic,
tectonic, and volcanic forces on landform evolution. Labs focus on field measurements of hydrologic and
geomorphic processes in the Williamstown-area as well as on the analysis of topographic maps and stereo
air photos.
Lectures and discussions, three hours a week; laboratory, three hours a week; student projects; weekend
field trip to the White Mountains.
Evaluation will be based on two hour exams, a project, and lab work.
Prerequisite: any 100-level Geosciences course or consent of the instructor.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR Lab: 1-4 T DETHIER
GEOS 202(S) Mineralogy and Geochemistry
This course focuses on elementary crystallography; crystal chemistry and element distribution; and the
phase relations, compositional variation, and mineral associations within major rock-forming mineral sys-
tems.
Laboratory work includes the determination of crystal symmetry; mineral separation; the principles and
applications of optical emission spectroscopy, x-ray diffraction and x-ray fluorescence analysis; the use of
the petrographic microscope; and the identification of important minerals in hand specimen and thin sec-
tion.
Lectures, three hours a week; laboratory, three hours a week; one all-day field trip. Evaluation will based
on one hour test, lab work, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: one 100-level Geosciences course or consent of the instructor.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR Lab: 1-4 T WOBUS
GEOS 206 Geological Sources of Energy (Same as Environmental Studies 206) (Not offered
2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
The severe economic effects of interruptions in oil supply highlight the dependence of most countries on
low-cost supplies of energy. What sources of energy will supply the world economy in the twenty-first
century and which countries will control these supplies? This course is an introduction to geological and
related sources of energy. Topics covered include: solar energy; the availability and environmental conse-
quences of hydroelectric, wind, and tidal power; biomass energy; energy from nuclear reactions; and geo-
thermal power.
Lectures, three hours a week; one hour discussion section, problem sets, and field trips.
Evaluation will be based on an hour exam, an 8- to 10-page paper, class participation, and a final exam.
DETHIER
GEOS 208(S) Water and the Environment (Same as Environmental Studies 208)
This course focuses on the flow, storage and use of fresh water in the United States and fundamental envi-
ronmental conflicts that result from human intervention in hydrologic processes. Lectures and use of com-
puter models about hydrology (surface water and groundwater) introduce discussion of topics such as
dams and flooding, pollution of water with nutrients or toxic chemicals, and water-borne disease. Techni-
cal reports and readings in American prose are used to study attitudes about irrigation, water depletion and
Geosciences
­ 185 ­
salinization, water law and economics, and aspects of the hydraulic empire of the American West.
Lectures and discussion, three hours a week.
Evaluation reflects an hour exam, class participation, field trips, a term paper, and a final exam.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR DETHIER
GEOS 210(F,S) Oceanographic Processes (Same as American Maritime Studies 211)
(Offered only at Mystic Seaport.)
(See under American Maritime studies for full description.)
Students who have taken Geosciences 104 may not take Geosciences 210 for credit.
GEOS 212(S) Invertebrate Paleobiology (Same as Biology 211)
This course offers an introduction to the study of prehistoric life. The fossils of marine invertebrates pro-
vide an excellent foundation for this purpose, because they are widespread and abundant, they are often
well-preserved, and they have a record that reaches back in time over 600 million years. The intellectual
discovery of fossils as organic relics and the ways in which fossils were used by earlier generations to
support conflicting views on nature are briefly surveyed. The lecture topics that follow are organized to
illustrate the various directions explored by paleontologists today to solve a broad range of questions.
These include: biological and paleontological views on the species concept relevant to taxonomy; ongoing
debate over the timing and mechanisms of evolution; biostratigraphy as a means to correlate sedimentary
rocks; functional morphology as a means to reconstruct the biomechanics of extinct species; analysis of
fossil assemblages to interpret the ecology of ancient environments; paleogeography as related to patterns
in biodiversity, and the possible causes of mass extinctions. Laboratory exercises utilize superb fossil
collections to study the processes of fossilization and to survey the biology and taxonomy of the major
invertebrate phyla.
Lectures, three hours a week; one three-hour laboratory a week; field trip to the Lower Devonian Helder-
bergs of New York State.
Evaluation is based on weekly lab reports, a midterm paper, a midterm exam, a lab practicum, and a final
exam.
Prerequisite: any 100-level Geosciences course or Biology 102 or 203.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR Lab: 1-4 T M. JOHNSON
GEOS 214(S) Remote Sensing and Geographic Information Systems (Same as Environmental
Studies 214)
Remote sensing involves the collection and processing of data from satellite and airborne sensors to yield
environmental information about the earth's surface and lower atmosphere. Remote sensing enhances re-
gional mapping of rock types and faults and analysis of vegetation cover and land-use changes over time.
A Geographic Information System (GIS) links satellite-based environmental measurements with spatial
data such as topography, transportation networks, and political boundaries, allowing display and quantita-
tive analysis at the same scale using the same geographic reference. This course covers the principles and
practice of remote-data capture and geographic rectification using a Global Positioning System (GPS), as
well as the concepts of Remote Sensing, including linear and non-linear image enhancements, convolution
filtering, principle components analysis, and classification Principles of GIS include display and classifica-
tion, spatial buffers, and logical overlays. Weekly labs focus on practical applications of these techniques to
data from Hopkins Memorial Forest, the Berkshire region, and other areas of North America.
Lectures, three hours per week; weekly lab.
Prerequisite: at least one introductory course in Biology, Environmental Studies, or Geosciences. Enroll-
ment limited to 16.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MW Lab: 1-4 W ART and DETHIER
GEOS 241 Test-Tube Earth (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
Geochemistry embraces all aspects of the study of the Earth. In this course, we will look at the formation of
our home planet, in the age before geologic time began. We will investigate the reasons why it is chemical-
ly zoned, with a molten core, hot rocky mantle, chilled outer crust, watery ocean, and turbulent gaseous
atmosphere. We will look at specific aspects of the Earth's chemical systems, including the chemical
clocks that give us the ages of rocks; the nature of weathering, and the formation of soils; chemical ther-
mometers and barometers that provide information about temperatures and pressures within the Earth; and
isotopic data from fossils and ice that provide a record of ocean temperatures and climate in the geologic
past. We will also examine processes operating in the earth system at the present time, including the forma-
tion and destruction of stratospheric ozone, the origin and remediation of acid mine drainage, and other
environmental issues.
Lectures, three hours per week. One all-day field trip.
Evaluation will be based on problem sets, critical discussions, one hour exam, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: one 100-level Geosciences course or permission of instructor.
COX
GEOS 301 Structural Geology (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
The structure of the Earth's crust is constantly changing and the rocks making up the crust must deform to
accommodate these changes. Rock deformation occurs over many scales ranging from individual mineral
grains to mountain belts. This course deals with the geometric description of structures, stress and strain
Geosciences, German
­ 186 ­
analysis, deformation mechanisms in rocks, and the large-scale forces responsible for crustal deformation.
The laboratories cover geologic maps, rock structures and fabrics in hand samples and thin sections, and
basic field techniques.
Lectures and discussion, three hours a week; laboratory, three hours a week.
Evaluation will be based on laboratory work, a midterm, and a final exam.
KARABINOS
GEOS 302(S) Sedimentation+
The composition and architecture of sediments and sedimentary rocks preserve information about the
rocks that were eroded to form them, the fluids and forces that transported them, the mechanisms by which
they were deposited, and the process by which they were lithified. This course will provide an introduction
to the principles of sedimentology, including petrology, fluid mechanics, bedform analysis, and facies ar-
chitecture.
Lectures and discussion, three hours per week; one three-hour laboratory each week; one all-day field trip.
Evaluation will be based on laboratory work, one hour exam, a written paper, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Geosciences 202 (may be taken concurrently).
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR Lab: 1-4 R COX
GEOS 303 Igneous and Metamorphic Petrology (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered
2001-2002)
This course examines the origin of metamorphic, plutonic, and volcanic rocks in the light of field evidence
and experimental work. Rock texture and composition are used to interpret the environment of formation
of individual rock types, and important assemblages are related, where possible, to theories of global tec-
tonics.
Laboratory work emphasizes the study of individual rock units and rock suites in hand specimens and by
petrographic and x-ray techniques.
Lectures and discussions, three hours a week; laboratory work, three hours a week; plus several field trips.
Evaluation will be based on lab work, one hour test, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Geosciences 202.
WOBUS
GEOS 401(F) Stratigraphy
Study of the composition, sequence, and correlation of layered sedimentary rocks is traditionally applied to
geologic mapping and the reconstruction of ancient environments. Through the use of various time scales,
stratigraphy is the unifier of historical geology while also at the heart of conceptual debates over the uni-
formism or episodicity of geological processes. During the first half of the course, emphasis will be placed
on the various methods of correlation based on physical means and the use of fossils. The second half of
the course will focus on plate migrations and the relationships between climate and depositional environ-
ments as a model for the broad scale interpretation of sedimentary sequences. This part of the course will
be conducted as a seminar, with students responsible for topics on the paleogeographic linkage of climate-
sensitive facies and natural resources. As a final project, students working individually or in pairs will pres-
ent a detailed analysis of North-American stratigraphic relationships during a specific interval of Cambrian
to Cretaceous time. In sequence, these class reports will provide highlights of the geologic history of the
North-American continent through Paleozoic and Mesozoic time.
Lectures, three hours a week; one three-hour lab per week during the first half of the course (including field
problems); independent projects during the second half of the course; one major field trip.
Evaluation will be based on weekly lab assignments during the first half of the semester, seminar participa-
tion, and the completion of a final project during the second half of the semester, as well as a midterm and a
final exam.
Prerequisite: Geosciences 302 or consent of the instructor.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR Lab: 1-4 R M. JOHNSON
GEOS 493(F)-W031-494(S) Senior Thesis
GEOS 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
GERMAN (Div. I)
Chair, Professor GAIL M. NEWMAN
Professors: B. KIEFFER*, G. NEWMAN. Associate Professor: DRUXES**. Visiting
Assistant Professor: WEINSTEIN. Part-time Lecturer: E. KIEFFER§. Teaching Associates:
FOITL, K. KOEHLER.
LANGUAGE STUDY
The department provides language instruction to enable the student to acquire all four linguistic skills:
understanding, speaking, reading, and writing. German 101-W-102 stresses basic communicative compe-
tence and covers German grammar in full. German 103 combines a review of grammar with extensive
practice in reading and conversation. German 104 aims to develop facility in speaking, writing, and read-
ing. German 107 emphasizes accuracy and idiomatic expression in speaking and writing. German 108
German
­ 187 ­
combines advanced language study with the examination of topics in German-speaking cultures. Students
who have studied German in secondary school should take the placement test given during First Days in
September to determine which course to take.
STUDY ABROAD
The department strongly encourages students desiring to attain fluency in German to spend a semester
or year studying in Germany, Austria, or Switzerland, either independently or in one of several approved
foreign study programs. German 104 or the equivalent is the minimum requirement for junior-year abroad
programs sponsored by American institutions. Students who wish to enroll directly in a German-speaking
university should complete at least 107 or the equivalent. In any case, all students considering study-abroad
are advised to discuss their language preparation with a member of the department.
LITERATURE IN TRANSLATION
The department regularly offers courses on German literature in translation for students who have little
or no knowledge of German, but who wish to become acquainted with the major achievements in German
literary and intellectual history.
ADVANCED STUDIES
The department offers a variety of advanced courses for students who wish to investigate German litera-
ture, thought, and culture in the original. German 108 is given each year and is recommended as prepara-
tion for 300-level courses.
THE CERTIFICATE IN GERMAN
To enhance a student's educational and professional profiles, the department offers the Certificate in
German. It requires seven courses--two fewer than the major--and is especially appropriate for students
who begin study of the language at Williams.
Students who enter Williams with previous training in German may substitute more advanced courses
for the 100-level courses; they can also be exempted from up to two of the required courses.
Students must receive a minimum grade of B in each course taken in the sequence. In addition, they
must score of at least 650 (out of a possible 800) on the ETS (Educational Testing Service) Proficiency
Test.
Appropriate elective courses can usually be found among the offerings of German, Art History, History,
Music, Philosophy, Political Science, and Theatre.
Required Courses
German 101
German 102
German 103
German 104
German 107
Electives
zat least one course (in German or English) on German cultural history (literature, art, drama, music)
zat least one course (in German or English) on German intellectual, political, or social history
MAJORS
The department supports two distinct majors: German Studies and German Literature.
German Studies
German Studies offers students an interdisciplinary approach to German intellectual and cultural history
by combining courses in German language and literature with courses in History, Philosophy, Music, and
other appropriate fields.
The German Studies major consists of ten courses. Students selecting the major must normally com-
plete German 104 or the equivalent no later than the end of the sophomore year.
Required Courses
German 103
German 104
German 107
German 108
Two 300-level German courses, at least one of which must be taken in the senior year.
Four other courses drawn from German offerings above 108 and offerings in other departments chosen
in consultation with the chair of the German Department. The electives must include courses from at least
two departments other than German.
Examples of appropriate courses in other departments are:
ArtH 267 Art in Germany: 1960 to the Present
History 238 Germany in the Twentieth Century
Literary Studies 203 Literary Movements: European Modernism: Modernity and Its Discontents
German
­ 188 ­
Music 120 Beethoven
Philosophy 201 Continental Philosophy: From Hegel to Poststructuralism
German Studies majors may receive major credit for as many as four courses taken during study abroad.
German Literature
The German Literature major consists of nine courses. Students selecting this major should usually have
completed German 104 or the equivalent by the end of the sophomore year.
Required Courses
German 108
Two 300-level German courses, at least one of which must be taken in the senior year
Electives
Six other courses. At least four must focus on topics in German literary history. Two may be either lan-
guage courses above 103 or relevant courses offered in other departments such as Literary Studies and
Philosophy.
German Literature majors may receive major credit for up to four courses taken during study abroad.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN GERMAN
Students earn honors by completing a senior thesis (German 493-W031-494) of honors quality.
Students interested in honors should consult with the department chair no later than April 15 of their
junior year. The usual qualifications for pursuing honors are: (1) an overall GPA of 3.33 or better, (2) a
departmental GPA of 3.67 or better, (3) a strong interest in a specific topic for which an appropriate faculty
advisor will be available in the senior year.
GERM 101(F)-W088-102(S) Elementary German
A comprehensive introduction to German grammar utilizing all four linguistic skills: understanding,
speaking, reading, and writing. The class meets five hours a week. Credit granted only on successful
completion of 102. Students electing this course are required to attend, and pass, the sustaining program in
the winter study period.
Principal requirements: quizzes, tests, and active class participation.
For students with no previous preparation.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF and 8:55-9:45 TR, 11:00-11:50 and 11:20-12:10 TR
First Semester: G. NEWMAN, WEINSTEIN
9:00-9:50 MWF and 8:55-9:45 TR, 11:00-11:50 and 11:20-12:10 TR
Second Semester: G. NEWMAN, TBA
GERM 103(F) Intermediate German I
Intensive grammar review. Practice in writing and speaking, vocabulary building. For the last five weeks of
the course, we will interact with students in the intermediate German course at Vassar College, through a
Web-based German-language MOO (a discussion and design medium), on a variety of projects concern-
ing private and public selves, personal and communal space, and society.
Prerequisites: German 101-102 or equivalent preparation.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF, 11:00-11:50 MWF TBA
GERM 104(S) Intermediate German II
The prerequisite to all advanced courses in German. A portion of the course will be taught together with
students at Vassar College in a German-language MOO (a virtual discussion medium). We will work on
shared tasks in small groups, on topics in contemporary German culture and society. We will also meet our
partners from Vassar face-to-face at least once. Practice in speaking and writing; reading in a variety of
texts. Conducted in German.
Prerequisite: German 103 or equivalent preparation.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF DRUXES
GERM 107(F) Advanced German
This course will expand on reading and writing skills acquired at the intermediate level. We will examine
many different forms of texts from the following areas: business German, websites, ad copy and journal-
ism, and short fiction. Topics will be taken from current events. Conducted in German; readings in Ger-
man.
Prerequisite: German 104 or the equivalent.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF WEINSTEIN
GERM 108(S) Topics in German Language and Culture: Berlin
We will concentrate on the time period before and after the fall of the Wall, as well as investigating some of
the city's unique features and historical contributions to Germany's social transformations. These include
the working-class "Mietskasernen," Berlin as a center for migration from Eastern Europe, Berlin at the
outbreak of World War One, Berlin's Jews during the Nazi era, Berlin's special brand of irreverent humor
called "Berliner Schnauze," the divided city in the cold war era, recent proposed architectural changes for
the new capital, and Berlin as a center for the arts (Christo's recent "Wrapped Reichstag" may serve as an
example). Interactive multimedia exercises will allow you to explore cultural and historical information
German
­ 189 ­
tailored to each course segment. On a regular basis, we will consider websites about Berlin. Short texts will
include: Walter Benjamin, "Berliner Kindheit um 1900," excerpts from an anthology about the Jewish
ghetto, fiction about the so-called "golden twenties," the architecture of Berlin as the Nazi capital, recent
newspaper articles, interviews with Berliners since unification, poetry and stories about Turkish and Afro-
German minorities in Berlin, two recent memoirs: Irina Liebmann, In Berlin, Bodo Morhäuser, Gezielte
Blicke. Films: Wim Wenders, Wings of Desire, Helga Reidemeister, Drehpunkt Berlin, and documentaries.
Frequent short multimedia and written exercises.
Conducted in German.
Prerequisite: German 104 or permission of instructor.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF DRUXES
GERM 201(F) German Literature and Society, 1750-1870
A survey of German thought from the Enlightenment to the beginning of the first unification. Through
literature, music, art, psychology, philosophy and social thought we will explore the period of Germany's
greatest intellectual prominence. Syllabus will include texts by some of the following: Lessing, Goethe,
Schiller, Novalis, Hoffmann, Kleist, Bettina von Arnim, Beethoven, Schumann, Friedrich, Büchner,
Heine, Droste-Hülshoff, Marx, Schopenhauer.
Seminar.
Conducted in German.
Requirements: active class participation, three short and one long paper.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR G. NEWMAN
GERM 202 German Literature and Society, 1871-1945. (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered
Fall 2001)
This course will be offered for the first time in Fall 2001. For more information, contact Bruce Kieffer,
Chair, German and Russian.
GERM 204(S) From Goethe to Kafka
After centuries of dependence on foreign models, German writing emerged around 1790 as the most cre-
ative and powerful national literature in Europe. German authors continued to make widely influential
contributions into the early decades of the twentieth century. The course will survey the major periods
within this era: Storm and Stress, Classicism, Romanticism, Realism, and Modernism. We will read liter-
ary and theoretical texts by Goethe, Schiller, Kleist, Nietzsche, Thomas Mann, Rilke, and Kafka. All read-
ings in English.
Requirements: active class participation and two medium-length papers.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR TBA
GERM 207(F) Weimar and Nazi Film: Envisioning German Identities
The course will address such topics as modernization, the relationship between the individual and the
mass, and discourses of sexuality, race, and Germanness in early-twentieth-century German film while
looking at examples of popular films, avant-garde films, and Nazi propaganda. Our screening list will in-
clude classics like Nosferatu, Metropolis, Girls in Uniform, Triumph of the Will, and Jew Süss. We will
also read historical sources, film criticism, and film theory, and cover basic techniques in film "reading"
and analysis. Readings and discussion in English. Films subtitled in English.
Lecture/discussion format.
Requirements: active class participation, informal film journals, two short
papers and one longer final paper.
Students must view the films outside class, either at scheduled screenings (TBA) or on reserve in the lan-
guage lab.
Houir: 11:20-12:35 TR WEINSTEIN
GERM 302 Growing Up Under the Nazis: Remembering as Revision (Not offered 2000-2001)
Fifty-five years after the end of World War II, we possess the historical detachment and the resources to
look back at the Nazi era and evaluate life accounts of both Germans and Jews who grew up during those
years. We will study post-war autobiographical texts by Germans and Jews of both the parents' and chil-
dren's generations in order to understand their attempts to come to terms with their experiences. Questions
of memory and agency are often linked to reclaiming or confronting what is German, and what role pa-
triotism and a sense of national identity might play in today's Germany. Authors include: Christa Wolf,
Ruth Klüger, Peter Brückner, Eugen Herman-Friede, Peter Sichrovsky, Chaim Noll, Lea Fleischmann.
Films include: Das Schreckliche Mädchen, Au revoir les enfants, Europa Europa, Zentropa. Conducted in
German.
Requirements: two 3-page and one 10-page paper.
DRUXES
GERM 305(S) Germany: From the Student Revolution to Unification and Its Aftereffects
Developments in the two German states from 1968 to the collapse of the GDR, with emphasis on unifica-
tion and its current impact. Literary reflections on the far-reaching social reorganization represented by
unification are only now coming out. We will look at films, short novels, stories, plays, poetry, interviews
and essays by writers such as Handke, Braun, Plenzdorf, Schneider, Grass, Hein and Krauß. Political, eco-
nomic and cultural aspects we will examine are: the relationship between the two Germanies, the situation
German, History
­ 190 ­
of women and minorities, alternative culture, the reckoning with the Nazi past.
Seminar.
All readings in German.
Requirements: active class participation, two short papers and a 10-page term paper.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR DRUXES
GERM 311 Telling Lives/Inventing Selves: Biography and Autobiography in the Two
Germanies and Austria, 1915-Today (Not offered 2000-2001)
We will examine how contemporary writers in these societies describe and define men's and especially
women's work, property, marriage, child-raising, their status as political subjects, as well as how they try to
understand their families' past lives under Nazism, how they attempt to create a self through autobiogra-
phy, examine the changing experience of women as writers, and experiment with language and narrative
structure, and their efforts to create new models for female and male existence. Readings will be in a vari-
ety of genres ranging from the novel to the short story, interview, and diary, and will probably include:
(from Wilheminian Germany) Adelheid Popp, Jugend einer Arbeiterin; (from Austria) Ingeborg Bach-
mann, Das dreißigste Jahr, Marlen Haushofer, Die Wand, Brigitte Schwaiger, Wie kommt das Salz ins
Meer, Erich Hackl, Abschied von Sidonie; (from West Germany) Christoph Meckel, Suchbild, Peter
Schneider, Vati, Erika Runge, Frauen (excerpts), Alice Schwarzer, Der kleine Unterschied und seine
großen Folgen; (from the GDR) Karin Struck, Klassenliebe, Gerti Tetzner, Karen W., Christa Wolf, Nach-
denken über Christa T., Irmtraud Morgner, Trobadora Beatriz (excerpts). Readings in German.
Requirements: active participation in discussions, group oral report, two 3-page papers, and one 10- to
15-page final paper.
DRUXES
GERM 313 Nietzsche-Zeit (Not offered 2000-2001)
The course will examine the career of Friedrich Nietzsche as the pivotal figure in German intellectual and
literary life at the end of the nineteenth century and the beginning of the twentieth. We will map Nietzsche's
major styles and concepts from Geburt der Tragödie through Götzendämmerung in the context of German
society from the creation of the Second Empire in 1871 to the outbreak of World War I in 1914. Readings
in German.
Requirements: active class participation, one seminar presentation, one 12- to 15-page paper.
B. KIEFFER
GERM 493(F)-W031-494(S) Senior Thesis
GERM 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
GERM 501(F)-502(S) (101-102) Elementary German
This course is the regular undergraduate introductory course for graduate students of art history.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF and 8:55-9:45 TR, 11:00-11:50 MWF and 11:20-12:10 TR
First Semester: G. NEWMAN, WEINSTEIN
9:00-9:50 MWF and 8:55-9:45 TR, 11:00-11:50 MWF and 11:20-12:10 TR
Second Semester: G. NEWMAN, TBA
GERM 509(F) Readings in German Art History and Criticism
Texts will be selected from fundamental works of art history and criticism and from the specialized litera-
ture required in concurrent art seminars in the Graduate Program in Art History.
Prerequisites: German 501-502 or equivalent preparation (a score of 500 or higher on the CEEB Reading
Examination). For graduate students. Others by permission of the department.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF E. KIEFFER
HISTORY (Div. II)
Chair, Professor WILLIAM G. WAGNER
Professors: R. DALZELL, DEW, FROST, KOHUT, OAKLEY, TRACY*, W. WAGNER, WATERS***,
WOOD. Associate Professors: KUNZEL*, SINGHAM, WONG. Assistant Professors: BERETZ*,
GOLDBERG, HICKS§§, KITTLESON, MUTONGI*, PAGÁN, REEVES**, WILDER. Visiting
Professor: KAIJAGE§§. Visiting Assistant Professor: ROSENFELD§§.
GENERAL STATEMENT OF GOALS
Although the History Department aspires to pursue a variety of goals, our core objectives remain the
cultivation in our students of a critical understanding and awareness of the past and the development of our
students' intellectual, analytical, and rhetorical abilities. In pursuit of the first objective, through its curricu-
lar offerings the department seeks both to expose students to the richness, diversity, and complexities of
human history over long periods of time and in different geographic regions and to provide students with
the opportunity to explore aspects of the past in depth. At the same time, the department endeavors to de-
velop students' ability to think historically and to foster in them an appreciation of the contested nature and
the value of historical knowledge by confronting them with the variety of ways in which historians have
approached and interpreted the past, engaging them in issues that provoke historical debate, and familiariz-
ing them with the nature and uses of historical evidence. By engaging students in the critical study of the
History
­ 191 ­
past, finally, the department seeks to develop their ability to formulate historically informed opinions and
their analytical and rhetorical skills generally. While members of the department attempt to accomplish
these multiple objectives individually through their particular courses and their other contacts with stu-
dents, the department seeks to do so collectively through the structure of the History curriculum and the
requirements of the History major.
COURSE NUMBERS
The course numbering system used by the History Department reflects the different types and
objectives of courses offered at each level. The different course levels are distinguished less by de-
gree of difficulty than by the purposes that the courses at each level are intended to serve and the
background knowledge they presume.
First-Year Seminars (102-199): These writing-intensive seminars introduce students to the rich-
ness of historical approaches to the past and to the contested subjects on which historians focus.
They emphasize the acquisition of skills needed in the advanced study of history and are ideal for
students contemplating a major in History. Each seminar is limited in enrollment to nineteen stu-
dents. For these reasons, preference will be given to first-year students and then to sophomores.
Because first-year seminars serve as an introduction to the study of history, only one may count
towards the History major; it can also be used to meet the department's group and concentration
requirements.
Introductory Survey Courses (202-299): These courses are open to all students and are intended to
provide a basic understanding of the history of peoples, countries, and geographic regions over rel-
atively long time-spans. Most of all, they will provide students with the background necessary for
more advanced study in history at the 300 and 400 level. They are offered in either small or large
formats, depending on the individual course.
Junior Seminars (301): Junior seminars offer a series of "reflections on history," are required for the
degree in History, and are normally restricted to junior History majors. Each seminar focuses in
depth on questions of methodology, historiography, and/or epistemology and is intended to
introduce students to various ways of thinking about and "doing" history, both in the present and in
the past. Each year several junior seminars will be offered; prospective majors must select two ju-
nior seminars at the end of their sophomore year and will then be assigned to one of their two choice-
s. If students are studying away from Williams during their junior year, they must enroll in a junior
seminar during their senior year.
Advanced Electives (302-399): These advanced, topical courses are more specialized in focus than
are the introductory survey courses (202-299) and are intended to follow such courses. Enrollment
is often limited. Because these courses may presume some background knowledge, the instructor
may recommend that students enroll in an appropriate introductory course before registering for an
advanced elective.
Advanced Seminars (402-479): These are advanced courses normally limited in enrollment to fif-
teen students. Each seminar will investigate a topic in depth and will require students to engage in
research that leads to a substantial piece of historical writing. All History majors are required to
complete either an advanced seminar (402-479) or a tutorial (480-492). Instructors may recom-
mend prior coursework in the area of the seminar. Priority will be given to senior History majors,
followed by junior History majors.
Tutorials (480-492): These are advanced reading and writing courses that offer an in-depth analysis
of a topic in tutorial format. Tutorials are limited in enrollment to ten students and priority will be
given to senior History majors. All History majors are required to complete either an advanced
seminar (402-479) or a tutorial (480-492). Instructors may recommend prior coursework in the area
of the tutorial. The writing of five or six essays and the oral presentation of five or six critiques of
another student's essays are central to tutorials.
Within each of these levels, courses are further divided by geographical area:
Africa and the Middle East 102-111 202-211 302-311 402-411
Asia 112-121 212-221 312-321 412-421
Europe and Russia 122-141 222-241 322-341 422-441
Latin America and the Caribbean 142-151 242-251 342-351 442-451
United States 152-191 252-291 352-391 452-471
Transnational/Comparative 192-199 292-299 392-396 472-479
History
­ 192 ­
ADVISING
Both majors and non-majors are encouraged to talk at any time with Professor Wagner, the department
chair, Mrs. Swift, the department administrative assistant, or any other member of the department about the
History major.
All majors will be assigned a faculty advisor. All majors must meet with their advisor, or the department
chair, during the first week of classes during the fall semester and at the time of the spring semester registra-
tion period in order to have their courses and plans for the History major approved. Students who are inter-
ested in the senior honors program or graduate school should contact Professor Wong. Prospective study
abroad students should contact Mrs. Swift.
ADVANCED PLACEMENT
Beginning with the class of 2002, students will be granted one semester course credit toward the course
requirement in the History major if they receive a score of 4 or 5 on one or more of the Advanced Place-
ment examinations in history. Even if two Advanced Placement examinations are taken, and the student
receives a 4 or 5 on both, only one semester course credit will be applied toward the course requirement in
the History major. Moreover, such credit may not be used to satisfy the group requirements or concentra-
tion requirements.
THE MAJOR
The major consists of at least nine semester courses as follows:
Required Courses in the Major
One Junior Seminar (History 301)
At least one Advanced Seminar (History 402-479) or Tutorial (History 480-492)
Elective Courses
Seven (or more) additional semester courses in History, at least one of these to be chosen from each of
the following three groups:
Group A: History of the United States
Group B: European History (including Russian History)
Group C: History of Africa and the Middle East, and/or Latin-American and the Caribbean
In addition, at least one of the courses used to satisfy the group requirement must be a premodern course,
which will be labeled Group D in the catalog.
A single course can meet the requirement for no more than one of Groups A through C. Only one First-
year seminar (102-199) may be used to meet the group requirements.
Concentration in the Major
All students are required to adopt a concentration within the History major. The concentration
should be selected in consultation with a faculty advisor at spring registration during the sophomore
year. A list of concentrations is appended below and a list of the courses that fall within each con-
centration is available from the History Department office and can also be found on the depart-
ment's website. Students must choose to concentrate in one of these eighteen broad areas unless
they petition the department's Curriculum Committee to substitute a concentration of their own de-
sign. A concentration will consist of at least three courses linked by common themes, geography, or
time period; only one of those courses can be a 100-level seminar while at least one must be a 300-
or 400-level course. Courses in the concentration may be used to fulfill the group requirements. In
selecting courses to meet their concentration requirement, students should be aware that not every
course is offered every year. Courses taken abroad may be included in the concentration with the
approval of the chair.
Concentrations:
1. Africa and the African Diaspora
2. Asia and the Asian Diaspora
3. Comparative Slavery
4. Ancient and Medieval Europe
5. Early Modern Europe
6. Modern Europe
7. Gender and Sexuality
8. History of Ideas
9. Imperialism, Nationalism, and European Expansion
10. Latin America and the Caribbean
11. Latin America and the Latina/o Diaspora
12. Religion
13. The Twentieth-Century World
14. Colonial North America and the United States to 1865
15. The United States Since 1865
16. Race and Ethnicity in North America
17. Urban and Environmental History
18. War and Revolution
History
­ 193 ­
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN HISTORY
The History Department offers a thesis route to the degree with honors in History. This involves a
ten-course major as well as an independent WSP. Students wishing to undertake independent re-
search or considering graduate study are encouraged to participate in the thesis program and honors
seminar. Juniors considering writing a thesis are encouraged to enroll in the winter study course,
HIST 010, Historical Research and Thesis Writing, in their junior year, in advance preparation for
thesis writing as a senior.
Application to enter the honors program should be made by spring registration in the junior year
and should be based on a solid record of work of honors caliber, normally defined as maintaining at
least a B+ average in courses taken for the major. Students who intend to write an honors thesis must
submit a proposal to the History Department at this time. Students who will be away during the
spring semester of their junior year should make arrangements to apply before leaving. Normally, it
is the responsibility of the individual student to procure the agreement of a member of the depart-
ment to act as his or her thesis advisor, and the student must therefore consult with a member of the
department about a thesis topic and a possible thesis advisor prior to submitting a proposal to the
department. A student who is uncertain of which member of the department might be an appropriate
advisor, or who otherwise is unable to find an advisor, should contact the chair of the honors com-
mittee. An honors thesis proposal must be signed by a member of the History Department. Normal-
ly, the thesis topic should be related to course work which the student has previously done. Students
should be aware, however, that while the department will try to accommodate all students who qual-
ify to pursue honors, particular topics may be deemed unfeasible and students may have to revise
their topics accordingly. Final admission to the honors thesis program will depend on the depart-
ment's assessment of the qualifications of the student and the feasibility of the project.
Once the student has been notified of admission to the honors thesis program, he or she should
register for History 493, Senior Honors Thesis Research Seminar, in the fall semester, for History
031 during winter study, and for History 494, Senior Honors Thesis Writing Seminar, in the spring.
In addition to doing the research for and writing a thesis of approximately 75-100 pages, students
will attend special presentations under the History Department's Class of 1960 Scholars Program.
During the fall, students should work regularly on their research and consult frequently with their
advisors. Throughout the semester, honors candidates will also present written progress reports for
group discussion to the seminar (History 493). Performance in the seminar will be evaluated on the
basis of class participation and completed written work and will determine if a student will continue
in the thesis program. For students proceeding to History 031 and History 494, performance in the
fall semester will figure into the thesis grade calculated at the end of the year.
Students who are deemed to be making satisfactory progress on their research and writing at this
point will be allowed to continue with the thesis. They will devote the entire winter study period to
thesis work. They should conclude their research during winter study and complete at least one
chapter of their thesis for submission to their advisor before the end of winter study. At the end of
winter study, the honors committee will formally consult with advisors and make recommendations
to the department concerning which students should be allowed to proceed with the thesis. During
the early weeks of the second semester, students will present a draft chapter of their thesis to the
honors seminar.
Completed theses will be due in mid-April, after which each student will prepare and present a
short oral presentation of his or her thesis for delivery at the departmental Honors Colloquium.
Another student who has read the thesis will then offer a critique of it, after which the two faculty
readers of the thesis will offer their own comments and questions. Finally, there will be a general
discussion of the thesis by students and other members of the department.
LANGUAGE
Study of a foreign language is basic to the understanding of other cultures. Particularly those students
who might wish to do graduate work in History are encouraged to enroll in language courses at Williams.
COURSES
FIRST-YEAR SEMINARS (102-199)
These writing-intensive seminars introduce students to the richness of historical approaches to the past
and to the contested subjects on which historians focus. They emphasize the acquisition of skills needed in
the advanced study of history and are ideal for students contemplating a major in History. Each seminar is
limited in enrollment to nineteen students. For these reasons, preference will be given to first-year students
and then to sophomores. Because first-year seminars serve as an introduction to the study of history, only
one may count towards the History major; it can also be used to meet the department's group and con-
centration requirements.
FIRST-YEAR SEMINARS: AFRICA AND THE MIDDLE EAST (102-111)
HIST 102 (formerly 116) Environmental History of Africa (Same as Environmental Studies
116) (Not offered 2000-2001)*
Recent international attention has focused on efforts to preserve Africa's shrinking rain forests, to prevent
decertification and food shortages in drought-prone savanna and to eradicate epidemics. But how have
History
­ 194 ­
Africans themselves historically coped with their environments? This seminar will examine the environ-
mental history of Africa, from the origins of settled agriculture to the present. The course will illuminate
how Africans have developed creative strategies to contend with a wide variety of dramatically changing
environments. We will address how precolonial Africans adapted to living in various ecological zones,
such as the Nile River Valley, the Sahara/Kalahari deserts, the savannas, and the equatorial rain forest. We
will explore the ecological implications of the trans-Atlantic slave trade and also show how European colo-
nizers dramatically altered African ecosystems and thus their social, economic and political relations.
Hence we will examine the transformations of African farming, hunting and gathering, and disease by
studying colonial policies and practices concerning agricultural production, forestry, game conservation,
malaria and sleeping sickness. Finally we will explore contemporary issues of African environments, in-
cluding toxic dumping and the conflicts between development and conservation.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, five short essays, and a final research paper.
Enrollment limited. Preference to first-year students.
Groups C and D
MUTONGI
FIRST-YEAR SEMINARS: ASIA (112-121)
HIST 114(S) (formerly 110) The Mao Cult*
The Great Helmsman of the People's Republic of China, Chairman Mao Zedong, is one of the most
controversial figures in history. Did he save China or almost destroy it? Should he be revered as a hero or
defiled as a demon? In China of the 1990s, an entire cult has sprung up around Mao Zedong--perhaps not
as all-encompassing as the Mao Worship of the 1960s and early 70s, but still an intriguing and important
phenomenon. This course will look at the personal and public history of the Chairman and the cults he
continues to inspire. We will also explore personality cults in comparative perspective and look at Mao
Zedong's impact in other parts of the world (such as on the Shining Path guerrillas of Peru).
Evaluation will be based on class participation and three papers.
Enrollment limited. Preference to first year students.
Group C
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF REEVES
FIRST-YEAR SEMINARS: EUROPE AND RUSSIA (122-141)
HIST 127(F) (formerly 105) The Expansion of Europe
This course investigates the expansion of European power and influence over much of the rest of the world
from the late Middle Ages to the mid-nineteenth century--the early period of European Imperialism. Spe-
cific topics will vary, but include the development and initial expansion of medieval and Renaissance Eu-
rope, the discovery and conquest of the New World, the struggle with Islam for command of the seas, the
establishment of European influence in the East and Far East, the slave trade, the invasion of North Ameri-
ca, and the initial steps toward hegemony in the Middle East and Africa. Students will investigate the ways
in which individual personality, religiosity, greed, critical first contacts, and cultural misunderstandings and
prejudices combined with important aspects of the Military, Scientific, and early Industrial Revolutions to
establish European hegemony on a world-wide scale during this early period of European Imperialism.
Evaluation will be based on five short written exercises and one research paper.
Enrollment limited. Preference to first-year students.
Groups B and D
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF WOOD
HIST 129(S) (formerly 107) Religion, Race, and Gender in the Age of the French Revolution*
The French Revolution was an important turning point in world history. Besides ushering in an age of
liberté (liberty) and egalité (equality), it also postulated the existence of a new revolutionary fraternité
(brotherhood) between peoples of all backgrounds. Would revolutionary fraternity include women, Afri-
can slaves, and Jews in the new democratic polity? French men and women debated these questions in
ways that have had a direct impact on our contemporary discussions of race, gender, religious freedom and
ethnicity. In this course, we will explore these debates, their Enlightenment roots, and works by contempo-
rary historians. Students will be introduced to various types of historical sources (rare books, art, opera,
plays) as well as to the lively historiographical debates between historians of France concerning methodol-
ogy, politics, and the goal of historical research.
Evaluation will be based upon class participation, oral reports, several short papers, a 10-page research
paper, and an oral final examination. The class will also be expected to go on a couple of field trips.
Enrollment limited. Preference to first-year students.
Groups B and D
Hour: 7:00-9:30 p.m. T SINGHAM
FIRST-YEAR SEMINARS: LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN (142-151)
HIST 148(F) (formerly 102) The Mexican Revolution: 1910 to NAFTA*
The first great revolution in the twentieth century, the Mexican Revolution was as dramatic and compelling
as later episodes in Russia, China and Cuba. Using a wide variety of sources--from films, murals, and
comic books to classic works of political and social history--this seminar will examine the forces that
History
­ 195 ­
exploded in over a decade of violence and produced the peculiar "institutional revolutionary" government
that has ruled Mexico from the 1920s to the crises of the late 1990s. Was the Revolution a true social revo-
lution or just a "palace coup"? Did workers, women, peasants, indigenous peoples make real gains in so-
cial or political power during and after the Revolution? How democratic or authoritarian is the Mexico that
emerged from the brutal decade of the 1910s? Finally, in light of globalization, the political scandals of the
1990s, and ongoing peasant rebellion in Chiapas, is the Revolution dead or is its promise only now to be
fulfilled?
Evaluation will be based on class participation, a series of short written assignments, and a research paper.
Enrollment limited. Preference to first-year students.
Group C
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF KITTLESON
FIRST-YEAR SEMINARS: UNITED STATES (152-191)
HIST 157 (formerly 115) The Great Depression: Culture, Society, and Politics in the 1930s (Not
offered 2000-2001)
The economic collapse of the 1930s set social, cultural, and political changes in motion that transformed
the character of American life. This course focuses on the ways contemporaries encountered, participated
in, and resisted those changes, as well as on the ways in which historians interpret the Great Depression.
Through the use of a variety of sources--memoirs, films, oral histories, fiction, photography--we will
explore the breadth of responses to the Depression, shaped as they were by region, class, race, ethnicity,
and gender. Most broadly, we will consider the meaning of the Great Depression to American culture,
society, and politics.
Evaluation will be based on class discussion, two short essays, and a research paper.
Enrollment limited. Preference to first-year students.
Group A
KUNZEL
HIST 164(S) (formerly 104) Slavery in the American South*
No area of American social history has been more active and exciting in recent years than the study of
slavery. This seminar will introduce students to the most important aspects of the South's slave system. We
will begin by reading a number of key books in the field, and then we will turn to the College library's
extensive holdings of microfilm records dealing with both agricultural and industrial slavery. In consulta-
tion with the instructor, each student will select the records of a slave-manned plantation or industrial site
for careful and detailed study. The most important piece of work in the seminar will be a research paper that
each student will prepare using the manuscript source materials.
Evaluation will be based on class attendance and participation, several short preliminary essays, and the
final research paper.
Enrollment limited. Preference to first-year students.
Group A
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR DEW
HIST 175 (formerly 114) Families and Social Change: An Introduction to the Study of Private
Life (Not offered 2000-2001)
For most people, "family" connotes a set of experiences that are defined as private and governed by emo-
tion; but family life is greatly influenced by the more public phenomena of ethnic and racial identification,
class position, religious affiliation, and ideologies of gender, as well as national and international structures
of economic and political power. This course will use selected episodes from four centuries of American
family experiences to explore the theories and methods by which historians study private life in its social
context. Our focus will be dual: we will examine the impact of public policies on personal experience, and
we will try looking at "macro" events (the invention of a new nation, international migration, global eco-
nomic change and technological advances, the alleged revolution in the traditional Western system of gen-
der) through the lens of the choices required within the life of an individual family member. Our materials
will include--besides scholarly analyses--such primary documents as popular films, autobiographies, fic-
tion, political arguments about voting and schooling, maps, house designs, fashions, and cemetery design.
The classes will involve mostly reading and discussion, with occasional workshop sessions with docu-
ments.
Evaluation will be based on class discussion and a series of short papers designed to develop students'
skills in research, analysis, and writing.
Enrollment limited. Preference to first-year students.
Group A and D
TRACY
HIST 177(F) Vroom!--A Nation on Wheels
Arguably the single most powerful agency shaping life in the United States in the twentieth century was the
automobile. Making cars go--building and maintaining them and the systems they require--is by far the
country's largest industry. From cities and towns to the smallest hamlets and the uninhabited wilderness
beyond, the national landscape has been totally transformed by the automobile. In a less tangled but hardly
less important vein, automobiles have left an indelible imprint on the dreams we dream. They have also
History
­ 196 ­
changed forever the way we work, the way we play; the way we date and mate; the way we rear our chil-
dren; how and what we consume; the demands we make on government; the crimes we commit; the way
we enforce the law--even the way we go to our graves. The course will consider this protein phenomenon
selectively and in detail, with an eye to discovering what historians have said and can say about it. Read-
ings will be drawn from a wide variety of sources.
Written work will include both short and longer papers. There will be an optional final exam.
Enrollment limited. Preference to first-year students.
Group A
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR R. DALZELL
HIST 180 "The God of History": Slavery and Race in Christian Thought (Same as Religion
222) (Not offered 2000-2001)*
In the Americas, many enslaved Africans encountered the Christian god for the first time. This god was not
just the creator and the ruler of the natural world, but, as Albert Raboteau writes, "the god of history": an
agent in human affairs. No two modern institutions have so completely challenged Christianity as have
African enslavement and the idea of race. This course examines the encounter between Christianity and
slavery and the attempts of Christian philosophers and ordinary Christians to understand human bondage.
It begins with a survey of early European Christian understandings of unfreedom, but focuses on the im-
pact of the Atlantic slave trade and African enslavement in the Americas on Christian belief systems.
Evaluation will be based on class participation and several essays.
Enrollment limited. Preference to first-year students.
Groups A and D
WILDER
INTRODUCTORY SURVEY COURSES (202-299)
These courses are open to all students and are intended to provide a basic understanding of all history of
peoples, countries, and geographic regions over relatively long time-spans. Most of all, they will provide
students with the background necessary for more advanced study in history at the 300 and 400 level. They
are offered in either small or large formats, depending on the individual course.
INTRODUCTORY SURVEY COURSES: AFRICA AND THE MIDDLE EAST (202-211)
HIST 202 (formerly 270) Early-African History Through the Era of the Slave Trade (Not
offered 2000-2001)*
This course introduces students to the early history of the peoples of Africa, with an emphasis on sub-Saha-
ran Africa. The course begins with the origins of late stone-age African civilizations (ca. 25,000 B.C.E.)
and runs through the late-eighteenth-century years of the most intensive exports of slaves. It concentrates
on people and civilizations indigenous to Africa. It therefore notices Asian and European visitors mostly as
Africans influenced them, and takes up foreigners and outside ideas only as Africans made use of them.
Such extraneous (though related) topics as the origins of Islam, the Atlantic slave trade, European wars that
touched African shores, the African Diaspora in the New World, and European explorers and missionaries
receive only passing attention. The emphasis in this course on the African sides of these, and other aspects
of world history provide a valuable alternative perspective on apparently familiar events elsewhere around
the globe.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, two shorts papers, an hour exam, and a final exam.
Groups C and D
MUTONGI
HIST 203 (formerly 269) A Survey of Modern African History, 1800-Present (Not offered
2000-2001)*
This survey of African history takes up the continuing saga of African political, social and economic devel-
opments from the aftermath of the trans-Atlantic slave trade up to the present. It is divided into three sec-
tions. The first section of the course focuses on the consequences of the slave trade on African societies and
on the interaction of Africans with European merchants, explorers, and missionaries in the decades preced-
ing colonial conquest. The effects of the trade in human beings lingered long after the abolition of the slave
trade across the Atlantic ocean. Many African societies were weakened, setting the stage for colonial con-
quest, while others were strengthened, often at the expense of their neighbors. During the second half of the
nineteenth century, however, competition among Europeans for control over sources of raw materials for
their nascent industries led to colonization, and in some cases, to white settlement in Africa.
The second section of the course investigates the process of colonial conquest and the dynamics of colonial
rule in Africa. It looks especially at the ways in which colonialism affected various Africans, and at the
ways, both subtle and overt, in which Africans resisted or collaborated with colonial rule in order to
achieve their goals. The colonial period, brief in time, yet profoundly significant in its impact, was ushered
out partly by the rising tide of African nationalism.
The last section of the course, then, examines the rise of new nation-states, their colonial legacies, post-
colonial economies, and systems of justice, education and governance. The course ends by exploring the
meanings of independence for African leaders, farmers, women, laborers, merchants, civil servants, and
other groups.
The course is structured around lectures and discussions. Course materials include historical writings, doc-
History
­ 197 ­
uments, novels and films. This is an introductory course and requires no prior knowledge of African
history.
Evaluation will be based on two short papers, an hour exam, and a final exam.
Group C
MUTONGI
HIST 209(F) (formerly 275) The Origins of Islam: God, Empire, and Apocalypse (Same as
Religion 231)*
(See under Religion for full description.)
Groups C and D
INTRODUCTORY SURVEY COURSES: ASIA (212-221)
HIST 212 (formerly 283) Barbarians in the Middle Kingdom: China to 1850 (Not offered
2000-2001)*
This course will explore the history of early Imperial China through an investigation of so-called barbarian
incursions into China proper. Among other topics, we will study Buddhism's penetration of China during
the fourth through ninth centuries and beyond; the arrival of the Mongol Hordes, led by Ghengis and then
Khubilai Khan; attitudes toward overseas exploration and migration in the early- and late-Ming and early-
Qing dynasties; and finally the arrival of the "foreign devils" (Europeans) in China. The course will offer
an overview of early-Imperial China, as well as an investigation of what it meant to be "Chinese" during
that era.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, three short papers and a self-scheduled final exam.
Groups C and D
REEVES
HIST 213(S) (formerly 284) Modern China, 1850-Present: Continuity and Change*
This course is designed to introduce students to some of the major events and issues in China's dynamic
transformation from the world's oldest and largest bureaucracy to a revolutionary state--and its subse-
quent evolution to the contemporary political and economic phenomenon we know today. Tracing pre-
modern legacies that have helped shape China, the course covers the decline and fall of the Qing dynasty
through the creation of Communist China and the unfolding of the post-Mao era. The class uses primary
and secondary sources (including literature and films) to examine the origins and impact of major social
and ideological trends such as foreign imperialism, nationalism, racism/culturalism, feminism, commu-
nism, Maoism, and capitalism in China. The course considers the relationship between political thought
and practice and how these "-isms" affected the daily life of the individual in China.
Classes center on group discussion.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, a short paper (3-5 pages), quizzes and a self-scheduled final
exam.
Group C
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF REEVES
HIST 216(F) (formerly 285) Modern Japan*
This course will utilize a wide variety of religious, social, political, and literary materials to explore why
Japan has developed into one of the major industrialized nations in the world. The syllabus will be divided
into a section dealing with the relationship between traditional Samurai culture and Japan's response to the
West, a section showing how the modernization process broke down during the period of Fascism, war,
and the American occupation, and two sections analyzing aspects of contemporary Japanese society.
Requirements: two short papers, an hour exam, and a self-scheduled final exam.
Not open to first-year students.
Group C
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR, 2:35-3:50 MR FROST
INTRODUCTORY SURVEY COURSES: EUROPE AND RUSSIA (222-241)
HIST 222(S) (formerly 216) Greek History (Same as Classics 222)
Ancient Greece has been thought to embody the origins of Western civilization in its institutions, values,
and thought; it has been seen as the infancy of modern society, with the attributes of innocence, purity, and
the infant's staggering capacity for exploration and learning; it has been interpreted as an essentially primi-
tive, violent culture with a thin veneer of rationality; and it has been celebrated as the rational culture par
excellence. The study of ancient Greece indeed requires an interpretive framework, yet Greek culture and
history have defied most attempts to articulate one. We will make our attempt in this course by investigat-
ing ancient Greece as a set of cultures surprisingly foreign to us, as it so often was to its own intellectual
elite. But we will also come to appreciate the rich and very real connections between ancient Greek and
modern Western civilization. The course will begin with Bronze Age-Greece and the earliest develop-
ments in Greek culture, and will conclude with the spread of Greek influence into Asia through the con-
quests of Alexander the Great. We will explore topics such as the aristocratic heritage of the city-state, the
effects of pervasive war on Greek society, the competitive spirit in political and religious life, the confronta-
tions with the East, the relationship of intellectual culture to Greek culture as a whole, Greek dependence
on slavery, and the diversity of political and social forms in the Greek world. The readings will concentrate
History
­ 198 ­
on original sources, including historical writings, philosophy, poetry, and oratory. The class will meet once
a week for a lecture, and will divide into two discussion sections for the second meeting of the week.
Evaluation will be based on contributions to class discussions, a midterm, a final exam, and a medium-
length paper.
Open to first-year students.
Group D
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR CHRISTENSEN
HIST 223 (formerly 218) Roman History (Same as Classics 223) (Not offered 2000-2001)
The study of Roman history involves questions central to the development of Western institutions, religion,
and modes of thought. Scholars have looked to Rome both for actual antecedents of European cultural
development and for paradigmatic scenes illustrating what they felt were cultural universals. Yet Roman
history also encompasses the most far-reaching experience of diverse cultures, beliefs, and practices
known in the Western tradition until perhaps contemporary times. A close analysis of Roman history on its
own terms shows the complex and fascinating results of an ambitious, self-confident nation's encounter
both with unexpected events and crises at home, and with other peoples. As this course addresses the histo-
ry of Rome from its mythologized beginnings through the reign of the emperor Constantine, it will place
special emphasis on the impressive Roman ability to turn the unexpected into a rich source of cultural
development, as well as the complex tendency later to interpret such ad hoc responses as predestined and
inevitable. The Romans also provide a vivid portrait of the relationship between power and self-confidence
on the one hand, and violence and ultimate disregard for dissent and difference on the other. Readings for
this course will concentrate on a wide variety of original sources, and there will be a strong emphasis on the
problems of historical interpretation.
Classes will involve both lecture and discussion.
Evaluation will be based on class preparation and participation, two short papers, and a final exam.
Open to first-year students.
Group D
CHRISTENSEN
HIST 224(F) The Birth of Medieval Christendom: Europe and the Mediterranean World,
AD 300-1000 (Same as Religion 213)
In the year AD 300, the Romans ruled a massive Mediterranean empire that stretched from Scotland to
Egypt and from Spain to the Black Sea. Seven centuries later, this ancient empire had fragmented into three
successor civilizations: the Byzantine Empire, the Islamic World, and early medieval Christendom. This
course explores how this momentous transformation occurred. We will investigate such topics as the late
Roman empire and its relations with so-called "barbarian" peoples, the origins and spread of Christianity,
monasticism and saints cults, Byzantine civilization, the rise of Islam, the foundation of early medieval
Germanic and Slavic kingdoms, changes in the family and social hierarchies, relations between church and
state, feudalism, economy and trade, and the Vikings.
Groups B and D
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR GOLDBERG
HIST 225(S) Expansion, Crisis, and Rebirth: Medieval Europe and the Wider World, AD
1000-1500 (Same as Religion 214)
This course investigates Europe and its relations with the wider world in the high and later Middle Ages.
This period witnessed both the geographic expansion and cultural flowering of medieval civilization as
well numerous political, social, and spiritual crises. We will explore such topics as the crusades, the rise of
centralized monarchies, the conflict between church and state, the growth of cities and revival of trade,
religious reformers and heretics, the foundation of universities and the rediscovery of Aristotle, the per-
secution of Jews and other minorities, the Black Death, peasant rebellions, and the Italian Renaissance.
Groups B and D
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR GOLDBERG
HIST 226(S) (formerly 205) Europe from Reformation to Revolution: 1500-1815
This course introduces students to the major historical developments in Western Europe during the early
modern period--such pan-European phenomena as the Reformation, the Witch Craze, the Military Revo-
lution, the rise of absolutist states, the seventeenth-century crisis in government and society, the Enlighten-
ment, the French Revolution and Napoleon, and the establishment of European influence around the
world.
Evaluation will be based on two short papers, a midterm and a final exam.
Group B and D
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR WOOD
HIST 227(F) (formerly 207) A Century of Revolutions: Europe in the Nineteenth Century
This course introduces students to the era of the European domination of the world, a time of revolutionary
excitement and fervor, of war and travesty, and of great intellectual ferment. Topics include the French
Revolution, the Revolutions of 1830 and 1848, the Industrial Revolution, German and Italian Unification,
the Scramble for Africa, the Russian Revolution, and the origins of World War I. With an eye toward ex-
ploring the origins of today's complex attitudes toward race, ethnicity, and gender, the course will investi-
History
­ 199 ­
gate racial thought, anti-semitism, and feminism in the nineteenth century.
Evaluation will be based upon class participation, a midterm exam, an interpretive essay, and a final exam.
Group B
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR SINGHAM
HIST 228(F) (formerly 209) Europe in the Twentieth Century
This course offers an introduction to some of the more important issues in twentieth-century European
history, focusing on the major ideologies, institutions, and cultural practices that have shaped the course of
European history in this tumultuous century. Organized topically and thematically, the course will consider
European society on the eve of World War I, the impact of the War on that society, the Russian Revolution
and its aftermath, economic and political reconstruction in the 1920s, the Depression, the rise of Fascism
and Nazism, World War II and the Holocaust, the establishment of postwar social democratic welfare
states in western Europe, the "economic miracle" of the 1950s, the social unrest of the 1960s, the origins
and development of the European Union, the 1989 revolutions in Eastern Europe, and the rebirth of nation-
alism at the close of the century.
Following several introductory lectures, the course will be taught via discussion.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, a midterm, several quizzes, and a final take-home essay
exam.
Group B
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF WATERS
HIST 229 (formerly 222) European Imperialism: The Conquest and Division of the World (Not
offered 2000-2001)*
A survey of European imperialism in the nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries, paying special attention
to important case studies--British India, South and Latin America after independence, China and the Opi-
um Wars, and the Scramble for Africa--and the onset of anti-colonial struggles in these areas. The rich
historiographical debate concerning both the reasons for and the nature of imperialism, commencing with
the Hobson-Lenin thesis, will be examined. Issues to be explored include imperialism and Christianity,
imperialism and gender, imperialism and racism, and imperialism and technology. The course will include
a number of important films on these subjects.
Evaluation will be based on a midterm, a final exam, one 10-page research paper, two map quizzes, and
class participation.
Group B
SINGHAM
HIST 234 (formerly 230) Britain, 1688-1848 (Not offered 2000-2001)
This course offers a survey of British history between 1688 and 1848, introducing the student to major
aspects of the nation's development in the "long eighteenth century." Several themes will be addressed in
the course: British society before the industrial revolution; the political and ideological structure of the Brit-
ish state in the wake of the Glorious Revolution of 1688 and the Hanoverian succession of 1714; social
conflict in pre-industrial Britain; the domestic consequences of Britain's foreign wars and imperial ven-
tures; the advent of a "modern" consumer economy; the causes and consequences of the industrial revolu-
tion; the impact of the French Revolution on British society; and, finally, the reform of British political
institutions in the first half of the nineteenth century. Overall, the course is designed to explore the creation
of "Great Britain" via the Act of Union between England and Scotland in 1707 and then to trace the emer-
gence of Britain as a modern industrial democracy and world power.
While the instructor will deliver four introductory lectures, emphasis in the course will be placed on class
discussion of the readings. Along with History 235, "Britain Since 1848," this course is conceived as part
of a two-semester survey of modern British history.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, two interpretive essays (8-10 pages each), and a self-sched-
uled final exam.
Groups B and D
WATERS
HIST 235 (formerly 231) Britain Since 1848 (Not offered 2000-2001)
This course offers a survey of British history since 1848, focusing on Britain's industrial and political su-
premacy in the later nineteenth century and the reasons for the subsequent decline of Britain as a world
power in the twentieth century. Several themes will be addressed in the course: the meanings of "victorian-
ism," the social, economic, and ideological underpinnings of what has been termed "mid-Victorian stabil-
ity," the increasing threat posed to that stability by a new politics of class, gender, and imperialism towards
the end of the nineteenth century; the rise of a democratic polity; the "crisis" of the British state in the early
twentieth century, the impact of two world wars and the Depression on British political, social, economic,
and cultural life; the emergence of the postwar welfare state; the challenge mounted by Thatcherism to the
so-called "postwar settlement"; and, finally, Britain's attempt to chart a new identity for itself in the
post-1945 world.
While the instructor will deliver four introductory lectures, emphasis in the course will be placed on class
discussion of the readings, which, taken together, will chart the transformation of Britain from a major
power to a "dim little island" off the coast of Europe, as one critic has put it.
History
­ 200 ­
Along with History 234, "Britain, 1688-1848," this course is conceived as part of a two-semester survey of
modern British history.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, two interpretive essays (8-10 pages each), and a self-sched-
uled final exam.
Group B
WATERS
HIST 238 Germany in the Twentieth Century (Not offered 2000-2001)
Written documents, literature, film, and the writings of historians will be used in surveying the history of
Germany since 1890. Topics to be considered include: Wilhelmian Germany and the role played by do-
mestic and foreign policy in the decision of the imperial government to opt for war in 1914; the impact of
war and defeat on German society; the relation of the cultural flowering that occurred in Germany during
the 1920s to the political and social instability of the Weimar Republic; Hitler and the collapse of democrat-
ic Germany; the Third Reich; World War II and the Holocaust; the reconstruction of Germany after 1945;
Germany in the context of the Cold War (the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic
Republic); and united-Germany after the wall. A central theme of the course will be the attempt of Ger-
mans during the twentieth century to decide what Germany is and how it fits into the rest of Europe, and to
determine the nature of their state and society.
Requirements include: three short papers and a number of pop quizzes.
Group B
KOHUT
HIST 240(F) (formerly 232) Muscovy and the Russian Empire
Between the fourteenth and the seventeenth centuries the princes and political elite of Muscovy created a
vast multi-national empire in Eastern Europe and Asia. Over the next 150 years their imperial heirs trans-
formed and extended this empire, to the point that on the eve of the Crimean War (1853-1855) many be-
lieved it to be the most powerful state in Europe. But defeat in the war exposed the weakness of the imperi-
al regime and helped to provoke a process of state-led reform that failed to avert, and may well have con-
tributed to, the collapse of the regime in the February Revolution of 1917. Using a combination of primary
and secondary sources, this course will explore the character of the Muscovite and the Russian empires and
the forces, processes, and personalities that shaped their formation, expansion, and, in the latter case, de-
cline.
Discussion/lecture course.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, a map quiz, several short essays based on class readings,
and a final self-scheduled exam.
Groups B and D
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR W. WAGNER
HIST 241 (formerly 233) The Rise and Fall of the Soviet Union (Not offered 2000-2001)
The October Revolution of 1917 brought to power in the debris of the Russian empire a political party
committed to the socialist transformation of society, culture, the economy, and individual human con-
sciousness. Less than seventy-five years later, the experiment appeared to end in failure, with the stunning
collapse of the Soviet Union in December 1991. Using a combination of primary and secondary sources,
this course will explore the nature and historical significance of the Soviet experiment, the controversies to
which it has given rise, and the forces, processes, and personalities that shaped the formation, transforma-
tion, and ultimate collapse of the Soviet Union.
Discussion/lecture course.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, a map quiz, several short papers based on class readings,
and a final self-scheduled exam.
Group B
W. WAGNER
INTRODUCTORY SURVEY COURSES: LATIN AMERICAANDTHE CARIBBEAN (242-251)
HIST 242 (formerly 287) Latin America from Conquest to Independence (Not offered
2000-2001)*
This course examines the construction of distinctively Latin-American societies from the age of conquest
to the independence movements of the early-nineteenth century. The central theme will be the ways in
which social conflicts between and among Europeans, Amerindians, and Africans shaped colonial Latin
America and the subsequent creation of independent nations in the region. While discussing the interplay
of race, class, and gender in these New World societies, the course will analyze the transformation of politi-
cal and economic structures during the period of Spanish and Portuguese rule in the Americas.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short papers (3-5 pages), and a take-home final exam.
Groups C and D
KITTLESON
HIST 243(S) (formerly 288) Modern Latin America, 1822 to the Present*
This course will examine salient issues in the history of the independent nations of Latin America. The first
section of the course will focus on the turbulent formation of nation-states over the course of the nineteenth
century. In this regard the course will analyze the social and economic changes of the period up to World
History
­ 201 ­
War I and the possibilities they offered for both political order and disorder. Key topics addressed will in-
clude caudillismo, the role of the Church in politics, economic dependency and development, and the place
of indigenous and African Latin-American peoples in new nations. The second section will move us to
questions in twentieth-century Latin-American history, including industrialization and urbanization; the
emergence of workers' and women's movements and the rise of mass politics; militarism, democracy, and
authoritarian governments; the influence of the U.S. in the region; and the construction of cultural modern-
ism in these "Third World" societies. Here and throughout the course we will strive for an understanding of
how social conflicts shaped and were shaped by economic and political forces.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short papers (3-5 pages), and a take-home final exam.
Group C
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR KITTLESON
HIST 249(F) (formerly 225) The Caribbean from Slavery to Independence: A Comparison of
Empires*
This course explores the history of the Caribbean from the eighteenth to the twentieth centuries, focusing
on a comparative approach to British, French, and Spanish rule in the region. It will concentrate on the
history of Jamaica, Haiti, Cuba and Puerto Rico. Topics to be covered include: comparative slave systems;
plantation economies; revolution, rebellion and resistance; abolitionism; missionary activity; the appren-
ticeship system; voodoo and slave religions; indentured labor and intra-Caribbean migration; free persons
of color, mulattoes, and West Indian color hierarchies; class and color; trade unionism; communism; the
independence movements; women in the contemporary Caribbean; and the legacies of slavery and colo-
nialism.
Evaluation will be based on a midterm, a final exam, one 10-page research paper, and class participation.
Group C
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR SINGHAM
INTRODUCTORY SURVEY COURSES: UNITED STATES (252-291)
HIST 252(F) (formerly 243) America from San Gabriel to Gettysburg, 1492-1865
A topical analysis of the history of what became the United States of America, beginning with the early
years of European conquest and ending with the crisis of the Civil War. Particular attention will be paid to
the relationship between major political events and changing patterns of economic, social, and cultural life
that shaped them. Readings will include contemporary sources, historical studies, and biographies.
Students will write a series of short analytical papers and will have a choice of either writing a longer, final
essay or taking a final exam.
Groups A and D
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF R. DALZELL
HIST 253(S) (formerly 244) The United States from Appomattox to AOL, 1865-Present
This course will survey the history of the United States from the time the nation struggled to heal from the
wounds of fratricidal war, to the closing of the frontier, to the struggle to come to terms with is place in the
world community, and finally, to the modern period as the United States continues to wrestle with and
define its global mission. Against this larger backdrop we will explore the history of the women and men
who struggled daily with the circumstances unique to their color and class, while trying to create better
lives for themselves. Readings will include selected primary sources, contemporary historical scholarship,
novels, and memoirs.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short papers (5-7 pages) and a final exam.
Group A
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR, 1:10-2:25 TF WONG
HIST 281(F) (formerly 261) African-American History Through Emancipation*
This course introduces students to the events, figures, and institutions that have shaped African-American
history. Beginning with the struggles to dominate the African coast and the emergence of the modern slave
trade, the course traces the experiences of Africans in North America through the fall of the Western slave
societies. While our goal is to see American history from the perspective of people of African descent in
the United States, we will also compare their experiences with those of African descent in the Caribbean,
South America, and other parts of North America. The final objective is to increase students' familiarity
with the historiography and intellectual debates in "Afro-Am."
Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short papers, and a final exam.
Group A
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF WILDER
HIST 282(S) (formerly 262) African-American History From Reconstruction to the Present*
This course introduces students to the significant themes and events that have shaped the African-Ameri-
can historical experience from Reconstruction to the present. We will examine the social, political, and
economic meaning of freedom for men and women of African descent as well as explore the political
nature and development of African-American historiography. The course will give particular attention to
such topics as the rise of Jim Crow, migration, urbanization, the Civil Rights Movement, as well as the
History
­ 202 ­
legacy of the post-Civil Rights Movement era. Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short
papers, and a final exam.
Group A
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF HICKS
HIST 286(F) (formerly 250) Introduction to U.S. Latino Studies (Same as American Studies
250)*
This course will introduce students to a variety of methods for studying the history, culture, economics, and
politics of Latinos in the United States. The course is structured around the following key areas of concern:
(1) Identifying Communities: From the perspective of area studies we will explore the major Latino com-
munities in the United States, which together with other Latino peoples will soon make up the largest "mi-
nority group" in the country; (2) Identifying Modes of Inquiry: Through anthropological, sociological, and
historical scholarship this course will explored the nature of identity-formation (both corporate and individ-
ual), the maintenance of identity during cross-cultural contact, and the processes by which identity changes
within a complex multicultural society; (3) Identifying Topics for Study: We will pay much attention to the
social and historical context of Latino identity, such as immigration and migration, demographic politics,
socioeconomic conditions, labor, and the arts, particularly as they express and generate distinctions among
the various Latino communities and other racial and ethnic groups.
Evaluation will be based on course participation, two short essays (5-8 pages), and one final essay (15
pages) that will emphasize original research and analytical skills.
Group A
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR PAGÁN
INTRODUCTORY SURVEY COURSES: TRANSNATIONAL/COMPARATIVE (292-299)
HIST 292(F) Technology and Culture (Same as History of Science 305)
(See under History of Science for full description.)
HIST 293(S) History of Medicine (Same as History of Science 320)
(See under History of Science for full description.)
JUNIOR SEMINARS (301)
Junior Seminars offer a series of "reflections" on history, are required for the degree in History, and are
normally restricted to junior History majors. Each seminar focuses in depth on questions of methodology,
historiography, and/or epistemology and is intended to introduce students to various ways of thinking
about and `doing' history, both in the present and in the past. Each year several junior seminars will be
offered; prospective majors must select two junior seminars at the end of the sophomore year and will then
be assigned to one of their two choices. If students are studying away from Williams during their junior
year, they must enroll in a junior seminar during their senior year.
HIST 301A(F) History, Theory, Practice
Our primary goal in this course is to come to some conclusions about the current state of the historical
profession--about the nature and practice of history in an era often dominated by postmodern cyni-
cism--and to situate the current "crisis" of history in its broader historical context. We will begin our ex-
plorations by discussing the beliefs and writings of several nineteenth-century historians (Thomas Babing-
ton Macaulay, Karl Marx, and Leopold von Ranke), those titans of the past who believed that historical
"truth" existed and could, with skill and practice, be discovered. Next we will explore the rise of the new
social history and the new cultural history, beginning in the 1960s, and examine the extent to which the
practitioners of these subfields differed in their assumptions and methodological approaches to the past
from their nineteenth-century predecessors. Finally, we will consider the work of more recent literary theo-
rists and metahistorians who have refuted historians' claims to be able to capture the "truth" of the past and
who have put forward a very different agenda for the practice of history. In general, we will be less con-
cerned with "the past" than with what historians do with "the past." Consequently, we will focus almost
wholly on epistemological issues, surveying various issues in the philosophy of history during the last 175
years.
Evaluation will be based on a short position paper ( "What is History?"), on-going participation in class
discussion, two 10-page interpretive essays, and a take-home final exam.
Enrollment limited. Restricted to junior History majors.
Group B
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR WATERS
HIST 301B(S) Autobiography as History: An American Character?
Historians have long debated whether it makes sense to speak of distinctive national characters--tenden-
cies to think and behave in particular ways that are endemic to specific nations or peoples. In the United
States, with its high degree of racial and ethnic diversity, such notions seem especially problematic.
Through a reading of selected autobiographies supplemented by other materials, we will seek to test the va-
lidity of various conceptions of "American" national character by looking at how individuals in different
eras and circumstances have attempted to understand and interpret their own life experiences. Readings will
include autobiographies by William Bradford, Benjamin Franklin, Frederick Douglass, Mary Chestnut, Jan
Addams, Martin Luther King, Michael Herr, Richard Rodriguez, Maxine Hong Kingston, and others.
History
­ 203 ­
Evaluation will be based on aseries of 3- to 5-page written assignments and a longer essay due at the end of
the semester.
Enrollment limited. Restricted to junior History majors.
Group A
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF R. DALZELL
HIST 301C(F) Historical Materialism: The Theory and Evolution of Marxist History
This course is intended to give each student a command of Karl Marx's theory of history. The literature
includes classical materialism, communist propaganda, Marxist economics, and Marxist and neo-Marxist
histories. Central to our examination is an in-depth look at Marx's economic theory and his political philos-
ophy (which culminated in the dictatorship of the proletariat). Marx used history to provide a context for
his political and intellectual work, and to bridge the distance between the two; however, Marxism has been
used to analyze social relations well beyond the world and moment that its author envisioned. We will end
by exploring the applicability of Marxist historical philosophy to contemporary human affairs.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, two papers and a final exam.
Restricted to junior History majors.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR WILDER
HIST 301D(S) Is History Eurocentric?
The modern historical profession is very much a European creation, originating in the Age of Enlighten-
ment. Championing reason and challenging religious views of the past, the philosophes linked the new
secular study of man and his society to a view of historical progress, of which they were the preeminent
spokesmen. History as the story of progress continued unabated through the early-twentieth century, until
challenged by critics within and critics without. Some of these have argued that the very nature of the his-
torical discipline is Eurocentric, based as it is on Western concepts of reason, science, and historical evolu-
tion. In this course, we will study some of the important spokesmen for historical progress (Voltaire, Con-
dorcet, Marx, von Ranke) as well as some of their important critics. The first half of the course will survey
the history of the historical profession from the Enlightenment to the present. In the second half of the
course, we will read some of the great works of history which have attempted to explain the rise of the
west, grappling with how and to what extent these interpretations are Eurocentric.
Evaluation will be based on informed class participation, class debates, two short papers (5 pages), one
long paper (10 pages) and a self-scheduled final exam.
Restricted to junior History majors.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR SINGHAM
ADVANCED ELECTIVES (302-396)
These advanced, topical courses are more specialized in focus than are the introductory survey courses
(202-299) and are intended to follow such courses. Enrollment is often limited. Because these courses may
presume some background knowledge, the instructor may recommend that students enroll in an appropri-
ate introductory course before registering for an advanced elective.
ADVANCED ELECTIVES: AFRICA AND THE MIDDLE EAST (302-311)
HIST 304 (formerly325) South Africa and Apartheid (Not offered 2000-2001)*
On April 27, 1994, all adult South Africans--men and women, rich and poor, black, white, colored and
Asians--were, for the first time, eligible to vote in national elections. These elections officially marked the
"end" of apartheid. But the "end" of apartheid does not mean the beginning of a perfectly just and equitable
society. South Africans, especially non-white South Africans will continue to fight against poverty, fear
and intolerance. They will bear, that is, the burden of the past. It is for this reason that a detailed study of
apartheid is necessary. This course will focus on the socioeconomic, political and spatial history of apart-
heid in South Africa. Although we will be concerned primarily with the nineteenth and twentieth centuries,
we will need to look briefly at the events 500 years old, when Europeans first settled in South Africa. We
will then take up topics such as slavery and the origins of racial domination, conquest and resistance, the
incorporation of Africans into the colonial economy, the creation of legal structures of apartheid and the
eventual collapse of the racial order.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, and three essays.
Group C
MUTONGI
HIST 309(S) (formerly 278) Women and Islam (Same as Religion 232)*
(See under Religion for full description.)
Groups C and D
ADVANCED ELECTIVES: ASIA (312-321)
HIST 313 (formerly 345) Women in Chinese History (Not offered 2000-2001)*
This course examines the roles and status of women in Imperial China and how the Communist govern-
ment manipulated those roles after 1949. Using primary and secondary materials as well as women's cul-
tural artifacts, we will cover topics such as footbinding and female complicity; the improvement of
women's status in the late Ming dynasty and regression in the early Qing; nationalism and feminism after
the turn of the century; prostitution in China; and Communism and women's roles in family and society. A
History
­ 204 ­
textbook will be assigned in conjunction with other readings to give an overview of Chinese history
throughout the period covered.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, short essays, and take-home exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited.
Group C
REEVES
ADVANCED ELECTIVES: EUROPE AND RUSSIA (322-341)
HIST 322(F) (formerly 239) Women in Greece and Rome (Same as Classics 239)
(See under Classics for full description.)
HIST 324 (formerly 212) The Development of Christianity: 30-600 C.E. (Same as Religion
212) (Not offered 2000-2001)
(See under Religion for full description.)
HIST 325(S) Charlemagne and the Formation of Europe (AD 700-900)
The medieval emperor Charlemagne (768-814) was known by contemporaries as the "Father of Europe,"
and since World War II he has emerged as the symbol of an increasingly united Europe. Thus for twelve
hundred years people have believed that Charlemagne and his royal dynasty--the Carolingians--played a
decisive role in the shaping of European civilization. This course seeks to understand why that should be
the case. We will explore how Charlemagne and his family created the first medieval empire out of the
diverse peoples and territories of continental Europe: not only through warfare and military might, but also
through Christianity and the Church, educational and cultural reforms, government and law, art and archi-
tecture, and a fundamental reorganization of the economy and society. Studying these aspects of the Caro-
lingian age will enable us to see the enduring contributions of the Carolingians to the formation of Europe
as well as the shortcomings and failures of their multi-ethnic empire.
Groups B and D
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR GOLDBERG
HIST 326(S) War in European History
From the ancient world to the twentieth century, war has always played an important part in European
history. Europeans have not only constantly been at war with other Europeans, but also with neighboring
cultures and, indeed, most peoples around the globe. This course will introduce students to the history of
European warfare from its origins in the classical and medieval periods to its maturation in the early mod-
ern period (1450-1815), and its disastrous culmination in the nationalist struggles of the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries. Has there been a distinctively "European Way of War" from the beginning? How do
we explain failure and success in European wars? What exactly happened at the strategic, operational, and
tactical levels of war? And what caused changes in the organization and waging of European war from one
period to the next?
Class will be run as combined lecture/discussion.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, one short research paper, and midterm and final exams.
Groups B and D
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF WOOD
HIST 327(F) Knighthood and Chivalry
Today the terms "knighthood" and "chivalry" evoke images of polite and courteous behavior or the mythi-
cal deeds of King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table. Throughout the Middle Ages, however,
knighthood and chivalry described the warlike and violent world of the European ruling class: the nobility.
A knight was an armored warrior on horseback, and chivalry described his bellicose aristocratic culture.
This course seeks to understand the origins, nature, and transformations of knighthood and chivalry during
the Middle Ages and Renaissance. We will explore such topics as the ethos of knighthood, Christian lay
piety, family structure and inheritance patterns, the changing status of women, warfare and crusades, life in
castles, relations with peasants, jousting and tournaments, courtly love, chivalric literature, and the gradual
emergence of "civilized" courtly manners.
Groups B and D
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR GOLDBERG
HIST 329(S) (formerly 302) Reformation, Renewal, Reaction: The Reshaping of Christianity in
Early-Modern Europe (Same as Religion 219)
A study of the revolutionary religious movements of the sixteenth and early-seventeenth centuries that led
to the establishment of the Protestant churches, transformed the nature of Roman Catholicism, and ushered
in a century and more of ideological and political strife. Attention will be paid to the medieval antecedents
of these movements and to the intellectual, social and political forces that intersected with them. The pri-
mary emphasis will be on the magisterial reformers--Luther, Zwingli, Calvin--on the radical Protestant
sectaries, on Catholic renewal and Counter Reformation, and on the enduring legacy of the Age of Refor-
mation. Students will write one short paper on a set topic, one longer research paper on a topic of their
choosing, and a final exam.
Groups B and D
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR OAKLEY
History
­ 205 ­
HIST 330(S) The Social History of Ideas: Enlightenment and Revolution
Did the Enlightenment cause the Atlantic Revolutions? To answer this question, we need to figure out what
people read in the eighteenth century and how they read the works they either came into contact with or
owned. In this course, we will study some of the important works of the pre-Revolutionary period, paying
attention both to the ideas contained therein, and to the history of their production, dissemination and re-
ception. We will also examine the lifestyles and biographies of some of the men and women writers who,
in salons, academies, reading clubs, and Masonic lodges, made up the "republic of letters" in the eighteenth
century. Although this course will focus on France, we will study the Enlightenment in its broader Euro-
pean and American setting. We will also study opera (The Magic Flute), music (Haydn's Creation), plays
(The Marriage of Figaro and Nathan the Wise), and enlightened art (David). Figures to be studied include
Diderot, Rousseau, Mercier, Beaumarchais, Olympe de Gouges, Lessing, Kant, Mendelssohn, Hume, and
Wollstonecraft.
Evaluation will be based on informed class participation, two long papers (8-10 pages), and a self-sched-
uled final exam.
Groups B and D
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR SINGHAM
HIST 331 (formerly 307) The French and Haitian Revolutions (Not offered 2000-2001)
Described as the "mother of the political culture into which all of us are born," the French Revolution con-
tinues to fascinate those interested in social equality, political liberty, and revolutionary fraternity. This
course examines this starting point of modernity, tracing its effects both internally (in France) and external-
ly (in Europe and the Caribbean), from the calling of the Estates General in 1788 to the defeat of Napoleon
in 1815. Topics include social history and popular revolts; the effect of the Enlightenment on the Revolu-
tion; the counter-revolution; the Church and the Civil Constitution of the Clergy; war, the revolutionary
armies and the transformation of Europe; the status of Blacks, Jews and women in the new nation; and the
sticky problem of sugar and slavery in Saint Domingue (Haiti). By placing the Revolution in the context of
global politics, this course will attempt to shed light on the highly-debated issues of the autonomy of the
Haitian Revolution and its legacy of racial equality in the New World and Old.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, two 10-page papers, and a self-scheduled final exam.
Groups B and D
SINGHAM
HIST 333 (formerly 329) Modern European Intellectual History (Not offered 2000-2001)
Through the history of historical thought during the last two centuries, the student will be introduced to the
principal intellectual traditions of Western Europe since the Enlightenment. The works of individual think-
ers--including Vico, Kant, Hegel, Marx, Comte, Ranke, Dilthey, Nietzsche, Freud, Weber, Croce, Col-
lingwood, Hempel and Heller--will be studied.
Class format: lecture and discussion.
Requirements: several short papers and a final exam.
Group B
KOHUT
HIST 335 (formerly 316) Class, Gender, and Race in Post-1945 Britain (Not offered
2000-2001)
A major theme in British historiography is the enormous social change that has taken place in Britain since
the end of World War II. In the 1950s, sociologists argued about the extent to which postwar affluence was
leading to the "embourgeoisement" of the working class; in the 1960s, the advent of the so-called "Permis-
sive Society" witnessed the flourishing of a culture of sex, drugs, and rock 'n roll; in the 1970s, the feminist
movement challenged gender roles that earlier had seemed so secure; in the 1980s, Thatcherism tried to
undo many of the social changes that Britons had experienced after the War; moreover, throughout this
period successive ways of immigration challenged the social and cultural homogeneity of white Britain.
This course will explore these themes by tracing the break-up of the immediate postwar consensus and the
gradual unfolding of a new politics of class, gender, and race in the midst of England's "green and pleasant
land." In attempting to make sense of these complex transformations in the fabric of postwar British soci-
ety, we will consider a variety of material, from documentary sources to the writing of more recent histo-
rians. We will also thoroughly integrate a series of feature films into our discussion; students will hence be
expected to view a film a week outside of class time.
Evaluation will be based on participation in class discussion, two interpretive essays on the readings, and a
self-scheduled final exam.
Group B
WATERS
HIST 338 (formerly 335) Weimar Germany (Not offered 2000-2001)
The Weimar Republic has been examined and re-examined not only in an effort to account for the failure
of democracy and the rise of Hitler in Germany, but also for its remarkable artistic achievements. Using a
variety of primary documents, including movies, works of art and literature, as well as more traditional
historical sources, and the writings of historians, this course will consider the social, political, and cultural
history of the Weimar Republic. At issue in the course will be the relationship between the political and
social instability and the cultural blossoming that characterized Germany during the 1920s. We will also
History
­ 206 ­
consider whether the Weimar Republic in general, and the Weimar culture in particular are better under-
stood as the product of Germany's past or as harbingers of its future.
Evaluation will be based upon participation in class discussion, two essays (each approximately five
pages), and one 8-page paper due at the end of the semester.
Group B
KOHUT
ADVANCED ELECTIVES: LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN (342-351)
HIST 342(S) Creating Nations and Nationalism in Latin America*
As it emerged from Spanish and Portuguese colonial rule between the 1790s and 1890s, Latin America
spawned some of the earliest self-conscious nationalisms in the world. With particular emphasis on the
interplay of race and ethnicity, regional economic and political spaces, and gender identities, this course
will examine the construction and continuing life of the modern nations and nationalisms of the region.
The aim here is double. First, we will seek to understand the historical processes that created nationalisms
and nation-states in distinct cases, including Argentina, Mexico, Brazil, Nicaragua, Peru, and Chile. At the
same time, we will use those individual country studies to revise or better understand major theories about
nations and nationalism-theories that almost always take as their starting point the study of past and present
European states.
Evaluation will be based on class participation and three essays.
Groups C and D
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR KITTLESON
HIST 343 (formerly 328) Gender and History in Latin America (Not offered 2000-2001)*
This course examines the history of women, men, and gender in Latin America from the late-colonial era
to the present. Observers have almost universally portrayed Latin-American societies in this period as
dominated by machismo and gendered notions of honor that have relegated women to the kind of comple-
mentary, subordinate position suggested in a quip from a nineteenth-century Brazilian newspaper:
"Woman is an adjective that must agree with the substantive man to exist grammatically in society." In our
readings and discussions we will evaluate the consequences of such dominant visions--as well as the in-
adequacies of analyses based on them. Besides looking at machismo and its corollaries, we will explore
how such codes have faced alternative readings by women and men and the challenges of subversive gen-
der identities and sexualities. Topics will include the often conflicting marriage strategies of young men
and women and their parents, domestic violence and men's real and attempted control over "their" women,
the repercussions of women's changing participation in the industrializing and globalized economies of the
late-twentieth century, the links between feminisms and gender politics in Latin America, and the proble-
matic relationship between women's movements and progressive and revolutionary politics.
Group C
KITTLESON
HIST 344 (formerly 305) Latin-American Revolutions and the United States (Not offered
2000-2001)*
The specter of revolution--real and potential--in Latin America has haunted the United States for a centu-
ry. Focusing on the cases of Guatemala, Cuba, Bolivia, Nicaragua, and El Salvador, this course will ex-
amine the promise and/or threat that revolutions and revolutionaries represented within Latin America and
within U.S. policymaking circles. Why did some Latin Americans turn to revolution? Why did the United
States respond as it did to revolutionaries in "our backyard"? What explains differing U.S. reactions to
specific movements? To what extent did the U.S. foster revolution even as it tried to head it off or squelch
it?
Evaluation will be based on class participation, one essay, and midterm and final exams.
Group C
KITTLESON
HIST 346 (formerly 314) History of Modern Brazil, 1822 to the Present (Not offered
2000-2001)*
This course will examine the major themes of Brazilian history from Independence to the present. Begin-
ning with the relatively (by Latin-American standards) easy transition from colony to independent empire,
we will analyze the hierarchies that have characterized Brazilian society and their relation to the political
and economic evolution of the Brazilian nation-state. The course will give particular attention to questions
of race, national identity and popular culture, women's sexuality and machismo, and democracy and au-
thoritarianism in social and political relations.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short (4 -6 page) papers, and a take-home final exam.
Group C
KITTLESON
ADVANCED ELECTIVES: UNITED STATES (352-391
HIST 352(F,S) (formerly 255) America and the Sea, 1600-Present (See American Maritime
Studies 201) (Offered only at Mystic Seaport.)
(See under American Maritime Studies for full description.)
History
­ 207 ­
HIST 353 (formerly 319) Politics and Culture in Colonial British America (Not offered
2000-2001)
An investigation of the growth of an ultimately revolutionary "American" system of political practice and
theory in the British colonies of North America. This course will survey the changing relation of govern-
mental and economic power (provincial and imperial) to other aspects of colonial culture: the regional dis-
tinctiveness of social systems, population growth, ethnic diversity, a growing consumer economy, religious
practice and ideology, and the evolution of social and political theory. A wide variety of primary and sec-
ondary sources will be read, and careful attention will be paid to methods, assumptions, and quarrels of
modern historians.
The format will be mostly reading and discussion.
Students will write two short interpretive essays and take midterm and self-scheduled final exams, or sub-
mit a research paper based on primary sources.
Groups A and D
TRACY
HIST 354 (formerly 321) Gender and Community in Early America (Not offered
2000-2001)*
This course is a study of the lives of men and women in the territory that became the United States, from
the early-seventeenth century to the Civil War. Experiences of kinship, work, religion, and sexuality will be
studied in the context of culturally and geographically varied communities, which constructed different
codes of behavior and followed different paths through the complexities of economic and political moder-
nization. Among the topics investigated will be gender systems among the Native Americans east of the
Mississippi and the consequences of European incursions; the difference that evangelical religion made
among communities of British Americans; the complex construction of community life and gender sys-
tems among African Americans; the evolution of ideologies of masculinity when brainwork replaced
physical labor as the norm for the middling classes; the critique of a developing consensus about gender
that was offered by utopian reform groups; and Westward migration of Euro-Americans and the Civil War
as episodes in the history of gender. This course involves extensive reading and discussion of primary and
secondary sources.
Evaluation will be based on a short interpretive essay, a midterm exam and, then, either a research paper or
a final exam.
Groups A and D
TRACY
HIST 358 (formerly 242) "The Good War": World War II and American Culture and Society
(Not offered 2000-2001)
This course examines social and cultural changes on the U.S. home front during the Second World War.
Through primary documents including memoirs, fiction, oral histories, photographs, and films, as well as
historical analyses, we will explore how different Americans understood and experienced World War II.
We will pay particular attention to the racial, ethnic, class, gender, sexual, and regional relations engen-
dered, consolidated, and unsettled during the war. Themes include mobilization for war; the politics and
impact of propaganda; efforts to boost morale; women and the war effort; the internment of Japanese-
Americans; African-Americans' fight for racial justice; the decision to use the atomic bomb and responses
to its use; confronting the Holocaust; and World War II and historical memory.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, three short essays (5-7 pages), and a final exam.
Group A
KUNZEL
HIST 361(S) Metropolis: The History of New York City
"Hitherto it had gone by the original Indian name Manna-hatta, or as some still have it, `The Manhattoes;'
but this was now decried as savage and heathenish . . . At length, when the council was almost in despair, a
burgher, remarkable for the size and squareness of his head, proposed that they should call it New-Amster-
dam. The proposition took every body by surprise; it was so striking, so apposite, so ingenious. The name
was adopted by acclamation, and New-Amsterdam the metropolis was thenceforth called," explained
Washington Irving in 1808. In less tongue-in-cheek style, this course examines the evolution of New York
City from 1607 to the present. The readings focus on the city's social and physical histories, and the class
discussions compare New York's development to patterns in other cities. There is an optional tour of New
York City during the semester.
Evaluation will be based on class participation and several essays.
Groups A and D
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF WILDER
HIST 364(F) (formerly 311) History of the Old South*
During the course of the semester, we shall investigate two broad, interrelated topics: slavery in the ante-
bellum South, and the impact of slavery on Southern civilization. Our approach will be primarily topical. In
the first half of the course, we shall look at subjects like the foreign and domestic slave trade, patterns of
work and treatment, the nature of the master-slave relationship, resistance and rebellion, and slave cultural,
social, and family life. The second half of the course will concentrate on the influence of the institution of
History
­ 208 ­
slavery on the mind, social structure, and economy of the Old South, and slavery's impact on Southern
politics and the decision for secession in 1860-61.
Classes will be primarily discussion.
Requirements: a midterm, a final exam, and a paper of moderate length.
Groups A and D
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF DEW
HIST 365(S) (formerly 312) History of the New South*
A study of the history of the American South from 1877 to the present. Social, political and economic
trends will be examined in some detail: the rule of the "Redeemers" following the end of Reconstruction;
tenancy, sharecropping, and the rise of agrarian radicalism; Southern Progressivism; the coming of racial
segregation and the destruction of the Jim Crow system during the years of the Civil Rights movement;
Southern politics during the depression and post-World War II years.
Classes will be primarily discussion.
Requirements: a midterm, a final exam, and a paper of moderate length.
Group A
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF DEW
HIST 367(F) (formerly 342) Social and Economic History of the Southwest, from Pre-Conquest
to American Occupation*
This course will survey the social and economic development of the American Southwest, from the "pre-
history" of the region to the impact of the Spanish colonial enterprise and the American occupation. This
course strives to provide an integrated understanding of change of time within the native, Mexican, and
Anglo communities of the region by inquiry into the major formative historical forces affecting these
people. Topical emphasis will be upon social structure, class stratification, and labor conflict.
Evaluation will be based upon class participation, two midterm exams, and a final exam.
Group A
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF PAGÁN
HIST 368 (formerly 246) Cultural Encounters in the American West (Same as American
Studies 246) (Not offered 2000-2001)*
This class will explore the history of the trans-Mississippi West by focusing on the encounters between
Euro-Americans, Native Americans, African Americans, Latino Americans, and Asian Americans in that
region from the time of the Gold Rush to the present. We will examine various historical moments of con-
flict and cooperation between these groups as well as their perceptions of their experiences in the West and
how historians and other writers have constructed the history of the area. Readings will include traditional
and revisionist approaches to Western history, oral histories, travel literature, novels, and selected primary
documents.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short papers (5-7 pages), and a final exam.
Enrollment limited to 40.
Group A
WONG
HIST 370 (formerly 308) Studies in American Social Change (Not offered 2000-2001)
The purpose of this course is to consider how Americans have thought and acted about the process of
change in society, and whether or not an American "tradition" has developed over the years in response to
the demands for change. We will focus on four selected case studies: Lincoln, the abolitionists, and slavery;
industrialists and reformers during the Progressive era; controversy over the New Deal and the emergence
of the modern welfare-state, and the drive for expanded civil rights in the modern era.
Classes will be primarily discussion.
Evaluation will be based on participation in class discussion, a series of brief interpretative essays based on
the assigned reading, and a final exam.
Open to sophomores.
Group A
DEW
HIST 372(S) (formerly 313) The Rise of American Business
An examination of the complex process that saw business enterprise move from a marginal position in the
largely agrarian society of the early colonial period to become, by the twentieth century, one of the princi-
pal forces shaping American culture. Subjects to be considered: the business and political activities of colo-
nial merchants, early-American attempts at industrialization, the business careers of John D. Rockefeller
and Andrew Carnegie, and the growth, since 1900, of multidivisional corporations like DuPont and Gener-
al Motors. Readings will include historical studies, biography, autobiography, and fiction.
Students will write a series of short analytical papers and will have the choice of either writing a longer,
final essay or taking a final exam.
Open to sophomores and also to first-year students with Advanced Placement Credit in American History.
Group A
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR R. DALZELL
History
­ 209 ­
HIST 373(S) (formerly 221) American Religious History (Same as Religion 221)
(See under Religion for full description.)
HIST 374 (formerly 224) North-American Catholic History (Same as Religion 224) (Not
offered 2000-2001)
(See under Religion for full description.)
HIST 376 (formerly 320) Adolescence in America (Same as American Studies 320) (Not
offered 2000-2001)
Adolescence, the time between childhood dependency and full social adulthood, is a concept formalized in
the late-nineteenth century, but a topic of concern since at least the Middle Ages in Western culture. It is a
moment in which nature threatens to escape from the mechanisms of social order, and the moment at
which the self-conscious and implicit elements of culture get passed on to the future. With some attention
to European history as a background, we will focus on changing experiences of youth in colonial America
and the United States. Our hypothesis is that adolescence is a screen onto which are projected many of the
anxieties of a culture, and that we can read those projections as evidence of larger cultural change. Our data
will include autobiographies, census data, artifacts of adolescent culture (schoolbooks, clothing, popular
music), social-science analysis, fiction, and films.
Evaluation will be based on contributions to class discussions, two short essays, and midterm and final
exams.
Groups A and D
TRACY
HIST 378 (formerly 344) History of Sexuality in America (Same as Women's and Gender
Studies 344) (Not offered 2000-2001)
This course explores the shifting and contested meanings and experiences of sex and sexuality, primarily in
North America, from the pre-colonial period to the present. We will pay close attention to themes including
the development of sexual identities and the construction of sexual subjectivity; the role of sexual practices
and ideologies in creating and maintaining social hierarchies of class, race, and gender; and the interplay
between politics and sexuality. Topics include colonial American attitudes toward sexuality; Victorian
sexual ideology; the shifting boundary between "normality" and "deviance"; the emergence of "modern"
sexual identities; the formation of diverse lesbian and gay communities; the "sexual revolutions" of the
1910s and 1960s; and representations of AIDS/HIV.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, a series of short critical responses, a short essay, and a final
research paper.
Group A
KUNZEL
HIST 379 (formerly 324) Women in the United States Since 1870 (Same as Women's and
Gender Studies 324) (Not offered 2000-2001)
This course explores the history of U.S. women and gender from 1870 to the present. We will examine the
history of women and prevailing constructions of gender in relationship to major developments in U.S.
history, including Reconstruction, the making of empire, Progressive reform, World War II, and struggles
for citizenship, labor rights, and equality. Using primary and secondary materials, we will consider
women's experience in the realms of work, political activism, and sexuality.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short essays (5-7 pages), and a final paper.
Group A
KUNZEL
HIST 380 (formerly 227) Comparative American Immigration History (Not offered
2000-2001)*
The United States is often described as a "nation of nations," but there has always been an underlying
tension between the image of American pluralism and the desire for homogeneity. This lecture/discussion
course will examine the history of immigration to the United States from three primary regions: Europe,
Asia, and Latin America, as well as the Caribbean. Special attention will be paid to conditions in the send-
ing countries and the historical ties of those counties to the U.S., immigrant labor recruitment, anti-im-
migration sentiments in the U.S., and the development of American immigration policy. Readings will
include immigrant memoirs, novels, and modern interpretations of the immigration experience.
Evaluation will be based on two short essays (5 pages), a personal or family immigration history (15
pages), a final exam, and class participation.
Enrollment limited to 40.
Group A
WONG
HIST 381(S) African-American Religious History (Same as Religion 226)
(See under Religion for full description.)
HIST 382 (formerly 318) The Black Radical Tradition in America (Not offered 2000-2001)*
Throughout the history of the United States, African Americans have offered alternative visions of their
nation's future and alternative definitions of their nation's progress. Not limited to reforming the worst so-
History
­ 210 ­
cial ills, these discourses have called for a fundamental restructuring of our political, economic, and social
relations. Jupiter Hammon, the aged slave, preacher, and poet of Colonial New York, preceded the young
Phyllis Wheatley in offering a distinctly African reproach of bondage. After the American Revolution,
Africans established the foundations of black nationalism and separatism. In the decades that followed,
black Americans were central players in organizing anti-slavery societies in Northern cities, and providing
abolitionism with a coherent critique of bondage. Boston's David Walker was killed for publishing his
Appeal to the Coloured Citizens. Frederick Douglass emerged as the most famous man in America be-
cause of his involvement in an international assault on servitude. Black men and women took up arms
against the Confederacy to destroy slavery, and then did the same against the United States to preserve the
victories of Reconstruction. Interestingly, in the twentieth century, leaders like Booker T. Washington, W.
E. B. DuBois, Marcus Garvey, Paul Robeson, Malcolm X, and Martin Luther King, Jr. borrowed on centu-
ries-old social traditions to answer the racial dilemmas of the nation. The thread of continuity was provided
by a radical tradition through which African Americans cultivated and passed on a legacy of social resis-
tance.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, one essay, a midterm and a final exam.
Group A
WILDER
HIST 384(F) (formerly 331) Comparative Asian-American History, 1850-1965*
This course explores the comparative history of Asians in America from the mid-nineteenth century to
1965. We will cover the histories of the Chinese, Japanese, Koreans, Filipinos, and Asian Indians in light of
Asian and American history. Topics include the international context of Asian emigration, patterns of im-
migration, Asians in the labor force, anti-Asian movements, development of Asian-American communi-
ties, the impact of the second world war on Asian Americans, and literary and other artistic expressions of
the Asian-American experience. Readings will include selected primary sources, novels, and modern his-
torical studies.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short papers (5-7 pages) and a 15-page research paper.
Enrollment limited to 25.
Group A
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR WONG
HIST 385 (formerly 332) Contemporary Issues in Recent Asian-American History,
1965-Present (Not offered 2000-2001)*
Since 1965, the Asian-American community has increased in number and diversity. This course will ex-
amine the Asian diaspora since 1965 in light of events in both Asia and the United States and how Asians
have come to populate the American landscape in terms of immigration and adjustment patterns, Asian-
American identity and politics, and the Asian presence in American popular culture. Readings will include
oral histories, novels, and contemporary historical and sociological studies of the Asian-American experi-
ence.
Students will be evaluated on class participation, two short papers (5-7 pages), a midterm exam, and a
personal or family immigration history (15 pages).
Enrollment limited to 25.
Group A
WONG
HIST 386(S) (formerly 317) Intellectual Traditions of Chicano Nationalism*
This course is an introduction to the intellectual and artistic expressions of a generation of Mexican-Ameri-
can activists who defined themselves in opposition to American society during the Cold War. Through
primary and secondary materials we will explore the alternative visions of life and culture that Chicanos
offered in critique of what Corky Gonzales characterized as "the American social neurosis" of materialism.
We will critically explore how "Mexico" and "America" existed within Chicano nationalism as opposi-
tional constructs, how Chicanos claimed the contested ground that lay in-between the cultures of Mexico
and the United States, and what meaning Chicanos gave to their imagined "Aztec" past. Finally, because
Chicanismo did not occur in a vacuum, we will explore the larger historical circumstances that informed
the dynamics of gender and class in the construction of Chicano nationalism. Readings will include Anaya,
Behar, Bruce-Novoa, Gonzáles, Niggli, Rendon, Rodríguez, Villareal, and Villaseñor.
Requirements include two short papers of 5-8 pages, active class participation, and a final paper of approx-
imately 15 pages.
Group A
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR PAGÁN
HIST 387(F) (formerly 211) Puerto Ricans in the United States*
This course will examine specific moments and patterns in the historical and cultural development of Puer-
to Ricans in the U.S., and the evolution of major themes and controversies surrounding the political and
cultural debates on Puerto Ricans and Latinos in the U.S. Readings and class discussions will provide a
historical survey of the events leading to the incorporation of Puerto Rico into the U.S.; the changing politi-
cal and socio-economic structures of Puerto Rico and its interaction with the U.S.; and the evolution and
impact of Puerto Rican migration and labor in the U.S. economy, culture, and society.
History
­ 211 ­
Evaluation will be based upon class participation, a midterm exam, a short paper of 5- to 8-pages, and a
final exam.
Group A
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR PAGÁN
HIST 389 (formerly 327) Major Themes in the History of Native Americans (Not offered
2000-2001)
This course will introduce students to major themes and issues within a complex, multicultural and multi-
lingual group collectively known as "American Indians." Through the study of the major American-Indian
communities in the continental United States, we will explore the dynamics of Indian and "white" interac-
tion since first contact (both personal and communal), socioeconomic conditions of reservation life, cultur-
al resistance, and the new political configurations of pan-Indian identity. Although a number of relevant
theoretical positions will be discussed, this course will use research that is informed by post-structural
forms of analysis. Furthermore, while the disciplinary focus of this course is historical, we will also draw
from other disciplines in exploring the negotiated nature of cultural boundaries.
Evaluation will be based upon class participation, two historiographical essays of 8-10 pages, and a final
research paper of 15-20 pages.
Group A
PAGÁN
HIST 390 (formerly 343) An Intellectual History of Southwestern Indians (Not offered
2000-2001)*
This course is a critical exploration of the intellectual geographies of three Southwestern nations: diné (Na-
vajo), ndee (Western Apache), and yoeme (Yaqui). Though joined by trade, competition, and a history of
European and American colonial efforts, these nations have had very different experiences and outcomes.
We will use scholarly monographs in combination with recorded folklore, biography, and mythology in
exploring both the commonalities and differences between these three neighboring peoples, and the ways
in which they continue to negotiate their sense of place and self in the face of historical influences and
changes.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short papers of 8-10 pages, and a final essay of 15-20
pages. Students are strongly encouraged to have taken History 327 or Anthropology 207.
Group A
PAGÁN
ADVANCED ELECTIVES: TRANSNATIONAL/COMPARATIVE (392-396)
HIST 392 (formerly 220) Nature: The History of an Idea (Same as Environmental Studies
222) (Not offered 2000-2001)
The environmental policies we promote or tolerate, the environmental ethic that informs or fails to inform
our actions, the sensibilities that shape our personal interactions with the natural world, the metaphors to
which we instinctively resort in discussing it--all of these, at one remove or another, reflect and in turn
help shape the ways in which we characteristically conceive of nature. Such conceptions, varying from
culture to culture, have also changed quite dramatically across time. Although the course will attempt some
cross-cultural comparison, its primary focus will be on the latter issue and its purpose, then--that of ex-
ploring those changing ideas of nature from the ancient near East, via classical and European Middle Ages
and the early-modern era of scientific and industrial revolution, down to the present. Readings will be
drawn from such works and authors as the Babylonian Enuma Elish and other creation myths, Plato's Ti-
maeus, Genesis, St. Augustine, Robert Boyle, Pierre Gassendi, Newton, Henry Bergson, R.G. Colling-
wood, A.N. Whitehead and such other modern or contemporary authors as John Passmore, Carolyn Mer-
chant and Clarence Glacken.
Primarily reading and discussion format.
Evaluation will be based on contributions to class discussion, two short analytic papers on assigned topics,
and a longer research paper on a topic of the student's choosing.
Groups B and D
OAKLEY
HIST 393 (formerly 306) Urban Theory (Same as Environmental Studies 393) (Not offered
2000-2001)
Urban theory describes the varied intellectual attempts to explain the economic and social functions of
cities and the class and cultural interactions of urbanites. The course begins with the German urbanists of
the late-nineteenth century, turns to look at the focuses of social scientists such as Charles Booth in their
analyses of London, and finally traces the intellectual origins of an America-specific theory of urbanity in
the twentieth-century United States.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short papers, and a final exam.
Group A
WILDER
History
­ 212 ­
HIST 394 (formerly 346) Comparative Masculinities: Britain and the United States Since 1800
(Not offered 2000-2001)
The starting point for this course is the belief that gender in society is socially constructed--that identities
like "femininity" and "masculinity" are less the innate (or biological) characteristics of women and men
than they are products of social, economic, political, and cultural forces in any given time and place. Bor-
rowing from the work of scholars in the fields of anthropology, cultural studies, feminist theory, history,
literature, and sociology, this course will consider a number of masculine identities that have emerged in
Britain (and its colonies) and the United States in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The course will be
an interdisciplinary enterprise that will focus on various representations of masculinity and on the ever-
changing historical and social categories of masculinity; moreover, it will explore the ways in which mas-
culinity is always a "relational" construct, suggesting that white, normative, heterosexual, masculinity can-
not be understood without reference to its non-white, colonial, and deviant counterparts. Topics to be ad-
dressed include the shaping of bourgeois masculinities in Victorian Britain and the United States, the im-
pact of race and empire on masculinity in the years leading up to World War I, the role of Oscar Wilde in
subverting heterosexual masculinity in the 1890s, female masculinity in the 1930s, normative masculinity
and its discontents in the 1950s, and contemporary debates about the nature of masculinity. In short, from
eminent Victorians to Lawrence of Arabia, from James Dean to Iron John, the course will explore the shift-
ing meanings of manhood in British and American society.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, two 5-page "position statements" on the readings, and a 15-
to 20-page research paper.
There will be no final exam.
Groups A and B
WATERS
HIST 395(S) (formerly 322) Vietnam
This course uses a wide variety of readings, films, guest lectures, and small group discussions to illuminate
some of the major controversies surrounding the Vietnam War. While naturally concerned with topics as
diverse as the relations of the major world powers to Vietnam and the role of the media in reporting the war,
our main concern will be to analyze the sources of Communist Party strength in Indochina, the reasons
why American counterinsurgency tactics failed, and the causes of continued instability in the area.
Requirements include: two short papers, an hour test, and a self-scheduled final exam.
Not open to first-year students.
Group C
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF FROST
HIST 396 (formerly 338) Victorian Psychology (Not offered 2000-2001)
Although the Victorian era has traditionally been considered a psycho-social model of emotional inhibition
and sexual prudery, recent studies, by scholars in various disciplines, have demonstrated that this character-
ization grossly oversimplifies the attitudes toward emotional and sexual life held by Europeans and Ameri-
cans in the second half of the nineteenth century. This course will investigate professional and popular
ideas about human psychology during the Victorian era. We will attempt to define and understand what
people thought and felt about insanity, the unconscious, dreams, sexuality, the relationship between natural
impulses and civilized society, child psychology and development, the psychological differences between
men and women, the relationship between the physical and the psychical.
The course will concentrate on the close reading and analysis of primary documents, including: profes-
sional literature in psychiatry, from the phrenologists to Freud; manuals on child rearing, education, sexual
practice, and living the wholesome life; and cultural documents.
Evaluation will be based on participation in class discussion, two essays, each of approximately 5 pages,
and one 8-page paper due at the end of the semester.
Group B
KOHUT
ADVANCED SEMINARS (402-479)
These are advanced courses normally limited in enrollment to fifteen students. Each seminar will inves-
tigate a topic in depth and will require students to engage in research that leads to a substantial piece of
historical writing. All History majors are required to complete either an advanced seminar (402-479) or a
tutorial (480-492). Instructors may recommend prior coursework in the area of the seminar. Priority will be
given to senior History majors, followed by junior History majors.
ADVANCED SEMINARS: AFRICA AND THE MIDDLE EAST (402-411)
HIST 402 (formerly 373) African Political Thought (Not offered 2000-2001)*
This course examines the ideas of major figures in the progressive tradition of African political thought.
This emancipatory tradition emerged in societies shaped by racial, cultural, and economic exploitation,
forcing both African men and women to address questions of identity and political action. Most members
of this tradition also considered the ways in which uneven power relations within African communities
shaped the personal and political landscapes. The men and women we will study in this course drew on
resources as varied as pan-Africanism, classical liberalism, social democracy, Marxism, Black Conscious-
ness/Negritude, critical theory and gender theory, yet each participated at least implicitly, in a common
History
­ 213 ­
African intellectual project: the meaning of Africa and of being African.
Some of the figures we will examine include Edward Blyden, Aime Cesaire, Leopold Senghor, Frantz
Fanon, Amilcar Cabral, Steve Biko, Kwame Nkrumah, Nyerere, Ngugi wa Thiongo.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, class presentations, two short papers, and a final research
paper.
Enrollment limited.
Group C
MUTONGI
HIST 409 (formerly 363) Religion and Revolution in Iran (Same as Religion 234) (Not offered
2000-2001)*
(See under Religion for full description.)
Group C
ADVANCED SEMINARS: ASIA (412-421)
HIST 414(S) The Other Chinas: China, Taiwan and Hong Kong
This course will give students the opportunity to examine the histories of the "other" Chinas--Taiwan and
Hong Kong--areas whose importance in the modern geopolitical world is critical, but whose individuality
is too often overlooked. The course will focus on these islands' relationship with Mainland China, as well
as on their indigenous histories. Hong Kong's transformation from a rocky outpost to a colonial haven to a
Chinese municipality; Taiwan's passage from undisturbed island to colonial pawn to reactionary haven to
independent (?) nation will all be explored in this course. We will also study the factors that led Mainland
China to become so integrally involved in these island outposts.
Students will write a position paper as a final project. There will be no midterm or final exam.
Enrollment limited.
Group C
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W REEVES
ADVANCED SEMINARS: EUROPE AND RUSSIA (422-441)
HIST 425(S) East Meets West in the Middle Ages: The First Crusade (Same as Religion 215)
The First Crusade (1095-1131) was one of the most remarkable episodes in the history of the Middle Ages.
Responding to the call of Pope Urban II, a mass movement of armed pilgrims marched almost 2000 miles
from western Europe to the Holy Land to reconquer Jerusalem from Turkish invaders. In the eyes of these
crusaders, they were undertaking a Christian pilgrimage and penitential war through which they hoped to
win salvation, glory, and treasure. In the eyes of others, however, the crusaders were savage barbarians
who understood little of the sophisticated civilizations they encountered and who butchered innocent Jews,
Muslims, and fellow Christians in God's name. This seminar explores the origins, course, and impact of
the First Crusade from social, cultural, theological, political, economic, and military perspectives. Special
attention will be given to analyzing, comparing, and contrasting different accounts of the First Crusade-not
only those of western Christians, but also of Jews, Byzantine Greeks, Muslims, and other witnesses.
Through this study of the First Crusade, we will examine one of the defining events of the Middle Ages
and uncover the roots of much ethnic, religious, and political conflict in our modern world.
Groups B and D
Hour: 7:00-9:30 p.m. T GOLDBERG
HIST 438 (formerly 353) Nazi Germany (Not offered 2000-2001)
This course is designed less to introduce students to the history of Nazi Germany and more to enable them
to do a significant piece of historical research. Therefore class meetings of the seminar will be devoted not
to the discussion of a series of structured historical topics but to helping students with their research. There
are three assignments in this course: a thirty-minute oral presentation on the student's research project
(35% of the final grade); a 30- to 40-page research paper (40% of the final grade); and class attendance and
participation (20% of the final grade). Although the primary purpose of this course is to teach students to
write a research paper, they will also learn a great deal about the history of Nazi Germany. They will be
taught that history less by the instructor and more by each other. Indeed, in order to situate their research
projects into the general history and historiography of the Third Reich, students will need to depend upon
the oral reports of their colleagues.
Enrollment limited.
Group B
KOHUT
HIST 440 (formerly 372) Reform, Revolution, Terror: Russia, 1900-1939 (Not offered
2000-2001)
The Russian Revolution of 1917 and the establishment of the Soviet Union are among the most important
and influential events of the twentieth century. Not surprisingly, almost every aspect of the Revolution and
the emergence of the Soviet system has aroused intense controversy, from the origins of these events and
processes, to their character and the forces driving them, to the nature and meaning of their outcome. The
purpose of this seminar is to enable students to explore the sources and process of revolution in early twen-
tieth-century Russia and the controversies the Revolution continues to provoke through both common
History
­ 214 ­
readings and a substantial independent research project. Class meetings, therefore, will be devoted initially
to the discussion of common readings intended to familiarize students with the main aspects and interpreta-
tions of the Revolution (defined broadly as the period from roughly 1900 to 1939), and then to helping
students with their research. Topics for general discussion will include the prospects for non-revolutionary
change prior to 1914; the substance and significance of Marxist-Leninist ideology and Bolshevik political
culture; the interplay of social, political, ideological, and cultural forces in shaping the revolution and the
new Soviet order; the process of cultural revolution; and the origins and nature of Stalin's "revolution from
above" and the "Great Terror" of 1937-1939. Research topics will be chosen by each student in consulta-
tion with the instructor and can concern any aspect of Russian history during the revolutionary era.
Evaluation will be based on the final research paper, oral presentations in class, and class participation.
Although the common readings in the seminar will be in English, the research project will provide an op-
portunity for students with reading knowledge of Russian to use their language skills if they wish to do so.
Enrollment limited to 15.
Group B
W. WAGNER
HIST 441(S) Gorbachev and the Collapse of Soviet Communism
Upon becoming General Secretary of the Communist party of the Soviet Union in 1985, Mikhail Gorba-
chev initiated a series of increasingly radical reforms intended to revitalize and strengthen the Soviet Union
and to restructure the Soviet system. The outcome of these efforts, however, was the stunning, unexpected,
yet relatively peaceful disintegration of the Soviet Union and the collapse of the Soviet communist experi-
ment in 1991. The purpose of this seminar is to enable students to explore this process of reform, collapse,
and renewal through both common readings and a substantial independent research project. Class meet-
ings, therefore, will be devoted initially to the discussion of common readings intended to familiarize stu-
dents with the main aspects and interpretations of the Gorbachev era and the process of Soviet collapse,
and then to helping students with their research. Topics for general discussion will include the motives and
prospects for reform of the Soviet system; the interrelationship between economic and political reform and
between domestic and international pressures for reform; the relative importance of contingency, context,
personality, and systemic weaknesses in causing the collapse of the Soviet empire; and the development
and nature of oppositional political groups and alternative political cultures.
Research topics will be chosen by each student in consultation with the instructor and can concern any
aspect of late Soviet history. Evaluation will be based on the final research paper, oral presentations in class,
and class participation. Although the common readings in the seminar will be in English, the research proj-
ect will provide an opportunity for students with reading knowledge of Russian to use their language skills
if they wish to do so.
Enrollment limited to 15.
Group B
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W W. WAGNER
ADVANCED SEMINARS: LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN (442-451)
HIST 443(F) (formerly 355) Slavery, Race and Ethnicity in Latin America*
At times in this century African Americans have looked to Brazil and other Latin-American countries as a
sort of racial paradise, where people of color did not suffer the same brutal prejudice and violence that they
faced in the U.S. Especially since the 1930s, on the other hand, some Latin Americans of African descent
have admired the force, consciousness, and independence of Black movements in the U.S., wishing they
could construct similar organizations in their own countries. Although they might at first seem contradicto-
ry, these attitudes are rather reflections of the complex and subtle differences in the systems of race rela-
tions that have developed historically in the Americas. Instead of wondering which group of observers was
more correct in its analysis of the other's country, we will in this seminar try to see how each group was
both right and wrong in its judgment and how the history of their home society shaped their attitudes to-
ward other countries. To do this, we will explore the historical roots of race relations and politics in Latin
America from the beginnings of slavery through its abolition; the changing constructions of indigenous
ethnicities; and on to the emergence of new Black Movements and other race-based political currents in
Colombia, Brazil, and throughout the region.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, weekly reading responses, and a final paper.
Enrollment limited.
Group C
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W KITTLESON
ADVANCED SEMINARS: UNITED STATES (452-471)
HIST 453 (formerly 361) Salem Witchcraft (Not offered 2000-2001)
In 1692, Salem, Massachusetts became the center of an unusually large concentration of accusations of
witchcraft, a common occurrence in contemporary Europe but rare in the British-American colonies. For
300 years scholars, novelists, and (now) film-makers have used this event as a window into religious eco-
nomic, and political change in early modern Euro-American culture; recently gender and sexuality have
been placed at the center of the analysis. We survey the vast literature (including published primary
sources) on Salem, look at the politics of witchcraft in Europe for comparative purposes, and give a close
History
­ 215 ­
critical reading of Arthur Miller's play The Crucible and the recent film version. Students will write weekly
responses to the assigned reading and construct a research paper on some aspect of the historical problems
we raise.
Evaluation will be based on this written work and participation in class discussion.
Enrollment limited.
Groups A and D
TRACY
HIST 454 (formerly 386) The American Revolution (Not offered 2000-2001)
An examination of the ideological, political, and social aspects of the movement for American Indepen-
dence, 1760-1790. The analysis will focus on the disparate experiences of well-documented geographic
and economic communities to raise the question of how many movements were actually going on at the
same time, how many different meanings might have been implied by "independence." We will also sur-
vey the major historiographical trends, from contemporary debates to recent scholarly analyses, to see how
fertile a ground the Revolution has been for wildly divergent interpretations of the "real" America. Stu-
dents will do extensive reading and discussion in class and will write two short book-review essays to de-
velop their skills of interpretation.
The major piece of work in the course will be a substantial research paper.
Open to sophomores.
Groups A and D
TRACY
HIST 456(F) (formerly 360) Civil War and Reconstruction
An examination of one of the most turbulent periods in American history, with special emphasis on the
changing status of Afro-Americans during the era. During the war years, we shall study both the war itself
and homefront conditions: military, naval, political, economic, and especially social aspects will be ex-
amined in some detail. Our study of Reconstruction will concentrate on the evolution of federal policy
toward the Southern states and the workings out of that policy in the South, particularly as it relates to the
freedmen.
The major piece of work in the course will be a research paper based at least in part on primary sources.
Enrollment limited.
Group A
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W DEW
HIST 466(S) (formerly 364) Imagining Urban America, Three Case Studies: Boston, Chicago,
and L.A. (Same as American Studies 364)
This course will explore social, economic, and cultural lives of three cities, each of which at its zenith
seemed to contemporaries to represent definitive aspects of "American" development. We will begin with
Boston--the country's first "big" city and the nominal capital of Puritan New England--in the colonial
and early national periods. From there we will move to Chicago, the transportation and commercial hub of
the emerging national economy in the nineteenth century. Finally we will turn to Los Angeles, "The City of
Dreams" and the center of the popular entertainment industry in the twentieth century. In each case, draw-
ing on a variety of sources, we will examine the city's origins, the factors that promoted its growth, and the
distinctive society it engendered. Then we will consider some of the city's cultural expressions--expres-
sions that seem to characterize not only changing the nature of urban life, but the particular meanings each
city gave to the nation's experience at the time. What made these cities seem simultaneously, as they did, so
alluring and so threatening to the fabric of national community and identity?
Written work in the course will consist of two short papers and a longer essay analyzing selected primary
texts. There will be no hour test or final exam.
Enrollment limited
Group A
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W R. DALZELL
HIST 467(S) Black Urban Life and Culture*
This course will examine the historical trajectory of the black urban experience in the United States from
Reconstruction to the present. As we discuss the interpretive frameworks that have guided scholarship in
black urban studies, we will focus on selected themes such as migration, labor, politics and culture. We will
investigate these themes through primary documents, secondary works, and visual imagery.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, class presentations, a short historiographical essay, and a
final research paper.
Group A
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W HICKS
HIST 469(F) Notions of Race and Ethnicity in American Culture (Same as American
Studies 403)*
While "race" and "ethnicity" have always played fundamental roles in shaping the course of American
history and the image of American society, our understanding of the concepts of race and ethnicity has
often been less than clear. Our goal in this course is to determine and examine how Americans have de-
fined race and ethnicity at various points in our history and how these notions have been acted out in policy,
History
­ 216 ­
practice, and theory. Examples of the social and legal construction of race and ethnicity and their expres-
sion in American culture will include white-Native American relations, slavery and its legacy, the "Yellow
Peril," science and race, and contemporary race relations.
Students will be evaluated on class participation and three written assignments: an annotated bibliography,
an historiographical essay, and a final research paper.
Enrollment limited to 18. Priority given to American Studies senior majors and then to History majors.
Group A
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W WONG
HIST 470 (formerly 358) The Chinese-American Experience (Not offered 2000-2001)
This seminar will trace the history of the Chinese immigrant presence in the United States from the 1850s
to the present by focusing on the selected topics of labor, the era of immigration exclusion and the Chinese
response to exclusion, community life, gender relations, and issues of contemporary Chinese immigration.
We will investigate these topics through the reading of primary sources, contemporary scholarship, oral
histories, and Chinese-American literature.
Students will be evaluated on their class participation, their knowledge of the reading and three written
assignments: an annotated bibliography, an historiographical essay, and a research paper based in part on
primary sources.
Enrollment limited.
Group A
WONG
HIST 471(S) (formerly 369) Methods in Latino Studies: Community, Family, and Identity
Formation*
This research seminar on family history will explore the construction of personal and communal identities,
the creation of ethnicity, the effects of acculturation and assimilation, and the maintenance of imagined
communities within a national context of class formation, racialization, and social stratification since 1848.
While the emphasis of this course will be in Latino Studies, theoretical readings, autobiographies, biogra-
phies, and community studies will be comparative and interdisciplinary because of the complicated cross-
currents of race, ethnicity, and class within the Latino communities of the United States.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, an annotated bibliography, a historiographical essay, and a
substantial research paper that can include genealogy, biography, family history, or community study.
There is no prerequisite, although students are encouraged to have taken History 250 previously. Enroll-
ment limited.
Group A
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W PAGÁN
ADVANCED SEMINARS: TRANSNATIONAL/COMPARATIVE (472-479)
HIST 472 (formerly 351) Slavery, Capitalism, and Revolution: The Impact of the New
World on Europe, 1700-1900* (Not offered 2000-2001)
This seminar will investigate the rich historiographical debate on the causes for the end of slavery in Eu-
rope's New World colonies. Were the causes of abolition religious, political, or economic? Was abolition
caused by events in Europe or by events in the Caribbean and Latin and South America? What role did
slaves play, especially those in Saint Domingue/Haiti, in the ending of European New World slavery?
Classic works like Eric Williams' Capitalism and Slavery, C. L. R. James' The Black Jacobins, Sidney
Mintz's Sweetness and Power, and Thomas Holt's The Problem of Freedom, form the basis for an explora-
tion of these themes. While centered on the institution of slavery in the Caribbean, the course will also
examine the role of Latin- and South-American independence movements on slavery in Spanish America,
the evolution of racial thought in Europe, and the role of Chinese and Indian indentured labor during the
transition to free labor in the New World.
Requirements include: informed class participation, oral and written class presentations, and a long (20-30
page) research paper based on an original reading of primary sources.
Enrollment limited.
Groups B and D
SINGHAM
HIST 473 (formerly 362) Stuff (Not offered 2000-2001)*
What do we know about the things which surround us? What do they say about us? About our society?
What do we want them to say? This seminar investigates material culture from an historical perspective,
using the material culture of China as a basis of comparison against which to explore theoretical and practi-
cal approaches to all material cultures, including our own. Objects, spaces, cuisine, and literature (all parts
of material culture) will provide data for this course; theoretical readings will include Bourdieu and Appa-
durai. The seminar will also involve some field trips.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, three short papers, and a final research paper.
Enrollment limited.
Group C
REEVES
History
­ 217 ­
HIST 475 (formerly 356) Modern Warfare and Military Leadership (Not offered 2000-2001)
Since the late-eighteenth century, the history of the West has been marked by a number of enormously
destructive and decisive wars fought by nation-states on a continental and global scale. This era witnessed
dramatic changes in the size, armaments, organization, and lethal nature of military forces at sea, on land,
and, more recently, in the air, culminating in highly mechanized warfare, and its ultimate weapon, the
atomic bomb. This course will study that warfare, paying special attention to the role military leadership
played in its development. We will concentrate our attention on the Napoleonic Wars, the American Civil
War, World War I, and World War II, and such leaders as Napoleon, Lee and Grant, Haig and Ludendorff,
Churchill, Hitler, Stalin, Marshall, Eisenhower, and MacArthur. Do these great leaders provide the key to
our understanding of modern warfare? Or are certain "timeless" principles, factors, and behaviors that con-
sistently transcend local historical contexts more important?
Requirements: a substantial (no upper limit on length) research paper on a topic of the student's choice
growing out of some aspect of the course. Participants will, in teams of two or three, lead class discussion at
least once as well as give class reports on the course readings. There will be several required films, and the
class will also play some computerized historical wargames.
Enrollment limited.
Groups A and B.
This course is part of the Leadership Studies Cluster.
WOOD
HIST 477 (formerly 352) History and the Body (Not offered 2000-2001)
Does the body have a history? The body's status as a biological and therefore "natural" category would
seem to place it beyond the purview of historians. But some historians, drawing from work in anthropolo-
gy, feminist theory and cultural studies, have argued that the categories we think of as most basic and un-
changing are, instead, mutable and historically contingent. Through primary and secondary sources, this
course explores recent efforts to historicize the human body and to learn how it has been conceptualized
and lived in different periods. Topics include historical constructions of race, sexual difference, sexual
identity, health and illness.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, weekly critical writing, and a final paper.
Enrollment limited.
KUNZEL
HIST 478(S) (formerly 381) The Ghetto from Venice to Harlem*
This course is intended to give students an in-depth look at the history of a modern institution of oppres-
sion, the ghetto. The literature will cover episodes of ghettoization across a wide geographic area. The
course runs chronologically, beginning with the ghettoization of Jews in Medieval Europe and ending with
the ghettoization of African-Americans in the twentieth-century United States. We will also explore urban-
ization, urban poverty, and oppression in Africa, Asia, and South and Central America.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, a research paper, and a final written essay that addresses the
themes developed through the semester.
Groups A, B and D
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W WILDER
TUTORIALS (480-492)
These are advanced reading and writing courses that offer an in-depth analysis of a topic in a tutorial
format. Tutorials are limited in enrollment to ten students and priority will be given to senior History ma-
jors. All History majors are required to complete either an advanced seminar (402-479) or a tutorial
(480-492). Instructors may recommend prior coursework in the area of the tutorial. The writing of five of
six essays and the oral presentation of five or six critiques of another student's essays are central to tutorials.
HIST 480T (formerly 370T) Western Political Thought in Transition (Not offered
2000-2001)+
While modern Western political thinking traces its roots to classical Greek antiquity, it was creatively trans-
formed during the turbulent centuries stretching from late antiquity to the eighteenth. This tutorial will fo-
cus on that crucial period of transition, which eventuated in the emergence of recognizably "modern"
constitutionalist notions of consent, individual rights, and parliamentary representation. Readings will in-
volve both primary texts and secondary sources and will concentrate on the contributions of such authors
as Eusebius of Caesarea, Augustine, Aquinas, John of Paris, Marsiglio of Padua, John Locke and Jean-Jac-
ques Rousseau.
Each student will write and present orally an essay of approximately 7 pages every other week on an as-
signed topic focusing on the readings for that week. Students not presenting an essay will be responsible
for offering a critique of the work of their colleague. Students will be evaluated on their written work, their
analyses of their colleague's work, and on a final written exercise.
Enrollment limited.
Groups B and D
OAKLEY
History
­ 218 ­
HIST 487T(F) (formerly 374T) The Second World War: Origins, Course, Outcomes, and
Meaning+
1991 marked the fiftieth anniversaries of the Nazi invasion of Russia and the Japanese attack on Pearl
Harbor. Though war had come to Europe as early as 1939, when Germany invaded Poland, after 1941 the
war became a truly global conflict of unprecedented extent, ferocity, and destructiveness. As late as 1943 it
still appeared that the Axis powers might win the war. But, by the end of 1945, the bombed-out ruins of
Germany and Japan were occupied by the Allies, who were preparing to put the surviving Axis leaders and
generals on trial for war crimes.
This tutorial will concentrate on a number of important questions and issues which arise from a study of
World War II. What were the origins of this central event of the twentieth century? How and why did the
war begin? Why did the war take the course it did? What were the most crucial or decisive episodes or
events? How did the Allies win? Why did the Axis lose? Could the outcome have been different?
Many of the topics examined will also have to deal with important questions of human responsibility and
with the moral or ethical dimensions of the war. Why did France, Britain, and the Soviet Union not stop
Hitler earlier? Who was to blame for the fall of France and the Pearl Harbor fiasco? Why did the Allies
adopt a policy of extensive firebombing of civilian targets? How could the Holocaust have happened?
Could it have been stopped? Did the Atomic bomb have to be dropped? Were the war crime trials justified?
By the end of the tutorial, students will have become thoroughly familiar with the general course the war
followed as well as acquiring in-depth knowledge of the most decisive and important aspects of the con-
flict. Students will have also grappled with the task of systematically assessing what combinations of mate-
rial and human factors can best explain the outcomes of the major turning points of the war. Students will
also have dealt with the problem of assessing the moral and ethical responsibility of those persons, orga-
nizations, and institutions involved in the war.
Each student will write and present orally an essay of approximately seven double-spaced pages every
other week on a topic assigned by the instructor. Students not presenting an essay have the responsibility of
critiquing the work of their colleague. The tutorial will culminate in a final written exercise.
Enrollment limited.
Group B
Hour: TBA WOOD
HIST 488T (formerly 368T) The Politics and Rhetoric of Exclusion: Immigration and Its
Discontents (Same as American Studies 368T) (Not offered 2000-2001)+
This tutorial, of interest to students of race and ethnicity, and American immigration history, will examine
the development of American immigration policy as representative of the tension in American society be-
tween ideals of cultural pluralism and the desire for homogeneity. While landmark immigration bills will
anchor the course chronologically, emphasis will be placed on the analysis of rhetoric found in debates on
immigration, in publications produced by anti- and pro-immigration forces, and the sociopolitical circum-
stances which informed the discourse of exclusion. Thematically, this tutorial seeks to address the follow-
ing questions: how is the idea of an "American" encoded in American immigration policy; how are con-
cerns about race, class, and gender delineated in immigration laws and writings on exclusion; and, how can
official documents and public debates be read as texts which contribute to the popular constructions of our
perceptions of the nature of American society? The tutorial will begin with a study of American nativism
and the development of an organized opposition to immigrants and foreign labor and nativism's relation to
American racial thought. Next we will examine the anti-Asian movement, focusing specifically on numer-
ous immigration bills that excluded Asians from the United States. We will then consider the effects of the
1965 Immigration Act, which liberalized American immigration policy by striking down national quotas,
and the recent backlash against immigrants. Finally, we will consider trends in American society that have
given rise to the advocacy of "multiculturalism" as well as its opposition.
Each student in the tutorial will write and present orally an essay (7-10 pages) every other week on the
readings for the week. Students not presenting an essay will be responsible for offering a critique of the
work of their colleague. Students will be evaluated on their written work, their oral presentations of that
work, their analyses of their colleague's work, and on a final, comprehensive essay that will address the
themes addressed in the tutorial.
Enrollment limited to 10.
Group A
WONG
HIST 490T (formerly 350T) History, Nostalgia, and the Politics of Collective Memory (Not
offered 2000-2001)
This tutorial, of interest to students of history, anthropology, sociology, and literary theory, will consider the
social construction of historical memory. In particularly, it will focus on the process by which individuals
within society--and indeed whole societies--come to "remember" the past, both individually and collecti-
vely. The tutorial seeks to address the following questions: why and how do certain elements of "the past"
become more appealing in the present than others; what is the nature of nostalgia, and why do some soci-
eties become more nostalgic about their past than others; what are the political implications of collective
memory? The tutorial will begin by examining the theoretical origins of work on collective memory in
Freudian psychology and Durkheimian anthropology before turning to recent debates about the nature of
History, History of Science
­ 219 ­
nostalgia and collective memory. The second half of the tutorial will be devoted to a series of case studies,
focusing on the collective memory of World War I, the role of the city as a site for collective recollection,
the mnemonic functions of the Vietnam Memorial and the AIDS Memorial Quilt, and the remembrance of
the Holocaust.
In this writing intensive course, each student in the tutorial will write and present orally an essay (approxi-
mately 6 pages in length) every other week on the reading for that week. Students not presenting an essay
will be responsible for offering a critique of the work of their tutorial partner.
Students will be evaluated on their written work, their oral presentations of that work, their analyses of their
partner's work, and on a final, comprehensive essay that addresses the themes of the tutorial.
Enrollment limited to 10.
Group B
WATERS
THE THESIS AND INDEPENDENT STUDY (493-499)
HIST 493(F) Senior Thesis Research/Writing Seminar
This seminar is a colloquium for the writers of honors theses. Although each student's major work for the
fall will be the writing of a thesis in consultation with an individual advisor, students will gather for occa-
sional meetings in order to present and critique each other's proposals and drafts and to discuss common
problems in research and the design of a long analytical essay.
Evaluation will be based on class participation and completed written work, and will determine if a student
will continue in the thesis program. For students proceeding to W031 and HIST 494, performance in the
fall semester will figure into the thesis grade calculated at the end of the year. The quality of a student's
performance in the colloquium segment of History 493, as well as his or her performance in all aspects of
the May colloquium at which these are presented and critiqued, will be figured into the overall grade the
student is given for History 493-494 and the departmental decision to award Honors or Highest Honors at
Commencement.
Enrollment limited to senior honors candidates.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF WONG
HIST 494(S) Senior Thesis
Students continuing to work on an honors thesis after WSP must register for this course. Infrequent meet-
ings; times to be arranged.
Limited to senior honors candidates.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF WONG
HIST 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
HISTORY OF SCIENCE (Div. II & III)
Chair, Professor DONALD deB. BEAVER
Professor: D. BEAVER. Advisory Committee: Professors: D. BEAVER, V. HILL.
A major in the History of Science is not offered, but the occasional Contract Major in it or a related
interdisciplinary field is possible. Courses in the History of Science are designed primarily to complement
and strengthen work in other major fields. Although any of the courses may be taken separately, studying
related courses in other departments will enhance their value, because by nature, History of Science is in-
terdisciplinary.
The following will serve as examples: the 101 course is an introduction to science and technology stud-
ies, and concentrates on key aspects of contemporary science and technology relevant to many issues of
living in a technological society. Scientific Revolutions (HSCI 224) deals with the emergence of modern
science in the 1600s and 1700s, and with subsequent revolutions in scientific thought; as such it comple-
ments courses related to modern European history.Technology and Culture (HSCI 305), an introduction to
the history of technology, offers materials which support work in a wide variety of fields: environmental
studies, political science, history, philosophy, and the sciences. The 216 course treats past and present sci-
ence and technology in the light of women's studies and the sociology of knowledge. History of Science
240 traces the influential role of science and invention in the shaping of American culture, and comple-
ments offerings in American Studies and American History. HSCI 320, an historical overview of the ideas,
practice, and organization of medicine, provides context for related coursework in History, Philosophy, and
the Premed Program.
HSCI 101(F) Science, Technology, and Human Values (Same as Science and Technology
Studies 101)
A study of the natures and roles of science and technology in today's society, and of the problems which
technical advances pose for human values. An introduction to science-technology studies. Topics include:
scientific creativity, the Two Cultures, the norms and values of science, the Manhattan Project and Big
Science, the ethics and social responsibility of science, appropriate technology, technology assessment, and
various problems which spring from dependencies engendered by living in a technological society, e.g.,
computers and privacy, automation and dehumanization, biomedical engineering.
History of Science
­ 220 ­
Requirements: two or three short exercises, two papers (3-5 pages and 5-10 pages), and a final exam.
Satisfies one semester of Division II requirement.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF D. BEAVER
HSCI 216(F) Gender, Science, and Technology
What bearing does gender have upon the ideas, research programmes, and achievements of the natural
sciences and technology? If any, does it range across the sciences; for example, does gender affect mathe-
matical theorems? In turn, how have developments in science and technology related to concepts of gen-
der? In what ways have women's careers differed from men's in science and engineering? What contribu-
tions have women made to those fields?
This course explores these and other questions concerning: the interrelationships of gender, science, and
technology; women in science and technology; the effects of technology on women's lives; feminist cri-
tiques of science and technology.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, a term paper, and a final exam.
Open to first-year students.
Satisfies one semester of Division II requirement.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF D. BEAVER
HSCI 224(S) Scientific Revolutions: 1543-1927
How much does science create the sensibilities and values of the modern world? How much, if any, techni-
cal detail is it necessary to know in order to understand the difference between propaganda and fact?
This course investigates four major changes of world view, associated with Copernicus (1543); Newton
(1687); Darwin (1859); and Planck (1900) and Einstein (1905). It also treats briefly the emergence of mod-
ern cosmogony, geology, and chemistry as additional reorganizations of belief about our origins, our past,
and our material structure.
We first acquire a basic familiarity with the scientific use and meaning of the new paradigms, as they
emerged in historical context. We then ask how those ideas fit together to form a new framework, and ask
what their trans-scientific legacy has been, that is, how they have affected ideas and values in other
sciences, other fields or thought, and in society.
Knowledge of high-school algebra is presupposed.
Evaluation will be based on four problem sets, two short papers (3-5 pages), and a final exam.
Satisfies one semester of Division III requirement.
Open to first-year students.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF D. BEAVER
HSCI 240 Technology and Science in American Culture (Not offered 2000-2001)
Although technologically dependent, the American colonies slowly built a network of native scientists and
inventors whose skills helped shape the United States' response to the Industrial Revolution. The interac-
tion of science, technology, and society in the nineteenth century did much to form American identity: the
machine in the garden, through the "American System of Manufactures" helped America rise to techno-
logical prominence; the professionalization and specialization of science and engineering led to their be-
coming vital national resources. Understanding these developments, as well as the heroic age of American
invention (1865-1914), forms the focus of this course: how science and technology have helped shape
modern American life.
Requirements: class discussion, six short reports (1-2 pages), and a final exam.
Satisfies one semester of Division II requirement.
Open to first-year students.
D. BEAVER
HSCI 305(F) Technology and Culture (Same as History 292)
From the Neolithic to the Atomic Age: the role of technology in transforming civilization. An historical in-
quiry into the nature of technology, its effects upon society, and the social forces which affect its develop-
ment and diffusion. Particular attention is given to the dynamics of the impact of technology on human val-
ues and conduct, especially where subtle and unexpected. Uses James Burke's Connections video series.
Requirements:aterm paper andafinal exam.
Satisfies one semester of Division II requirement.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR D. BEAVER
HSCI 320(S) History of Medicine (Same as History 293)
A study of the growth and development of medical thought and practice, together with consideration of its
interaction with science and social forces and institutions. The course aims at an appreciation of the socio-
historical construction of Western medicine, from prehistory to the twentieth century. The course begins
with paleomedical reconstructions, and moves to Babylonian, Egyptian and Greek [not only Hippocratic]
medicine, Greek and Roman anatomy and physiology, Arabic medical thought, Renaissance medicine,
and the gradual professionalization and specialization of medicine from the sixteenth century. Attention is
paid to theories of health and disease, ideas about anatomy and physiology, in addition to achievements
such as anesthesia and internal surgery, and advances in instruments such as obstetrical forceps and the
stethoscope.
Reading and discussion format.
History of Science, Interdepartmental Program
­ 221 ­
Requirements: two papers (8-10 pages), midterm and final.
No prerequisites. Open to first-year students.
Satisfies one semester of Division II requirement.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF D. BEAVER
HSCI 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
COURSES OF RELATED INTEREST
History/History of Science 336 Magic and Science in the Middle Ages (Deleted 2000-2001)
Mathematics 381 History of Mathematics
Philosophy 209 Philosophy of Science
Philosophy 210 Philosophy of Medicine
Sociology 368 Technology and Modern Society
INTERDEPARTMENTAL PROGRAM FOR EXPERIMENTAL AND
CROSS-DISCIPLINARY STUDIES
Chair, Associate Professor PETER JUST
Advisory Committee: Professors: DARROW, R. BELL. Associate Professor: JUST. Assistant Professors:
COX**, FRIEDMAN.
This program is designed to facilitate and promote innovations in curricular offerings in relation both to
interdisciplinary conceptual focus and experimental pedagogical form. It provides support for faculty and
student efforts to develop a curriculum that creatively responds to intellectual needs and modes of teaching/
learning that currently fall outside the conventional pattern.
EXPR 209 The Art and Archaeology of Maya Civilization: A Marriage Made in Xibalba
(Same as Anthropology 219 and ArtH 209) (Not offered 2000-2001)*
The ancient Maya civilization was one of the most sophisticated and complex cultures of prehispanic Cen-
tral America. Its complex calendrics, astronomy, mathematics and hieroglyphic writing system are well
known worldwide. The course will examine the trajectory and nature of ancient Maya civilization from the
combined perspectives of art history and archaeology. The evolution of the Maya state during the Pre-
classsic period (1000 B.C.-A.D. 250) will be evaluated by looking at the rich archaeological evidence and
at the Preclassic art styles of the predecessors of the Mayas. The social, economic, political and ideological
organization of the Classic Maya civilization (A.D. 250-1000) will then be presented through a detailed
survey of the archaeology and art of this period. Finally, the collapse of Classic Maya civilization and its
transformation and endurance during the Postclassic period and under Spanish rule (A.D. 1000-1600) will
be critically evaluated through a detailed review of the archaeological and iconographic evidence.
Lectures and class discussions.
Requirements: midterm and final exams, research paper.
No prerequisites, but an introductory art history or anthropology course highly recommended.
Satisfies one semester of Division II requirement.
EDGERTON and FOIAS
EXPR 242(F) Cyberscapes (Same as ArtH 268, ArtS 212 and Religion 289)
We are in the midst of a social and cultural revolution of extraordinary proportions. With the rapid spread
of electronic, telematic and virtual technologies, the very conditions of experience as well as the social,
economic, and political structures of our world are undergoing radical transformation. The media hype
about new technologies obscures contribution that modern and postmodern artistic practices have antici-
pated and promoted many of these changes. In this course, we will attempt to come to a better understand-
ing of cyberspace by approaching this new territory from the perspective of art, philosophy and religion.
Issues to be considered include: the changing role of the avant-garde, the relation between post-industrial
capitalism and postmodernism, performance, postmodern architecture, gender and technology, the cultural
implications of television, video, computers, internet, hypertext, artificial life, and virtual reality. The
course also involves a Media Lab in which students will learn how to navigate in dataspace as well as how
to create hypertext, artificial life, and virtual reality. The course also involves a Media Lab in which stu-
dents will learn how to navigate in dataspace as well as how to create hypertexts that use sounds, images,
and videos. Class discussions will be based on readings selected by the instructor and websites identifies by
students.
Requirements: midterm project, weekly media lab, and final multimedia project.
No prerequisites.
Satisfies one semester of Division II requirement. Does not fulfill the requirement for studio art.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF TAYLOR
EXPR 252(S) Service, Community, and Self
The purpose of this student-initiated, student-run course is not to evangelize community service as undisput-
edly good, but to challenge conceptions of "service" and motivations to "serve." V
olunteer experiences inte-
grated with reflection are a vehicle for questioning one's conception of self and relations to a community.
Thus, this course is directed not only to students who want to enter the field of social work, but to anyone who
pays taxes, votes, and is a participating member of society. Students integrate active participation in a com-
Interdepartmental Program
­ 222 ­
munity social service organization with readings and class discussions. The readings are interdisciplinary,
ranging fromfictionandautobiographies,tosociologicalstudiesand political-economicanalyses.
Requirements include four to five hours of community service work per week, facilitation of two class dis-
cussions, journal entries, a group collaborative presentation, a short paper, and a final long paper or project of
equivalent effort.
SatisfiesonesemesterofDivisionIIrequirement.
Hour: TBA TBA
EXPR 253(S) Rhetoric and the Essay: Non-Fiction Writing
"I am never clear about any matter as when I have just finished writing about it."
--James Van Allen
In this course, we will examine different models of non-fiction writing and apply them to our own methods
of writing. Two popular views of non-fiction writing hold that good writing results from either "divine
inspiration" or strict adherence to rhetorical rules. Good writing, however, is a product of knowledge of
writing conventions and experience. We will explore different writing techniques through reading works
by essayists including Orwell, Updike, Dillard, Kincaid, Gates, and Will. Recognizing that the best way to
learn to write well is to write, we will practice every step of the writing process, from the initial conceptual
stage to revision.
Requirements: frequent short writing assignments (some in class) and a longer final paper.
The course is open to students in all classes who have interest in non-fiction writing. Enrollment limited to
15.
Satisfies one semester of Division I requirement.
Hour: TBA Members of the Writing Workshop (Student Coordinators)
R. BELL (Sponsor)
EXPR 273(S) Sacred Geographies (Same as Anthropology 273 and Religion 273)*
Bringing together insights from anthropology, art history, and religious studies, this course will explore the
geography of sacred space: the spatial organization of meaning across time and the world as humans have
again and again made a division between sacred and profane. We will attend to this process as expressed in
the geography, social dynamics, and architecture of sacred space, noting patterns of similarity and differ-
ence among and between the "little traditions" of folk and traditional societies as well as the "great tradi-
tions" of universalist and modern societies. Having developed an analytical vocabulary for understanding
sacred space, we will put our model in motion by examining the dynamics of change, redefinition, and con-
testation that have so often surrounded the history of sacred spaces.
The course begins by introducing students of theoretical models derived from our several disciplines, enab-
ling them to understand the form and character of sacred spaces. Authors to be read may include Eliade, Ba-
chelard, van Gennep, Metcalf, Tuan, Durkheim, Lefebvre, and Harvey. We will develop analytical tools for
interpreting the meaning and aesthetics of sacred space as it is constituted in the natural landscape (e.g.,
sacred mountains, rivers, trees, etc.) artificially-constructed places (e.g., temples, monuments, shrines, etc.)
and the intersection of the two. We will pay particular attention to the ways boundaries around sacred spaces
are created, maintained, and violated, as well as passages to and from sacred places (e.g., pilgrimage).
Once these interpretive tools have been developed, we will turn our attention to the ways in which religious
and political conflict are both aggravated and mediated through sacred space. Specific processes to be ex-
amined include: exile and diaspora--what happens when a people are cut off from their sacred space; con-
testation over sacred space in places like Jerusalem and the Babri Mosque in India; supercession in which a
late-coming tradition marks its relation to earlier traditions, as in the construction of the Mexican national
cathedral on the ruins of an Aztec temple in the heart of Mexico City; colonization, as in the creation of new
mosques in British and American cities; and cooperation, in which a sacred space allows for the establish-
ment of links between competing groups and divided ideologies, as in Mecca or monuments such as the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial. We will conclude with attention to the role of these four processes in contem-
porary society, where diaspora, contestation, supercession and cooperation continue to have wide relevance
for articulating the character of social conflict, reconciliation, and change.
Requirements: full attendance and participation and three 4- to 6-page essays.
Lecture and discussion.Open to all classes without prerequisite.
Satisfies one semester of Division II requirement.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR DARROW and JUST
EXPR 280(F) Myth (Same as Anthropology 280 and Classics 280)
(See under Classics for full description.)
Satisfies one semester of Division II requirement.
EXPR 313 Appearance/Reality (Same as Philosophy 313 and Religion 313) (Not offered
2000-2001)
(See under Religion for full description.)
EXPR 314(S) Complexity (Same as Religion 314 and Philosophy 354)
(See under Religion for full description.)
EXPR 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
­ 223 ­
JEWISH STUDIES
Advisory Faculty: Professor: DARROW. Associate Professors: CHRISTENSEN, JUST. Assistant
Professor: KRAUS, Coordinator, LEVENE.
Williams offers a variety of courses specifically directed to students interested in Jewish Studies. In
addition, many other courses incorporate topics relevant to the study of Judaism. Students are encouraged
to integrate courses from diverse disciplines with a focus in Jewish history, religion, literature, language,
and thought. Thus, rather than emphasizing a particular method of inquiry, Jewish Studies courses bring
together students from different departments who share interest in a common topic. As a result, Jewish
subjects become analyzed from a multitude of perspectives (religious, philosophical, political, historical,
psychological, literary, etc.). Williams offers two types of courses related to Jewish Studies: Courses direct-
ly focusing on Jewish topics and courses partially devoted to some aspect of Judaism.
[ ] Courses not offered in 2000-2001 are listed in brackets.
Courses in Jewish Studies
[ArtH 363 The Holocaust Visualized] E. Grudin
Classics/Religion 201/Literary Studies 219 Reading the Hebrew Bible Kraus
Classic/Religion 207 Biblical Interpretation in Classical Antiquity Kraus
[Classics/Religion 208 The Hellenistic World and the Emergence of Rabbinic Judaism] Kraus
CRHE 201-202 Hebrew (offered if tutor available)
[English 344 Imagining American Jews] L. Graver
Religion/Classics 203 Introduction to Judaism Levene
Religion 206 Judaism and the Critique of Modernity Levene
Religion 284 Imitating God: Wisdom and Virtue in Jewish Thought Levene
Courses Partially Related to Jewish Studies
[Classics/Religion 274 Women's Religious Experiences in the Ancient Mediterranean World] Buell
(Deals extensively with Jewish women in antiquity.)
German 302 Growing Up Under the Nazis: Remembering as Revision Druxes
History 228 (formerly 209) Europe in the Twentieth Century Waters
(One of the topics is World War II and the Holocaust.)
History 238 Germany in the Twentieth Century Kohut
History 425/Religion 215 East Meets West in the Middle Ages: The First Crusade Goldberg
[History 438 (formerly 353) Nazi Germany] Kohut
(Discusses the Holocaust.)
History 487T (formerly 374T) The Second World War:
Origins, Course, Outcomes, and Meaning Wood
(Discusses the Holocaust.)
[Political Science 244 Middle East Politics: State Formation and Nationalism] M. Lynch
Religion/Classics 209 The Religious Landscape of the Roman Mediterranean Kraemer
Religion 231/History 209 (formerly 275) The Origins of Islam:
God, Empire and Apocalypse Darrow
(Discusses the Jewish context in which Islam arose.)
[Religion/Classics 274 Women's Religious Experiences in the Ancient Mediterranean] Buell
Religion 281 Theism, Atheism, and Existentialism Levene
[Religion 288 Monasteries, Yeshivas, and other Universities:
Religion and the Nature of Education] Dreyfus
Croghan Professorship
Each year, in addition to the regular course offerings listed above, Williams sponsors the Croghan Bi-
centennial Visiting Professor in Religion who offers one course in Judaism and/or Christianity. This year's
Croghan Professor is Ross Kraemer, Professor of Religious Studies at the University of Pennsylvania. Past
Croghan Professors have taught courses on the Mishnah (Shaye Cohen) and the historical Jesus (John Do-
minic Crossan).
Overseas Studies
Studying in Israel is highly recommended for students interested in Jewish Studies. Many students have
spent a semester or year at Hebrew University. In Winter Study 2001, there will be a travel course to the
Middle East, Classics/Religion 025 Israel and Jordan: Intercultural Interchange, Ancient and Modern.
Funding
The Bronfman Fund for Judaic Studies was established in 1980 by Edgar M. Bronfman '50, Samuel
Bronfman II '75, and Matthew Bronfman '80. The Bronfman Fund provides opportunities for the Wil-
liams community to learn about Jewish history and culture, both within the College's formal curriculum
and through the planning of major events on Jewish themes.
The Morris Wiener and Stephen R. Wiener '56 Fund for Jewish Studies was established in 1997
through the estate of Stephen R. Wiener '56. The Wiener gifts have provided an endowment to support a
faculty position in modern Jewish thought, and are used to underwrite an annual lecture, forum or event
relevant to contemporary Jewish life.
Latin-American Studies, Leadership Studies
­ 224 ­
LATIN-AMERICAN STUDIES
Advisory Committee: Professors: BELL-VILLADA, M. F. BROWN. Associate Professor: MAHON.
Assistant Professors: CONNING**, FOIAS*, KITTLESON, PAGÁN.
Although Williams does not have a formal concentration in Latin-American Studies, the College offers
a wide range of courses that explore the history, languages, and cultures of Iberoamerica. Students who are
interested in Latin America are encouraged to develop proficiency in Spanish through the courses offered
by the Department of Romance Languages. The following courses expose students to the central themes of
Latin-American history and to the region's contributions to the contemporary world.
Concepts Courses
Anthropology 101 The Scope of Anthropology
Economics 204/Environmental Studies 234 Economic Development in Poor Countries
Recommended Core Course in Latin-American Studies
Spanish 112 Latin-American Civilizations (Conducted in Spanish)
Latin-American History and Culture
Anthropology 215 The Secrets of Ancient Peru: Archaeology of South America
Anthropology 216 Native Peoples of Latin America
Anthropology 217 Mesoamerican Civilizations
Economics 226 Economic Development and Change in Latin America
English/American Studies 218 Introduction to U.S. Latina and Latino Writing
History 148 (formerly 102) The Mexico Revolution: 1910 to NAFTA
History 242 (formerly 287) Latin America from Conquest to Independence
History 243 (formerly 288) Modern Latin America, 1822 to the Present
History 249 (formerly 225) The Caribbean from Slavery to Independence: A Comparison of Empires
History 286 (formerly 250)/American Studies 250 Introduction to U.S. Latino Studies
History 343 (formerly 328) Gender and History in Latin America
History 344 (formerly 305) Latin-American Revolutions and the United States
History 346 (formerly 314) History of Modern Brazil, 1822 to the Present
History 367 (formerly 342) Social and Economic History of the Southwest, From Pre-Contact to
American Occupation
History 386 (formerly 317) Intellectual Traditions of Chicano Nationalism
History 387 (formerly 211) Puerto Ricans in the United States
History 443 (formerly 355) Slavery, Race, and Ethnicity in Latin America
Political Science 246 Contemporary Mexican Politics (Deleted 2000-2001)
Political Science 344 Rebels and Revolution in Latin America
Political Science 349T Cuba and the United States
Spanish 203 Major Latin-American Authors: 1880 to the Present
Spanish 205/Literary Studies 215 The Latin-American Novel in Translation
Spanish 306T Latino Writing: Literature by U.S. Hispanics
Spanish 402 Studies in Modern Latin-American Literature
Study Abroad
Students interested in Latin America are encouraged to pursue junior-year programs in Mexico, Colom-
bia, Ecuador, and elsewhere in Central and South America. The College's foreign study program in Ma-
drid also offers exposure to courses in Latin-American literature and history.
Contract Majors
In consultation with members of the advisory committee, exceptionally qualified students may develop
a Contract Major in Latin-American Studies.
LEADERSHIP STUDIES
Chair, Professor GEORGE R. GOETHALS
Advisory Committee: Professors: ART, BUCKY, COOK***, DUNN, G. GOETHALS, S. GRAVER,
HOPPIN, JACKALL**, PASACHOFF, WOOD. Associate Professors: BURGER, CHRISTENSEN,
ROSENHEIM. Assistant Professors: MCALLISTER*, REEVES**. Lecturers: ENGEL,
MATHEWS§§.
Leadership Studies explores the phenomena of leadership from a wide range of historical, cultural, orga-
nizational and intellectual domains. Questions about leadership are pursued in the curricular cluster de-
scribed below, and through visits with guest leaders in classes, conferences and lectures, and at informal
social occasions. There are ample opportunities for students to become involved with leaders who are Wil-
liams College alumni and, through several experiential courses, to develop their leadership skills and apply
them to socially constructive ends.
Leadership Studies
­ 225 ­
The interdisciplinary nature of the cluster courses allows individuals to study leadership within contexts
most suited to their major area of study. Each course challenges the individual to acknowledge the complex
social, psychological, ethical, and aesthetic issues facing leaders of many kinds. The recommended curric-
ulum entails completion of two cluster courses, two Leadership Studies Electives, and EXPR 402, Topics
in Leadership. Leadership Studies Winter Study courses can be substituted for either cluster courses or
electives. Students may pursue a contract major in Leadership Studies if desired.
Cluster courses were designed especially for Leadership Studies and place a strong emphasis on leader-
ship issues, while electives are courses from a range of departments or programs that consider some aspect
of leadership in a particular domain. EXPR 402 allows students to develop an independent project that
explores in depth one of the many facets of leadership.
Interested students should contact the Chair of Leadership Studies to discuss their curricular goals. Stu-
dents should also note that due to the interdisciplinary nature of Leadership Studies, many of the courses
carry the prefix EXPR.
Cluster Courses
ANSO 352 Following the Leader: Charisma, Tradition and Bureaucracy Jackall
ArtH 351 The Modern Art World:
The Challenge of Leadership in the Midst of Chaos Mathews
English/American Studies 124 Exemplary Lives Kleiner and Rosenheim
English 378 The Artist in Society S. Graver
French 212 Sister Revolutions in France and America Dunn
History 475 (formerly 356) Modern Warfare and Military Leadership Wood
Political Science 218 Presidential Politics Cook
Psychology 342 Psychology of Leadership G. Goethals
Leadership Studies Electives
Economics 208 Modern Corporate Industry Bradburd
Environmental Studies 302 Environmental Planning and Analysis Workshop
Art and R. Bolton
History 114 (formerly 110) The Mao Cult Reeves
History 372 (formerly 313) The Rise of American Business R. Dalzell
History 382 (formerly 318) The Black Radical Tradition in America Wilder
History 438 (formerly 353) Nazi Germany Kohut
History 456 (formerly 360) Civil War and Reconstruction Dew
History 475 (formerly 356) Modern Warfare and Military Leadership Wood
Music 137 Great Conductors/Great Orchestras K. C. Roberts
Philosophy 101 Introduction to Moral and Political Philosophy Kojen, White
Political Science 213 Theory and Practice of Civil Rights Protest A. Willingham
Political Science 230 American Political Thought Reinhardt
Political Science 310/Psychology 345 Political Psychology Marcus
Political Science 344 Rebels and Revolution in Latin America Mahon
Religion 211 Paul and the Beginnings of Christianity Buell
Leadership Studies Winter Study Courses
EXPR 010 Corporate Leadership and Social Responsibility G. Goethals and Kennedy
EXPR/Astronomy 011 Leadership in Astronomy: From Copernicus to
Hubble and the Age of the Universe Pasachoff
EXPR/Political Science 012 The Roosevelt Century Burns and Dunn
EXPR 013 Managing Non-Profits: An Insider's Look Czerniak and Lipp
EXPR 018 Wilderness Leadership Lewis
EXPR/Geosciences/Political Science 019 Service Learning C. Johnson and Karabinos
EXPR 025 Williams in Washington: Leadership in Our Nation's Capitol Carlson and O'Doherty
EXPR/Political Science 021 Public Affairs Internships: Power, Authority and
Decisionmaking in the Public Sector Consolini and C. Johnson
EXPR 402(S) Topics in Leadership
A coordinated set of independent studies on leadership. Students should consult with the chair of the Lead-
ership Studies cluster and propose an independent study on a topic of his or her choosing. Suitable topics
might grow out of earlier Leadership Studies courses. The chair will arrange an appropriate independent
study supervisor among the faculty involved in the cluster. Individual students and their faculty advisors
will meet during the semester with other students enrolled in the course and their faculty advisors for dis-
cussions of the various independent projects.
Requirements: extensive independent project and presentation of project to other students and faculty in-
volved in the course.
Prerequisites: two Leadership Studies cluster courses and permission of the instructor.
Hour: TBA G. GOETHALS
Linguistics, Literary Studies
­ 226 ­
LINGUISTICS (Div. I)
Coordinator: CORNELIUS C. KUBLER
Courses in linguistics enable students to explore language from a variety of perspectives: the internal
workings of language as a system of communication, the role of language in society, the history of lan-
guage groups and specific languages, and the applicability of scientific knowledge about language to vari-
ous human endeavors.
Linguistics offers neither a major nor a concentration, but its courses complement study in several other
disciplines: Anthropology, Psychology, Sociology, English, Literary Studies, and all the foreign languages.
Anthropology majors can receive major credit for Linguistics 101. Majors in German Studies may receive
major credit for a linguistics course with the special permission of the department chair.
Knowledge of foreign languages is helpful but not required for Linguistics 101.
LING 101(S) Introduction to Linguistics (Same as Anthropology 107)
This course is designed to provide an introduction to the scientific study of language, particularly its
theoretical debates, methodology, and relationship to other disciplines. With this aim in mind, we will ex-
amine the analytic methods and major findings of various subfields of linguistics, including phonetics,
phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics, language change, and language acquisition.
Class format: lecture and discussion.
Requirements: participation in discussions, weekly homework, a midterm exam, a collaborative project,
and a final exam.
No prerequisites.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF AUSTIN
LING 202 Sociolinguistics (Same as ANSO 230) (Not offered 2000-2001)
In this course, we will investigate the complex relationship between language and its social context. The
topics that we will discuss include the development of pidgins and creoles, multilingualism, language con-
tact and variation, and the effects of variables such as a speaker's gender, ethnicity and socioeconomic
status on language change and use.
Class format: lecture and discussion.
Requirements: active class participation, problem sets, a class presentation and a final project.
No prerequisites.
AUSTIN
LING 431 Introduction to Chinese Linguistics (Same as Chinese 431) (Not offered
2000-2001)*
(See under Chinese for full description.)
LITERARY STUDIES (Div. I)
Chair, Assistant Professor JULIE A. CASSIDAY
Professors: GOLDSTEIN, B. KIEFFER*, G. NEWMAN, STAMELMAN. Associate Professor:
DRUXES**. Assistant Professors: CARTER-SANBORN, CASSIDAY, ROUHI, SILBER*.
Literary Studies provides students with the opportunity to study the history and theory of literature in an
international context. The program offers both a regular nine-course major and a selection of courses for all
students.
MAJOR
The Literary Studies major combines focused study of a single national language literature with wide
ranging exploration of literary forms across national, linguistic, and historical boundaries. Each student
who declares the major must select a single foreign language as his or her specialty. The languages current-
ly available are: French, German, Ancient Greek, Latin, Russian, and Spanish. Each student will also be
paired with a faculty advisor, usually the Chair, with whom he or she shall meet at least once a semester in
order to discuss how best to fulfill the requirements for the major.
Nine courses are required for the major:
Three of the following five:
English 105-121
Literary Studies 111 Introduction to Cultural Studies: Traveling Fictions--Encountering the Oth-
er Through Tourism, Time Travel, Exile
Literary Studies 202 Literary Genres: The Nature of Narrative
Literary Studies 203 Literary Movements: European Modernism: Modernity and Its Discontents
Literary Studies 205 Literature and Theory: Literature and Psychoanalysis
Literary Studies 402 The Ordeal of Freedom
Literary Studies
­ 227 ­
Three literature courses in the student's specialty language, in which texts are read in the original. At
least one of the three must be above the 200 level.
Two literature courses in which most of the course work concerns literatures other than that of the
student's specialty language. These courses may be selected from Literary Studies offerings or
from other literature departments and must be approved by the student's major advisor. Only one
may be in English or American literature. Among the offerings of other departments that are pos-
sible, the following employ readings in English translation and are especially appropriate to the
major:
Chinese 243 Gender Issues in Traditional Chinese Literature
Chinese 244 Writer and Society in Twentieth-Century China
Classics 101/Literary Studies 107 Greek Literature
Classics 102/Literary Studies 108 Roman Literature
Classics 103/Literary Studies 223/Theatre 311 Greek and Roman Drama
Religion 201 Reading the Hebrew Bible
Religion 211 Paul and the Beginnings of Christianity
Spanish 306T Latino Writing: Literature by U.S. Hispanics
Russian 203 Nineteenth-Century Russian Literature in Translation
Students who are considering a major in Literary Studies should aim to acquire intermediate level profi-
ciency in their specialty language by the end of the sophomore year. They should also complete the 100-
and 200-level core course requirements by the end of their junior year. They are expected to take the ver-
sion of 402 offered in their senior year, even if they have previously taken 402.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN LITERARY STUDIES
To achieve honors in Literary Studies a student must prepare a thesis, usually 50-75 pages long, during
the senior year (LIT 493-W031-494). The topic must be comparative and/or theoretical in approach and
must include a significant amount of material in the literature of the student's specialty language.
Students must apply to the advisory committee of the program for permission to pursue an honors proj-
ect. The application must be submitted before the beginning of the student's senior year
COURSES
Literary Studies 111, Traveling Fictions, 202, The Nature of Narrative, 203, European Modernism, and
205, Literature and Psychoanalysis are the core courses of the program. They provide a foundation for the
study of comparative literature and literary theory. Literary Studies 111 and 205 are open to all students
without prerequisite. Literary Studies 202 and 203 are open to all students who have completed English
101 (or the equivalent) or Literary Studies 111 or 205.
Other Literary Studies courses are also generally open to all students. Any prerequisites are given in the
individual course descriptions.
LIT 107(F) Greek Literature (Same as Classics 101)
(See under Classics for full description.)
LIT 108(S) Roman Literature (Same as Classics 102)
(See under Classics for full description.)
LIT 111 Introduction to Cultural Studies: Traveling Fictions--Encountering the Other
Through Tourism, Time Travel, Exile (Not offered 2000-2001)
The course will provide an introduction to cross-cultural and interdisciplinary analysis by familiarizing
students with comparative and theoretical approaches to Literary Studies. Explorers, migrants, the home-
less, refugees, tourists, space travelers all share the crossing of boundaries, but in the process they also
reveal cultural codes and biases which their own societies instilled in them. Through travel, new hybrid
cultural forms arise and the mass displacement of people leads to "global composite communities"
(McCannell, 1992), tourism similarly transforms and fictionalizes the global environment through simulat-
ing/reinventing the "primitive." Examples of such colonialist reshaping are rituals performed for tourists,
the marketing of indigenous handicrafts, safaris, and even constructing sanitized replicas of the Jungle
complete with waterfalls and a volcano. Beginning with nineteenth-century travelers to the Orient and
Africa (Flaubert and Kingsley), we will trace how Europeans look at the Near East and Africa to contrast
their perspectives with how colonial subjects look back once they themselves be- gin to travel. We will also
study involuntary forms of travel such as homelessness, exile, and displacement. Texts will include Mary
Kingsley's Travels in West Africa, Chatwin's Songlines, several films, short stories by Sandra Cisneros and
Oscar Hijuelos, Behar's Translated Woman, Grass's Show Your Tongue, Caryl Phillips' The European
Tribe, and Maxine Hong Kingston's China Men. Theory by Edward Said, bell hooks, Ronald Takaki and
others will be studied in conjunction with the primary readings.
Requirements: two short papers, several short multimedia exercises, and a 10-page final paper.
LIT 112(S) Introduction to Cultural Studies: Adultery and the Fallen Woman
This course will provide an introduction to cross-cultural and interdisciplinary analysis by familiarizing
students with comparative and theoretical approaches to Literary Studies. We will undertake this work by
Literary Studies
­ 228 ­
examining the Adulteress and her role in literature from Antiquity to present. Our readings will include the
Bible, Chaucer, Cervantes, Flaubert, Hawthorne, Tolstoy, and Chekhov, as well as medieval Chinese and
contemporary African authors. We will also view several films that focus on the Adulteress, such as
Double Indemnity and Crucified Lovers. To complement these literary and cinematic texts, we will read
historical and theoretical works, which will allow us not only to place the fictional Adulteress in her ap-
propriate cultural context, but also to forge meaningful links between the different incarnations of the
Adulteress that we will encounter during the semester. All reading in English.
Requirements: active class participation, three short papers, and a final 10-page paper.
No prerequisites.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF CASSIDAY
LIT 202(F) Literary Genres: The Nature of Narrative (Same as English 203)
This course focuses on the nature and function of narrative using a wide range of texts from different tradi-
tions and genres. We will analyze the ways in which each work of fiction makes use of narrative in order to
communicate its thematic concerns, and we will accompany several of the readings with pertinent theoreti-
cal texts. The works of fiction (to be read in either one or both semesters) will include stories from Antiqui-
ty, a picaresque novel from the sixteenth century, short stories by Cervantes, and selections representing the
Enlightenment, Realism, Modernism, and contemporary literature (examples include Voltaire, Jane Aus-
ten, Gogol, Pushkin, Dostoevsky, Flaubert, Kafka, and Kundera). We will also read a selection of theoreti-
cal and critical texts focusing primarily, but not exclusively, upon literary narrative. These will be chosen
(in one or both semesters) from the works of Plato, Aristotle Ortega, Freud, Chatman, Lotman, Wellek,
Iser, Genette, Todorov, Culler, Foucault, Barthes, and Felman. All readings in English.
Principal requirements: active class participation, two short papers, and a final paper of l0-15 pages.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MW CARTER-SANBORN
LIT 203(S) Literary Movements: European Modernism: Modernity and Its Discontents
This course will explore literary and cultural modernism as an international phenomenon from 1860 to the
1960s. In the context of the profound social and historical transformations of Western culture in this period,
we will examine the works of literary, cinematic and theoretical creators who have come to shape our "mo-
dernity"--the consciousness we have of ourselves, of the worlds we live in, and of the temporal rhythms
that determine the cadence of late-nineteenth- and twentieth-century life. Readings will include: Freud,
Baudelaire, Dostoevsky, Proust, Kafka, Apollinaire, Rilke, Pirandello, Breton, Mann, Woolf, Joyce, Beck-
ett, and Montale, among others. Films will include Modern Times, Nosferatu, and The Andalusian Dog.
Theoretical essays by Benjamin, Bataille, Kristeva, and Barthes will be considered as well. We will investi-
gate the imaginative formal responses of modernism to urban alienation and technological innovation, the
personal and cultural resistance to the hegemony of bourgeois rationality, the displacement of religion and
other forms of traditional spirituality, the persistence of redemptive, though endlessly unsatisfied, desire,
the empowerment of the female voice, the horror and despair of world war, the fragmenting of an inte-
grated sense of self, the proliferation of multiple perspectives in perception and narration, the irremediable
break with a coherent past, the reconception of memory, the privileging of the present, and the movement
from modernism to postmodernism. All readings in English.
Requirements: active class participation, one class presentation, one hour-exam, one 6-page paper, and one
final 10- to 12- page paper.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR STAMELMAN
LIT 205(S) Literature and Theory: Literature and Psychoanalysis
This course will explore the literary roots and effects of the explosion of the unconscious into conscious-
ness at the turn of the twentieth century. Freud's psychoanalytic revolution will reveal itself to be more
precisely a significant event in an evolutionary process. Freud himself repeatedly acknowledged his intel-
lectual debt to literature. We will examine psychologically-minded literary texts that precede and, in some
cases, preview Freud's theories, those theories themselves, and texts (theoretical and literary) that reflect
the immense influence of psychoanalysis in the twentieth century. Authors might include Sophocles,
Shakespeare, Goethe, Hoffmann, Flaubert, Carroll, Kafka, Duras, Garcia Marquez, Morrison.
Requirements: active class participation, reading journals, two short and one longer paper.
No prerequisites.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR G. NEWMAN
LIT 215(F) The Latin-American Novel in Translation (Same as Spanish 205)*
(See under Romance Languages--Spanish for full description.)
LIT 217(F) Issues in Literary and Cultural Theory: The Fashioning of Fashion: Theory and
Practice (Same as French 215)
(See under Romance Languages--French for full description.)
LIT 219(F) Reading the Hebrew Bible (Same as Classics 201 and Religion 201)
(See under Classics for full description.)
LIT 223 Greek and Roman Drama (Same as Classics 103 and Theatre 311) (Not offered
2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
(See under Classics for full description.)
Literary Studies, Materials Science Studies
­ 229 ­
LIT 234 Post-Mao Literature and Culture (Same as Chinese 234) (Not offered 2000-2001)*
(See under Asian Studies--Chinese for full description.)
LIT 275 China's Greatest Novel (Same as Chinese 275) (Not offered 2000-2001)*
(See under Asian Studies--Chinese for full description.)
LIT 312(S) Inventing the Renaissance (Same as English 312)
(See under English for full description.)
LIT 317 Dante (Same as English 304) (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
(See under English for full description.)
Prerequisite: English 101 (or the equivalent), Literary Studies 111, or any 200-level Literary Studies
course.
LIT 391(F) Kafka and His Descendants (Same as English 391)
(See under English for full description.)
LIT 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
LIT 402(S) The Ordeal of Freedom
"But on the bridges of Paris I, too, learned that I was afraid of freedom." (Clamence, in Albert Camus' The
Fall). Oppression, censorship, adversity, and bad luck, when experienced by talented writers, often lead to
the production of excellent literature. Many world masterpieces were written--and continue to be pro-
duced --in part as a response to authors' dire personal or political afflictions. But good literature is more
complex than just a response to grave adversity, be it personal or political; good fiction is produced also by
people who have no catastrophes, wars, disasters, or serious personal grievances to write about. What is the
critical difference between these two contexts: writing with no fear of censorship, nor in response to an
identified grievance, versus writing in fear or in response to misfortune? Are the demons fought by a visi-
bly oppressed or unhappy writer necessarily more frightening than the demons fought by an author who, to
all appearances, is not oppressed, nor overwhelmingly distressed? How does one even begin to identify,
evaluate, compare, and critique fiction in these slippery but significant areas? We will read works by Cer-
vantes, Camus, Havel, Akhmatova, Paul Auster, Coetzee, other writers from Canada, Iran, China, Latin
America (texts can be added or substituted based on student interest) in an effort to answer not only some
of the questions above, but also other valuable ones that will surely arise along the way. Pertinent theoreti-
cal readings will be included.
Requirements: meaningful class participation, class presentations, and a research paper.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR ROUHI
LIT 493(F)-W031, W031-494(S) Senior Thesis
MATERIALS SCIENCE STUDIES
Advisory Faculty: Professor: KARABINOS***, D. LYNCH. Associate Professor: STRAIT***. Assistant
Professors: AALBERTS*, S. BOLTON, L. PARK, SCHOFIELD.
Materials Science is an interdisciplinary field which combines microscopic physics and chemis-
try in order to understand and control the properties of materials such as plastics, semiconductors,
metals, liquid crystals, and biomaterials. Williams students with an interest in the properties of ma-
terials or in pursuing careers in materials science or a variety of engineering disciplines would bene-
fit from following the courses in this cluster.
Core Course in Materials Science:
Chemistry/Physics 318 Materials Science: The Chemistry and Physics of Materials
Cluster Courses:
Biology 101 The Cell
Chemistry 201-202 Organic Chemistry
Chemistry 301 Physical Chemistry: Thermodynamics
Chemistry 302 Physical Chemistry: Structure and Dynamics
Chemistry/Environmental Studies 304 Instrumental Methods of Analysis
Chemistry 305 Inorganic/Organometallic Chemistry
Geosciences 202 Mineralogy and Geochemistry
Mathematics 210 Differential Equations and Vector Calculus
Mathematics 315 Groups and Characters
Physics 201 Electricity and Magnetism
Physics 202 Waves and Optics
Physics 210 Mathematical Methods for Scientists
Physics 301 Introductory Quantum Physics
Physics 405T Electromagnetic Theory
Physics 411T Classical Mechanics and Fluid Mechanics
Physics 451 Solid State Physics
­ 230 ­
MATHEMATICS AND STATISTICS (Div. III)
Chair, Professor OLGA R. BEAVER
Professors: ADAMS*, O. BEAVER, GARRITY*, V. HILL, LENHART***, MORGAN, SILVA.
Associate Professors: BURGER, R. DE VEAUX, S. JOHNSON. Assistant Professors: CHKHENKELI,
LOEPP, REITER, WITTWER.
MAJOR
The major in Mathematics is designed to meet two goals: to introduce some of the central ideas in a
variety of areas of mathematics and statistics, and to develop problem-solving ability by teaching students
to combine creative thinking with rigorous reasoning.
Students are urged to consult with the department faculty on choosing courses appropriate to an individ-
ualized program of study.
REQUIREMENTS (nine courses plus colloquium)
Calculus (two courses)
104 Calculus II
105 Multivariable Calculus
Except in unusual circumstances, students planning to major in mathematics should complete the
calculus sequence (Mathematics 103, 104, 105) before the end of the sophomore year, at the latest.
Applied/Discrete Mathematics (one course)
210 Differential Equations and Vector Calculus or
243 Statistics and Data Analysis or
251 Discrete Mathematics or
a more advanced elective in discrete or applied mathematics, with prior departmental approval:
Mathematics 305, 306, 315, 346, 354, 361, 433, 452, or an appropriate course from another depart-
ment as listed in the notes below.
Note: Mathematics 251 is required in Computer Science, and Mathematics 210 is recommended in
other sciences, but double majors should understand that no course may count toward both majors;
Mathematics 243 is recommended for students interested in statistics or actuarial science. Physics
210 can be used to satisfy this requirement.
Core Courses (three courses)
211 Linear Algebra
301 Real Analysis or 305 Applied Real Analysis
312 Abstract Algebra or 315 Groups and Characters
Completion (three courses plus colloquium)
Senior Major Course (any 400-level course taken in the senior year or in exceptional circumstances, with
the prior permission of the department, in the junior year)
Two electives from courses numbered 243 or 300 and above.
Weekly participation as a senior in the Mathematics Colloquium, in which all senior majors present talks
on mathematical or statistical topics of their choice.
NOTES
In some cases, an appropriate course from another department may be substituted for one of the elec-
tives, with prior permission of the Mathematics and Statistics Department. In any case, at least eight
courses must be taken in mathematics and statistics at Williams. These can include courses taken away,
with prior permission. Students with transfer credit should contact the department about special arrange-
ments.
APPLIED MATHEMATICS OR OTHER SCIENCES
Students interested in applied mathematics or other sciences, including economics, should consider
Mathematics 210, 243, 244, 251, 305, 306, 315, 323, 342, 346, 354, 361, 433, 442, 448, 452, and addition-
al appropriate courses from outside Mathematics, including possibilities such as Chemistry 301, Computer
Science 256, Computer Science 361, Economics 255, Physics 201, Physics 202 or more advanced physics
courses.
BUSINESS AND FINANCE
Students interested in careers in business or finance should consider Mathematics 170 or 370, as well as
courses in statistics and related areas such as Mathematics 143, 243, 244, 342, 344, 346, 442, and 443.
Since these courses address different needs, students should consult with the instructors to determine which
seem to be most appropriate for individuals.
ENGINEERING
Students interested in engineering should consider the courses for applied mathematics immediately
above, with Mathematics 210 and 305 especially recommended. Williams has exchange and joint pro-
Mathematics and Statistics
­ 231 ­
grams with good engineering schools. Interested students should consult the section on engineering near
the beginning of the Bulletin and the Williams pre-engineering advisor for further information.
GRADUATE SCHOOL IN MATHEMATICS
Students interested in continuing their study of mathematics in graduate school should take Mathemat-
ics 301 and 312. Mathematics 302 and 324 are strongly recommended. Many of the 400-level courses
would be useful, particularly ones that involve algebra and analysis. Honors theses are encouraged. Read-
ing knowledge of a foreign language (French, German, or Russian) is helpful.
STATISTICS AND ACTUARIAL SCIENCE
Students interested in statistics or actuarial science should consider Mathematics 243, 244, 342, 344,
346, 348, 442, 443, 448 and Economics 255. Additionally, students should consider taking some number
of the actuarial exams given by the Society of Actuaries, which can constitute part of an honors program in
actuarial studies (see section on honors below).
TEACHING
Students interested in teaching mathematics at the elementary or secondary school level should consider
Mathematics 243, 285, 313, 325, 381, and practice as a tutor or teaching assistant. Winter study courses
that provide a teaching practicum are also highly recommended.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN MATHEMATICS
The degree with honors in Mathematics is awarded to the student who has demonstrated outstanding
intellectual achievement in a program of study which extends beyond the requirements of the major. The
principal considerations for recommending a student for the degree with honors will be: Mastery of core
material and skills, breadth and, particularly, depth of knowledge beyond the core material, ability to pur-
sue independent study of mathematics or statistics, originality in methods of investigation, and, where ap-
propriate, creativity in research.
An honors program normally consists of two semesters and a WSP (031) of independent research, cul-
minating in a typed thesis and a presentation. Under certain circumstances, the honors work can consist of
coordinated study involving a regular course and one semester plus a WSP (030) of independent study,
culminating in a typed "minithesis" and a presentation. At least one semester should be in addition to the
major requirements.
An honors program in actuarial studies requires significant achievement on four appropriate examina-
tions of the Society of Actuaries and giving a second colloquium talk. Written work is a possible compo-
nent.
Highest honors will be reserved for the rare student who has displayed exceptional ability, achievement
or originality. Such a student usually will have written a thesis, or pursued actuarial honors and written a
minithesis. An outstanding student who writes a minithesis, or pursues actuarial honors and writes a paper,
might also be considered.
Prospective honors students are urged to consult with their departmental advisor at the time of registra-
tion in the spring of the sophomore or at the beginning of the junior year to arrange a program of study that
could lead to the degree with honors. By the time of registration during spring of the junior year, the student
must have requested a faculty member to be honors advisor and must have obtained the department's ap-
proval of formal admission to the honors program. Such approval depends on both the record and the
promise of the applicant. It is conditional on continuing progress.
The recommendation for honors is usually announced at the end of the spring term. Participation in the
honors program does not guarantee a recommendation for honors. The decision is based not only on suc-
cessful completion of the honors program but also on the merit of the student's overall record in mathemat-
ics. If the student completes the program during the fall or winter study, the decision may be announced at
the beginning of the spring term, conditional on continuing merit.
ADVANCED PLACEMENT
The Mathematics and Statistics Department attempts to place each student who elects a mathematics
course in that course best suited to the student's preparation and goals. The suggested placement in an
appropriate calculus course is determined by the results of the Advanced Placement Examination (AB or
BC) if the student took one, and any additional available information. A student who receives a 3, 4, or 5 on
the BC examination or a 4 or 5 on the AB examination is ordinarily placed in Mathematics 105. A student
who receives a 1 or 2 on the BC examination or a 2 or 3 on the AB examination is ordinarily placed in
Mathematics 104. Students who have had calculus in high school, whether or not they took the Advanced
Placement Examination, are urged to register for either Mathematics 104 or Mathematics 105. Students
who take an Advanced Placement Exam in statistics should consult the department for placement. In any
event, students registering for mathematics and statistics courses are urged to consult with members of the
department concerning appropriate courses and placement. In general, students are encouraged to enroll in
the most advanced course for which they are qualified: it is much easier to drop back than to jump forward.
The department reserves the right to refuse registration in any course for which the student is determined to
be over-prepared.
Mathematics and Statistics
­ 232 ­
GENERAL REMARKS
Divisional Requirements
All courses may be used to satisfy this requirement.
Alternate Year Courses
Core courses 301, 305, 312, and 315 are normally offered every year. Other 300-level courses may be
offered in alternate years. Senior seminars (400-level courses) are normally offered every two to four years.
Students should check with the department before planning far into the future.
Course Admission
Courses are normally open to all students meeting the prerequisites. Students with questions about the
level at which courses are conducted are invited to consult members of the department.
Course Descriptions
Descriptions of the courses in Computer Science are under that heading. More detailed information on
all of the offerings in the department is available in the Informal Guide to Mathematics Courses at Williams
that can be obtained at the departmental office.
Courses Open on a Pass/Fail Basis
Students taking a mathematics course on a pass/fail basis must meet all therequirementssetforstudents
taking the course on a graded basis.
With the permission of the department, any course offered by the department may be taken on a pass/fail
basis. Permission will not be given to mathematics majors to meet any of the requirements of the major or
honors degree on this basis. However, with the permission of the department, courses taken in the depart-
ment beyond those requirements may be taken on a pass/fail basis.
Graduate School Requirements
An increasing number of graduate and professional schools require mathematics and statistics as a pre-
requisite to admission or to attaining their degree. Students interested in graduate or professional training in
business, medicine, economics, or psychology are advised to find out the requirements in those fields early
in their college careers.
MATH 100(F) Quantitative Studies
This course is intended for all students--first-year students and upperclassmen--who want to strengthen
their basic arithmetic and algebraic skills, and to understand the central concepts of elementary mathemat-
ics. Topics will include: signed numbers, fractions, decimals, percentages, exponents, logarithms, scientific
notation, polynomials, algebraic fractions, linear and quadratic equations, and graphing. Concepts will be
stressed in classroom lectures and discussions; techniques will be developed through daily assignments.
Evaluation will be based primarily on performance on quizzes and exams.
Prerequisite: permission of the instructor.
Depending on his or her performance on the diagnostic test administered at the beginning of the academic
year, a student may be required to take Mathematics 100 or Mathematics 101 as a prerequisite for Biology
101, Chemistry 101, 102, Computer Science 134, Mathematics 102, 103, 143, or Physics 131, 141. How-
ever, a student need not be planning to take one of these additional courses in order to take Mathematics
100 or 101.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF S. JOHNSON
MATH 101(F) Pre-Calculus
The elementary functions--algebraic, logarithmic, and trigonometric--from both a graphical and analytic
point of view.
Evaluation will be based primarily on performance on quizzes and exams.
Prerequisite: permission of the instructor.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF, 12:00-12:50 MWF CHKHENKELI
MATH 103(F,S) Calculus I
Calculus permits the computation of velocities and other instantaneous rates of change by a limiting pro-
cess called differentiation. The same process also solves "max-min" problems: how to maximize profit or
minimize pollution. A second limiting process, called integration, permits the computation of areas and
accumulations of income or medicines. The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus provides a useful and sur-
prising link between the two processes. Subtopics include trigonometry, exponential growth, and loga-
rithms. This is an introductory course for students who have not seen calculus before.
Evaluation will be based primarily on homework, quizzes, and/or exams.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 101 (or demonstrated proficiency on a diagnostic test; see Mathematics 101).
Hour: 8:00-8:50 MWF, 9:00-9:50 MWF First Semester: BURGER
12:00-12:50 MWF Second Semester: CHKHENKELI
MATH 104(F,S) Calculus II
Mastery of calculus requires understanding how integration computes areas and business profit and acquir-
ing a stock of techniques. Further methods solve equations involving derivatives ("differential equations")
for population growth or pollution levels. Exponential and logarithmic functions and trigonometric and
Mathematics and Statistics
­ 233 ­
inverse functions play an important role. This course is the right starting point for students who have seen
derivatives, but not necessarily integrals, before.
Evaluation will be based primarily on homework, quizzes, and/or exams.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 103 or equivalent.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR, 11:00-11:50 MWF First Semester: O. BEAVER, WITTWER
9:55-11:10 TR, 11:20-12:35 TR Second Semester: O. BEAVER
MATH 105(F,S) Multivariable Calculus
Applications of calculus in mathematics, science, economics, psychology, the social sciences, involve sev-
eral variables. This course extends calculus to several variables: vectors, partial derivatives, multiple inte-
grals. There is also a unit on infinite series, sometimes with applications to differential equations. This
course is the right starting point for students who have seen differentiation and integration before.
Evaluationwillbebasedprimarilyonhomework, quizzes,and/orexams. Prerequisite: Mathematics 104 or
equivalent, such as satisfactory performance on an Advanced Placement Examination.
Hour: 8:00-8:50 MWF, 9:00-9:50 MWF, 10:00-10:50 MWF, 11:00-11:50 MWF
First Semester: LOEPP, MORGAN
8:30-9:45 TR, 9:55-11:10 TR Second Semester: SILVA
MATH 143(F) Elementary Statistics and Data Analysis
It is nearly impossible to live in the world today without being inundated with data. Even the most popular
newspapers feature statistics to catch the eye of the passerby, and sports broadcasters overwhelm the listen-
er with arcane statistics. How do we learn to recognize dishonest or even unintentionally distorted repre-
sentations of quantitative information? How are we to reconcile two medical studies with seemingly con-
tradictory conclusions? How many observations do we need in order to make a decision? It is the purpose
of this course to develop an appreciation for and an understanding of the interpretation of data. We will
become familiar with the standard tools of statistical inference including the t-test, the analysis of variance,
and regression, as well as exploratory data techniques. Applications will come from the real world that we
all live in.
Evaluation will be based primarily on performances on quizzes and exams.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 100 (or demonstrated proficiency on a diagnostic test; see Mathematics 100).
Students who have had calculus, and potential Mathematics majors should consider taking Mathematics
243 instead.
Not open for major credit to junior or senior mathematics majors.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1:10-2 W; 2:10-3 W, F; 3:10-4 W, F R. DE VEAUX
MATH 170(F,S) (formerly 202) Mathematics of Finance
This course investigates the mathematics underlying various problems that arise in personal, consumer,
and business finance. Topics include simple and compound interest, periodic loans (such as home mort-
gages and auto loans), present value, future value, bank discounting and rediscounting, amortization, sink-
ing funds, corporate and municipal bonds, perpetual annuities, taxes, and the basic mechanics of life insur-
ance. Students are required to carry out some spreadsheet projects; instruction on the use of these systems
is provided as needed. Although the course does not prepare students for the examinations of the Society of
Actuaries, it is basically actuarial in approach, not a course in "how to invest."
Evaluation will be based primarily on performance in class quizzes, spreadsheet exercises, and exams.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 103 or equivalent. Not open to first-year students. Not open to junior or senior
Mathematics majors except by permission of the instructor. Not open on a pass/fail basis except by prior
written permission of the instructor.
Enrollment limited to 42.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR First Semester: V. HILL
8:30-9:45 TR, 11:20-12:35 TR Second Semester: V. HILL
MATH 180(S) The Art of Mathematical Thinking: An Introduction to the Beauty and Power
of Mathematical Ideas
What is mathematics? How can it enrich and improve your life? What do mathematicians think about and
how do they go about tackling challenging questions? Most people envision mathematicians as people
who solve equations or perform arithmetic. In fact, mathematics is an artistic endeavor which requires both
imagination and creativity. In this course, we will experience what this is all about by discovering various
beautiful branches of mathematics while learning life lessons that will have a positive impact on our lives.
There are two meta-goals for this course: (1) a better perspective into mathematics, and (2) sharper analyti-
cal reasoning to solve problems (both mathematical and nonmathematical). Evaluation will be based pri-
marily on projects, homework assignments, and exams.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 100 (or demonstrated proficiency on a diagnostic test--see Mathematics 100)
or permission of the instructor.
Not open to students who have taken mathematics courses other than Mathematics 100, 101, 103, 143,
170.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF BURGER
MATH 210(S) Differential Equations and Vector Calculus
Historically, much beautiful mathematics has arisen from attempts to explain heat flow, chemical reactions,
biological processes, or magnetic fields. A few ingenious techniques solve a surprisingly large fraction of
Mathematics and Statistics
­ 234 ­
the associated ordinary and partial differential equations. The mystical Pythagorean fascination with ratios
and harmonics is vindicated and applied in Fourier series and integrals. Integrating vectorfields over sur-
faces applies equally to blood flow, gravity, and differential geometry.
Lectures and discussion, three hours a week; problem sets.
Evaluation will be based on problem sets, hour tests, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 105.
Students may not normally get credit for both Mathematics 210 and Physics 210.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF S. JOHNSON
MATH 211(F,S) Linear Algebra
Many social, political, economic, biological, and physical phenomena can be described, at least approxi-
mately, by linear relations. In the study of systems of linear equations one may ask: When does a solution
exist? When is it unique? How does one find it? How can one interpret it geometrically? This course devel-
ops the theoretical structure underlying answers to these and other questions and includes the study of ma-
trices, vector spaces, linear independence and bases, linear transformations, determinants and inner prod-
ucts. Course work is balanced between theoretical and computational, with attention to improving mathe-
matical style and sophistication.
Evaluation will be based primarily on homework and exams.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 105 or 210 or 243 or 251.
Hour: 12:00-12:50 MWF, 10:00-10:50 MWF First Semester: SILVA
9:00-9:50 MWF Second Semester: LOEPP
MATH 243(S) Statistics and Data Analysis
Statistics can be viewed as the art (science?) of turning data into information. Real world decision-making,
whether in business or science is often based on data and the perceived information it contains. Sherlock
Holmes, when prematurely asked the merits of a case by Dr. Watson, snapped back, "Data, data, data! I
can't make bricks without clay". In this course, we will study the basic methods by which statisticians
attempt to extract information from data. These will include many of the standard tools of statistical infer-
ence such as the t-test, analysis of variance and linear regression as well as exploratory and graphical data
analysis techniques.
Evaluation will be based primarily on performance on quizzes and exams.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 105 or equivalent. Students without any calculus background should consider
Mathematics 143 instead.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 2:35-3:50 W, R; 1:10-2:25 R REITER
MATH 244(S) Statistical Design of Experiments
What does statistics have to do with designing and carrying out experiments? The answer is, surprisingly
perhaps, a great deal. In this course, we will study how to design an experiment in order to obtain the most
information from it in the fewest number of observations. The efficient design of experiments is important
not only in the sciences: it has been credited for helping Japanese industry achieve its success. The exam-
ples from this course will be primarily from the physical sciences and industry, but will apply to the biolog-
ical and to some extent the social sciences as well. The culmination of the course will be a project where
each student designs, carries out, analyzes, and presents an experiment of interest to him or her.
Evaluation will be based primarily on performance on the project, homework, and exams.
Prerequisite: some knowledge of statistics or permission of instructor.
Hour: 12:00-12:50 MWF Lab: 2:35-3:50 W; TBA R. DE VEAUX
MATH 251(F,S) Discrete Mathematics
As a complement to calculus, which is the study of continuous processes, this course focuses on the dis-
crete, including finite sets and structures, their properties and applications. Topics will include basic set
theory, graph theory, logic, counting, recursion, and functions. The course serves as an introduction not
only to these and other topics but also to the methods and styles of mathematical proof.
Evaluation will be based primarily on performance on homework and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 104 or Mathematics 103 and Computer Science 134 or one year of high school
calculus with permission of instructor.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF First Semester: WITTWER
10:00-10:50 MWF Second Semester: WITTWER
MATH 285 Teaching Mathematics (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
Under faculty supervision, student-teachers will prepare and conduct scheduled weekly extra sessions for
calculus, for smaller, assigned groups of students. For these sessions they will prepare presentations (on
topics initially assigned by the instructor and later chosen by them), assign and grade homework, and an-
swer questions on the course material and on the homework. They will be available to their students out-
side of class, attend and assist at calculus lectures (3 hours a week), and visit and evaluate each other's
sessions.
At the core of this activity is a seminar, meeting an hour or two a week, focusing on a deeper study of the
calculus and on teaching methods and experience. There will be assigned readings, instruction, discussion,
and weekly homework or papers. The student-teachers will participate in the design and review of exams,
weighing the importance and difficulty of questions, and observing the kinds of mistakes the students
make. Responsibility for the exams and grading will of course rest with the instructor.
Mathematics and Statistics
­ 235 ­
Evaluation will be based on the overall teaching activity, participation in the seminar and other meetings,
homework, and papers.
Prerequisite: permission of instructor, early in previous spring. Enrollment limited.
MORGAN
MATH 300 Fractals (Not offered 2000-2001)
This course will introduce students to the ideas and mathematics behind fractals and the Mandelbrot set. It
will begin with an introduction to dynamical systems, explore briefly the notion of chaos and look at iter-
ated function systems as a way of defining fractals. The notions of fractional dimension and self-similarity
will also be explored. The last part of the course will introduce the Mandelbrot set and the Julia sets in the
complex plane. The student will be expected to become familiar with software programs to explore and
learn the various properties of fractals and the Mandelbrot set. These experimental projects will be an inte-
gral part of the course.
Evaluation will be based on projects, homeworks, and exams.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 105, 210 or 211 or 243 or 251 or permission of the instructor.
SILVA
MATH 301(F) Real Analysis
The real and complex number systems. Elementary topology of the real line and plane. Functions of a
single variable: limits, continuity, differentiability, the Riemann and Riemann-Stieltjes integrals. Se-
quences, series and uniform convergence. Elementary topology of metric spaces and functions on metric
spaces with emphasis on R.
Evaluation will be based primarily on performance on problem assignments, projects, and exams.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 105, 211 or permission of instructor.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR O. BEAVER
MATH 302(S) Complex Analysis
The calculus of complex-valued functions turns out to have unexpected simplicity and power. As an exam-
ple of simplicity, every complex-differentiable function is automatically infinitely differentiable. As exam-
ples of power, the so-called "residue calculus" permits the computation of "impossible" integrals, and
"conformal mapping" reduces physical problems on very general domains to problems on the round disc.
The easiest proof of the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra, not to mention the first proof of the Prime
Number Theorem, used complex analysis. Evaluation will be based primarily on classwork, homework,
and exams. Prerequisite: Mathematics 301 or 305.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR MORGAN
MATH 305(S) Applied Real Analysis
A deeper understanding of the derivative and limits leads to important applications in physical and social
sciences as well as more advanced mathematics. Phase plane analysis extracts information from "insolu-
ble" systems of nonlinear differential equations about the counterintuitive ecological balance between
sharks and their prey or the peculiar motion of a box tossed in the air. The calculus of variations ("infinite-
dimensional calculus") underlies inventory control in economics, Lagrange's equations in physics, Rie-
mannian "noneuclidean" geometry, and general relativity.
Evaluation will be based on performance on homework and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 105 and 211, or 210 and permission of instructor.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF MORGAN
MATH 306 Chaotic Dynamics (Not offered 2000-2001)
This course is an introduction to chaotic dynamical systems. The topics will include bifurcations, the qua-
dratic family, symbolic dynamics, chaos, dynamics of linear systems, and some complex dynamics.
Evaluation will be based on performance on homework and exams.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 301 or 305.
SILVA
MATH 312(S) Abstract Algebra
Algebra gives us the tools to solve equations. Sets such as the integers or real numbers have special proper-
ties which make algebra work or not work according to the circumstances. In this course, we generalize
algebraic processes and the sets upon which they operate in order to better understand, theoretically, when
equations can and cannot be solved. We define and study the abstract algebraic structures called groups,
rings and fields, as well as the concepts of factor group, quotient ring, homomorphism, isomorphism, and
various types of field extensions.
Evaluation will be based primarily on problem sets and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 211 and one or more of the following: 148, 210, 243, or 251, or permission of
instructor.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF BURGER
MATH 313(F) Introduction to Number Theory
This course provides an introduction to the theory of numbers. Here we will examine classical issues in-
volving prime numbers, divisibility, and the general structure of numbers. Various applications and conse-
quences will be discussed. In addition, we shall examine the real and complex numbers and also numbers
which are neither real nor complex. These new numbers are called p-adic numbers and are very interesting
Mathematics and Statistics
­ 236 ­
and important. Although many of these issues go back to the dawn of humanity, here we will take a very
modern approach and use new techniques to investigate the issues at hand.
Evaluation will be based primarily on performance on assignments, projects, and exams.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 211 or 251 or permission of the instructor.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF BURGER
MATH 315(F) Groups and Characters
An introduction to group theory with emphasis on topics having applications in the physical sciences;
greater attention is paid to examples and to the application of theorems than to the more difficult proofs.
Topics include symmetry groups, group structure (especially properties related to order), representations
and characters over the real and complex fields, space groups (chemistry), matrix groups (physics).
Evaluation will be based primarily on performance on problem assignments and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 211.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR V. HILL
MATH 316(S) Protecting Information: Applications of Abstract Algebra and Quantum
Physics (Same as Physics 316)
Living in the early decades of the information age, we find ourselves depending more and more on codes
that protect messages against either noise or eavesdropping. We begin this course by studying the history of
this subject, including, for example, the story of the enigma code from World War II. We then examine
some of the most important codes currently being used to protect information, including linear codes,
which in addition to being mathematically elegant are the most practical codes for error correction, and the
RSA public key cryptographic scheme, popular nowadays for internet applications. Looking ahead by a
decade or more, we show how a "quantum computer" could crack any RSA code in short order, and how
quantum cryptographic devices will achieve security through the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
Evaluation will be based on homework sets and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 211 or Mathematics 251 or Mathematics 210 or Physics 210 or permission of
the instructors.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF LOEPP and WOOTTERS
MATH 321 Knot Theory (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
Take a piece of string, tie a knot in it, and glue the ends together. The result is a knotted circle, known as a
knot. For the last 100 years, mathematicians have studied knots, asking such questions as, "Given a nasty
tangled knot, how do you tell if it can be untangled without cutting it open?" Some of the most interesting
advances in knot theory have occurred in the last ten years.
This course is an introduction to the theory of knots. Among other topics, we will cover methods of knot
tabulation, surfaces applied to knots, polynomials associated to knots, and relationships between knot
theory and chemistry and physics. In addition to learning the theory, we will look at open problems in the
field.
Evaluation will be based on problem sets, midterms, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 211 or permission of instructor.
ADAMS
MATH 322 Differential Geometry (Not offered 2000-2001)
Differential geometry describes the shapes of objects from soap films to Universes in terms of curvature.
The curvature of a curve can be described in calculus, but it is more complicated to describe the various
twistings of surfaces and Universes. In general it requires going a step beyond vectors and matrices to the
"Riemannian curvature tensor," which is the key to understanding Einstein's theory of General Relativity,
in which mass itself is understood as curvature.
Evaluation will be based primarily on classwork, homework, and exams.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 211 or permission of instructor.
MORGAN
MATH 323 Applied Topology (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
In topology, one studies properties of an object that are preserved under rubber-like deformations, where
one is allowed to twist and pull, but one cannot tear or glue. Hence a sphere is considered the same as a
cube, but distinct from the surface of a doughnut. In recent years, topology has found applications in chem-
istry (knotted DNA molecules), economics (stability theory), Geographic Information Systems, cosmolo-
gy (the shape of the Universe), medicine (heart failure), robotics and electric circuit design, just to name
some of the fields that have been impacted. In this course, we will learn the basics of topology, including
point-set topology, geometric topology and algebraic topology, but all with the purpose of applying the
theory to a broad array of fields.
Evaluation will be based primarily on problem sets and exams.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 211 or permission of instructor. Not open to students who have taken Mathe-
matics 324.
ADAMS
MATH 324(S) Topology
Topology is the study of when one geometric object can be bent and twisted, but not ripped, into another
object. Determining when two objects are topologically the same is incredibly difficult and is still the sub-
Mathematics and Statistics
­ 237 ­
ject of a tremendous amount of research. The first part of the course involves establishing a precise defini-
tion for topological equivalence (point-set topology). Then we develop methods to determine when objects
are the same. We will define homotopy and homology and, if time permits, examine the topological classi-
fications of surfaces, which will show that you cannot twist a basketball into a doughnut.
Evaluation will be based on exams and homework.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 301, or permission of the instructor and Mathematics 305 or 312. Not open to
students who have taken Mathematics 323.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF CHKHENKELI
MATH 341 Probability (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
The historical roots of probability lie in the study of games of chance. Modern probability, however, is a
mathematical discipline that has wide applications in a myriad of other mathematical and physical
sciences. Drawing on classical gaming examples for motivation, this course will present axiomatic and
mathematical aspects of probability. Included will be discussions of random variables (both discrete and
continuous), distribution and expectation, independence, laws of large numbers, and the well-known Cen-
tral Limit Theorem. Many interesting and important applications will also be presented, including some
from classical Poisson processes, random walks and Markov Chains.
Evaluation will be based primarily on class participation, performance on homework sets and exams.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 211 or 251 or permission of the instructor.
O. BEAVER
MATH 344(S) Statistical Design of Experiments
This course will run concurrently with Mathematics 244 (please see description of Mathematics 244) with
the addition of an extra lecture per week. This additional lecture will cover more theoretical and founda-
tional material not covered in Mathematics 244. Extra assignments involving some proofs and derivations
of the results used in Mathematics 244 will be given. Students will be expected to complete all the assign-
ments of Mathematics 244 plus the additional exercises of Mathematics 344.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 211 or permission of instructor.
Hour: 12:00-12:50 MWF Lab: 2:35-3:50 W; TBA R. DE VEAUX
MATH 346(F) Regression and Forecasting
This course focuses on the building of empirical models through data in order to predict, explain, and inter-
pret scientific phenomena. The main focus will be on multiple regression as a technique for doing this.
Through no fault of its own, regression analysis has perhaps the most used of all data analysis methods. We
will study both the mathematics of regression analysis and its applications, including a discussion of the
limits to such analyses. The applications will range from predicting the quality of a vintage of Bordeaux
wine from the weather to forecasting stock prices, and will come from a broad range of disciplines.
Evaluation will be based primarily on performance on homework and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 143 or 243, and 105, and 211; or permission of instructor.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR REITER
MATH 354 (formerly 454) Graph Theory with Applications (Not offered 2000-2001)
Investigation of the structure and properties of graphs with emphasis both on certain classes of graphs such
as multi-partite, planar, and perfect graphs and on application to various optimization problems such as
minimum colorings of graphs, maximum matchings in graphs, network flows, etc.
Evaluation will be based primarily on problem sets and exams.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 211.
MATH 360(S) Mathematical Logic
In 1931 Kurt Gödel proved the famous Incompleteness Theorem, showing that any formal logical for-
mulation of ordinary arithmetic must contain a statement which can neither be proved nor refuted. This
discovery led to questions of solvability, computability, and decidability. Beginning with the rise of Intui-
tionism as a reaction to non-Euclidean geometry and to transfinite arithmetic, the course concentrates on
Hilbert's Formalism: rigorous construction of the propositional and predicate calculus and of the natural
numbers, treating questions of completeness and consistency. Primitive recursive functions are used to
prove the Incompleteness Theorem. The course concludes with consideration of computability, decidabil-
ity, and Turing machines.
Evaluation will be based primarily on performance on problem assignments and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 211 or 251.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR V. HILL
MATH 361(F) Theory of Computation (Same as Computer Science 361)
(See under Computer Science for full description.)
MATH 370 Mathematics of Investment (Not offered 2000-2001)
A mathematical investigation of topics in the field of investment: markets and instruments, portfolio
theory, equilibrium in capital markets, security analysis, options and futures, and portfolio management.
Mathematics and Statistics
­ 238 ­
Evaluation will be based primarily on performance in class participation, homework assignments, and ex-
ams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 211 and a basic knowledge of statistics. Not open to first-year students.
V. HILL
MATH 375(F) Game Theory
Game theory is the study of interacting decision makers involved in a conflict of interest. It is assumed the
players rationally pursue objective goals and interact according to specific rules, and we investigate out-
comes, dynamics, and strategies. Game theory has been used to illuminate political, economical, social,
and evolutionary phenomenon. We will examine concepts of equilibrium, stable strategies, imperfect in-
formation, repetition, cooperation, utility, and decision.
Evaluation will be based on problem sets and exams.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 211 and Mathematics 210, 251, or 243; or permission of the instructor.
Hour: 12:00-12:50 MWF S. JOHNSON
MATH 381 History of Mathematics (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
A survey of the development of mathematical thought from ancient times to the present, with some consid-
eration of its place in political, social, and intellectual history. Assigned problem studies will explore histor-
ical methods of solution, famous mathematical questions, the work of individual mathematicians, and the
rise of various branches of mathematics.
Evaluation will be based primarily on performance on problem assignments and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 211.
V. HILL
MATH 397(F), 398(S), 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
Directed independent study in Mathematics.
Prerequisite: permission of the department.
Members of the Department
MATH 402 Measure Theory and Probability (Not offered 2000-2001)
The study of measure theory arose from the study of stochastic (probabilistic) systems. Applications of
measure theory lie in biology, chemistry, physics as well as in economics. In this course, we develop the
abstract concepts of measure theory and ground them in probability spaces. Included will be Lebesgue and
Borel measures, measurable functions (random variables). Lebesgue integration, distributions, indepen-
dence, convergence and limit theorems. This material provides good preparation for graduate studies in
mathematics, statistics and economics.
Evaluation will be based primarily on performance on homework assignments and exams.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 301 or 305 or permission of instructor.
O. BEAVER
MATH 404 Ergodic Theory (Not offered 2000-2001)
Ergodic theory studies the probabilistic behavior of dynamical systems as they evolve through time. This
course will be an introduction to the basic notions in ergodic theory. The course will start with an introduc-
tion to the necessary topics from measure theory: sigma-algebras, measurable sets and measurable trans-
formations. Then we will cover ergodic, weak mixing, mixing, and Bernoulli transformations, and trans-
formations admitting and not admitting an invariant measure. There will be an emphasis on specific exam-
ples such as group rotations, the binary odometer transformations, and rank-one constructions.
Evaluation will be based on homework and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 301 or permission of instructor.
SILVA
MATH 408(S) Wavelets and Fourier Series
Can you hear the shape of a drum? How does the FBI store 200 million fingerprints efficiently? What is
behind the JPEG standard used for picture-compression on the web?
Here we will study how to answer such questions by decomposing a function into "special functions" such
as sines and cosines (known as Fourier Series), or the more modern analogue known as wavelets. For ex-
ample, a musical tone can be broken up into its overtones using Fourier analysis, making it easier to ana-
lyze. Similarly, a visual image can be broken up into its wavelet components. We will discuss Fourier se-
ries, continuous and discrete wavelet transforms, the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, and possibly frames
and MRA wavelets.
Evaluation will be based primarily on homeworks and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 301 or Mathematics 305 and Mathematics 211.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF WITTWER
MATH 414 Abstract Algebra II (Not offered 2000-2001)
The relation of high school algebra to the abstraction of Mathematics 312 is not apparent, but Galois
Theory shows the link. One goal of high school algebra is to solve (find roots of) linear equations (ax + b =
0) and quadratic equations. By the sixteenth century, methods were found to solve third and fourth degree
equations. Here progress stopped until the early-nineteenth century, when Abel and Galois showed that no
such general method for finding roots of equations of degree higher than four can exist. They needed total-
ly new tools, which led to the mathematics of abstract algebra. The goal of Mathematics 414 is to develop
Mathematics and Statistics
­ 239 ­
through linear algebra, the deep connection between roots of polynomials and finite groups.
Evaluation will be based on homework and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 312, or 315 and permission of the instructor.
GARRITY
MATH 416T Diophantine Analysis (Not offered 2000-2001)
In this tutorial students will work together to discover and develop the basic theory of diophantine analysis.
Specifically, we will begin with a careful investigation of the real numbers and develop a theory as to how
well we can approximate a real number by rational numbers that are, in some sense, not very complicated.
This theory leads to many avenues of investigation including such areas as continued fractions, geometry
of numbers, simultaneous approximation, and generalizations to p-adic fields. Both classical theorems and
current results will be explored.
Evaluation based on oral and written presentations.
Prerequisite: permission of the instructor only. No number theory background is required.
BURGER
MATH 421 Algebraic Geometry (Not offered 2000-2001)
Algebraic Geometry studies the geometry of polynomials and lies in the intersection of a tremendous
amount of current mathematics, ranging from number theory to robotics. This course will be an introduc-
tion, emphasizing curves in the plane. In particular, we will study conics and cubics (books are written
about the geometry of cubics; the depth of the ideas involved with cubics is amazing). Fundamental no-
tions such as projective space, elliptic integrals, algebraic varieties, genus of a curve, the Riemann-Roch
theorem, and rational points will be introduced.
Evaluation will be based primarily on homework and exams.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 312 or 315 or permission of instructor.
GARRITY
MATH 425(F) Soap Bubbles and Geometric Measure Theory
A single round soap bubble is the least-area way to enclose a given volume of air, as was proved in 1884 by
Schwarz. A double soap bubble is the least-area way to enclose and separate two given volumes of air, as
was proved in 2000 as the culmination of a decade of work by many, including Williams faculty and stu-
dents. Because it is hard to control ahead of time the complicated ways ("singularities") in which pieces of
soap film theoretically might come together, the study of such physical problems had to wait for the devel-
opment of a more general and inclusive kind of geometry, now known as Geometric Measure Theory.
(These same tools can be applied to all kinds of singularities from fractures in materials to black holes in
the universe.)
Evaluation will be based primarily on classwork, homework, and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 211 and either Mathematics 301 or 305.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR MORGAN
MATH 433(S) Dynamic Mathematical Modeling
Mathematical modeling is concerned with translating a natural phenomenon into a mathematical form. In
this abstract form the underlying principles of the phenomenon can be carefully examined and experiments
that would be difficult or impossible to carry out in a laboratory can be carried out on a computer in a
matter of seconds. The abstract process of modeling will be investigated by stepping through established
techniques as they are applied to a number of exciting recently developed models.
The models we will investigate include simple and coupled oscillators, feedback phenomena, population
dynamics, tidal dynamics, the pumping heart, reaction-diffusion, shock waves, morphogenesis, and the
spread of pollution, forest fires, and diseases. Wewill employ tools fromthe fieldsof differentialequations,
dynamical systems, and catastrophe theory.
The course is intended for students in the mathematical, physical, and chemical sciences, as well as for
students who are seriously interested in the mathematical aspects of physiology, economics, geology, biol-
ogy, and environmental studies.
Evaluation will be based primarily on performance of problem sets, exams, and a computer laboratory.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 210 and 301 or 305 or permission of the instructor.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF S. JOHNSON
MATH 442 Computational Statistics and Data Mining (Not offered 2000-2001)
In both science and industry today, the ability to collect and store data can outpace our ability to analyze it.
Traditional techniques in statistics are often unable to cope with the size and complexity of today's data
bases and data warehouses. New methodologies in Statistics have recently been developed, designed to
address these inadequacies, emphasizing visualization, exploration and empirical model building at the
expense of traditional hypothesis testing. In this course we will examine these new techniques and apply
them to a variety of real data sets using Silicon Graphics workstations.
Evaluation will be based primarily on homeworks and projects.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 346 or permission of instructor.
R. DE VEAUX
MATH 443 The Mathematics and Statistics of Surveys (Not offered 2000-2001)
How is the national unemployment rate determined? How about the percentage of people living in poverty,
the quantity of crops produced in agricultural counties, or the educational achievement levels of the na-
Mathematics and Statistics, Music
­ 240 ­
tion's fourth graders? The answer to these questions is: through surveys. In this course, we investigate the
mathematical and statistical underpinnings of survey design and analysis. We examine probability sam-
pling designs that can yield valid estimates of unknown population quantities, including stratified, clus-
tered, and multi-stage designs. For each of these designs, we derive estimators of population quantities and
measures of uncertainty of these estimators. We also discuss optimal sample allocation, methods for han-
dling nonresponse, resampling techniques for variance estimation, and other advanced topics. Emphasis is
on understanding surveys through real data sets in economics, education, health care policy, and the
sciences.
Performance is evaluated primarily through homeworks and projects.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 243 or permission of the instructor.
REITER
MATH 452 Combinatorics (Not offered 2000-2001)
An advanced course in discrete mathematics (see Mathematics 251) with emphasis on counting and finite
structures. Counting techniques will include generalized binomial coefficients, inclusion/exclusion, gener-
ating functions, partitions and Stirling numbers, and Polya counting. Structures studied will be drawn from:
graphs and digraphs, networks, designs, posets and lattices, possibly with applications to the physical and
social sciences. The theory will be developed with an emphasis on problem solving and independent work.
Evaluation will be based primarily on performance on problem sets and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 211, 251 and permission of instructor.
MATH 455(F) Problem Solving Seminar
The seminar will discuss problems from all areas of mathematics. Students will learn problem-solving
techniques, will combine some of the seemingly disparate parts of their mathematics background, and will
gain an appreciation for new areas of mathematics, by looking at some of the fundamental questions that
illustrate the key ideas. There will be emphasis on student participation in all aspects of the course, includ-
ing the posing of questions and the presentation and analysis of solutions.
Evaluation will be based primarily on problem sets, oral presentations contributions to class discussions,
and written analyses of proposed solutions.
Prerequisites: one of Mathematics 301, 305, and one of Mathematics 312, 315, 317, and one additional
Mathematics course numbered 240 or higher; or permission of instructor.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR CHKHENKELI
MATH W030 Senior Project
Taken by candidates for honors in Mathematics other than by thesis route.
MATH 493(F)-W031-494(S) Senior Honors Thesis
Each student carries out an individual research project under the direction of a faculty member that culmi-
nates in a thesis. See description under The Degree with Honors in Mathematics.
MATH 499(F,S) Mathematics Colloquium
Meets every week for two hours both fall and spring. Senior majors must participate at least one hour a
week. This colloquium is in addition to the regular four semester-courses taken by all students.
Hour: TBA Members of the Department
MUSIC (Div. I)
Chair, Professor DAVID S. KECHLEY
Professors: BLOXAM*, D. KECHLEY, D. MOORE*, K. C. ROBERTS, SUDERBURG. Associate
Professor: E. D. BROWN. Assistant Professors: A. SHEPPARD, PEREZ VELAZQUEZ. Lyell B.
Clay Artist in Residence in Jazz Performance/Lecturer in Music: JAFFE. Artist in Residence in Choral
and Vocal Performance/Lecturer in Music: B. WELLS. Visiting Assistant Professors: MCGRADE,
ONDERDONK. Artist in Residence: STEVENSON (piano). Ensemble Directors: FELDMAN (Berk-
shire Symphony); M. JENKINS (Marching Band); STACEY (Percussion Ensemble, percussion);
SUNDBERG (Brass Ensemble, trumpet); S. WALT (Woodwind Chamber Music, bassoon).
Adjunct Teachers: ACETO (piano), C. JENKINS (oboe), J. KECHLEY (flute), K. KIBLER
(voice), LAWRENCE (piano, organ, harpsichord, Musicianship Skills Lab), MARTULA (clarinet),
PARKE (cello), PARSHLEY (horn), PHELPS (guitar), ST. AMOUR (viola), M. WALT (voice),
WILLIAMSON (saxophone).
MAJOR
Sequence Courses
Music 104 Music Theory and Musicianship I
Music 201, 202 Music Theory and Musicianship II
Music 207, 208, 209 Music in History I, Music in History II, and Music in History III
Music 402 Senior Seminar in Music
Elective Courses
An additional year or two semester courses in music, to be selected from the following:
Group A: any Music 106-Music 141 course, including direct supervision by instructor in supplementary
readings, assignments, papers, and other projects appropriate for the Music major.
Music
­ 241 ­
Group B: Music 203T, 204T, 211, 212, 213, 301, 308, 325, 326, 427, 428.
Department strongly recommends that students elect at least one course from each group.
It is strongly recommended that prospective majors complete Music 104, 201, 202, and 207 by the end
of the sophomore year.
Performance and Concert Requirements
Music majors are encouraged to participate in departmental ensembles throughout their careers at Wil-
liams; i.e., for eight semesters. Majors are required to participate in departmental ensembles for at least four
semesters. The student must petition to meet this requirement in an alternative way. Music majors are also
expected to attend departmentally-sponsored concerts.
Foreign Languages
Music majors are strongly urged to take courses in at least one foreign language while at Williams.
Musicianship Skills
Music majors are strongly urged to maintain, refine and improve their musicianship skills, such as sight-
singing, score reading, melodic and harmonic dictation, and keyboard proficiency, throughout their entire
Williams career.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN MUSIC
Three routes toward honors and highest honors are possible in the Music major:
a. Composition: A Composition thesis must include one major work completed during the senior year, a
portfolio of smaller works completed during the junior and senior years, and a 10- to 15-page discus-
sion of the student's work.
b. Performance: A Performance thesis must include an honors recital given during the spring of the
senior year and a 15- to 20-page discussion of a selection of the works performed. The student's
general performance career will also be considered in determining honors.
c. History, Theory and Analysis, or Ethnomusicology: A written Historical, Theoretical/Analytical, or
Ethnomusicological thesis between 65 and 80 pages in length and an oral presentation based on the
thesis is required. A written thesis should offer new insights based on original research.
To be admitted to the honors program, a student must have at least a 3.3 GPA in Music courses (this
GPA must be maintained in order to receive honors), and have demonstrated ability and experience
through coursework and performance in the proposed thesis area. A 1- to 2-page application to the honors
program, written in consultation with a faculty member, must be made to the chair of Music before or
during spring registration in the junior year.
Honors candidates must enroll in Music 493(F)-W031-494(S) during their senior year. A student who is
highly qualified for honors work, but who, for compelling reasons, is unable to pursue a year-long project,
may petition the department for permission to pursue a thesis over one semester and the winter study term.
If granted, the standards for evaluating the thesis in such exceptional cases would be identical to those that
apply to year-long honors projects. Final submission of the thesis must be made to the Music Department
by April 15 of the senior year. The department's decision to award honors will be based on the quality of
the thesis.
Courses involving individual vocal or instrumental instruction involve extra fees which are subsidized
by the department. (See Music 251-258 and Studies in the Musical Art 325, 326, 427, 428). For further
information contact the Coordinator of Private Instruction.
________________________________
There are two introductory courses in music at Williams College. The student is urged to read the de-
scriptions of Music 101 and 103, and to consult the instructors to determine which course will best assist
his or her growth in understanding music.
MUS 101(F) Listening to Music: An Introduction
Intended for non-major students with little or no formal training.
When you listen to music--on the radio, on a CD, at a concert--how much do you really hear? This
course has two goals: to refine listening skills, thus increasing the student's understanding and enjoyment
of music, while at the same time providing a survey of the major composers and musical styles of the
Western classical repertory to be encountered in concert halls today. Students will be introduced to music
from the Baroque, Classical, Romantic, and Modern periods, including works by composers such as Bach,
Mozart, Beethoven, Brahms, Mahler, and Stravinsky. Genres to be covered include the symphony, cham-
ber music, opera, song, and choral music. Attendance at selected concerts on campus required.
Evaluation based on two tests, two concert reports, and a final exam.
No prerequisites.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF ONDERDONK
MUS 103(F) Basic Music Theory and Musicianship
This course is designed for students with a strong instrumental or vocal background. Although there is
no prerequisite, students are expected to be proficient in reading at least one clef. Students should take
a placement exam during First Days.
Music
­ 242 ­
Prepares the student for the study of common-practice harmony with a review of the fundamentals of mu-
sic theory and an introduction of triadic harmony through figured bass realization at the keyboard, com-
position of harmonic progressions, harmonization of melodies, and extensive eartraining exercises.
The first half of the course reviews the basic principles of pitch and rhythmic notation, key signatures,
modes, scales and intervals and triads, as well as the fundamentals of triadic harmony. The remainder of the
course emphasizes triadic progression through written assignments and figured bass realization at the key-
board including inversions and some altered chords.
Sightsinging, sightreading, eartraining, and harmonic structural analysis are pursued concurrently with
keyboard and written theory. Students are required to attend a weekly skills lab and to develop, outside of
class, their vocal, aural, and keyboard competence through regular practice. Music software may be used
for some written assignments as well as eartraining drill. The software will be available both on the net-
work and in the Bernhard Music Technology Lab.
Three lectures and one eartraining skills lab per week.
Evaluation will be based on assignments, quizzes, and a final exam. All will have both written and aural
components. Students with previous theory training or Advanced Placement credit may be permitted to go
directly into 104; see department.
Enrollment limited to 15 in each section.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF, 11:00-11:50 MWF Lab: 1:10-2 W; 1:10-2:25 R; 2:10-3 W
D. KECHLEY, ONDERDONK
MUS 104(S) Music Theory and Musicianship I
This course is designed for potential majors and students with a strong instrumental or vocal background.
Students are expected to have competence in reading all clefs and must have a working knowledge of triad-
ic harmony and figured bass realization. Students should take a placement exam during First Days.
A study of common-practice harmony with emphasis on both keyboard and chorale style. The course re-
views triadic progression in keyboard style, introduces principles of chorale style and part writing, non-
chord tones, dominant seventh and other seventh chords, borrowed chords, and modulation all through
written assignments, figured bass realization at the keyboard, eartraining exercises, and analysis of musical
examples of the period.
Sightsinging, sightreading, eartraining, and dictation are pursued concurrently with keyboard and written
theory. Students are required to attend a weekly skills lab and to develop, outside of class, their vocal, aural,
and keyboard competence through regular practice. Music software will be used for some written assign-
ments as well as eartraining drill. The software will be available both on the network and in the Bernhard
Music Technology Lab.
Three lectures and one eartraining skills lab per week.
Evaluation will be based on assignments, quizzes, and a final exam. All will have both written and aural
components. Students with Advanced Placement credit or the equivalent may be permitted to go directly to
201; see department.
Prerequisite: Music 103 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limited to 15 in each section.
Note: Music 104 cannot be taken on a pass/fail basis
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF, 11:00-11:50 MWF Lab: 1:10-2 W; 1:10-2:25 R D. KECHLEY, ONDERDONK
NOTE: Prerequisites for Music 106 through 141
For each course, varying degrees of musical experience are necessary. Students may consult with the
instructor or simply attend the first class meeting. (Successful completion of Music 101 automatically
qualifies the student for Music 106 through 141.)
MUS 106(S) Opera
An introduction to the history of opera, from the genre's birth c. 1600 to the present. At various points in its
400-year development, opera has been considered the highest synthesis of the arts, a vehicle for the social
elite, or a form of popular entertainment. Opera's position in European cultural history will be a primary
focus of our inquiry. We will also study the intriguing relationship between text and music, aspects of per-
formance and production, and the artistic and social conventions of the operatic world. The multidimen-
sional nature of opera invites a variety of analytical and critical perspectives, including those of music anal-
ysis, literary studies, feminist interpretations, and political and sociological approaches. Works to be con-
sidered include operas by Monteverdi, Charpentier, Handel, Glück, Mozart, Rossini, Donizetti, Verdi,
Wagner, Bizet, Puccini, Strauss, Berg, Britten, and Glass. This course may involve a trip to the Metropoli-
tan Opera.
Lecture/discussion.
Evaluation will be based on a midterm, a brief paper, a 10-page paper, and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 35.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR A. SHEPPARD
MUS 107 Verdi and Wagner (Not offered 2000-2001)
This course will look closely at several works of the two opera giants of the nineteenth century, Giuseppi
Verdi and Richard Wagner. The two composers and their operas will be studied in their historical and social
context in order to shed light on both the individual works and on the social conditions and values they
expressed. Works to be studied will be drawn from among Verdi's Macbeth, Un Ballo in Maschera, La
Traviata, Rigoletto, Don Carlo, Aida, Othello, and Falstaff, and Wagner's Der Fliegende Hollander, Tann-
Music
­ 243 ­
hauser, Tristan und Isolde, Ring of the Nibelungen, and Parsifal.
Two lectures per week.
Evaluation will be based on participation, quizzes, a final exam, and a research paper.
No prerequisites or musical background assumed. Those who have taken Music 101 or 106 are particular-
ly welcome.
MUS 108(F) The Symphony
A combined musical and cultural historical study of the symphony as observed in the late-eighteenth
through the twentieth century. Particular attention to Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven, Brahms, Tchaikovsky,
Mahler, and Shostakovich. Emphasis on listening.
Three lectures per week.
Requirements: two exams, based on listening and readings, one short paper, and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 30. Priority given to first-year students.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF MCGRADE
MUS 109 Music for Orchestra (Not offered 2000-2001)
An introductory survey of music written for the symphony orchestra from the Classical period through the
present day. The course will trace the development of orchestral genres such as the concerto, symphonic
poem, suite, variations, and concert overture, with examples written by major composers such as Haydn,
Mozart, Beethoven, Berlioz, Mendelssohn, Liszt, Smetana, Brahms, Richard Strauss, Elgar, Ravel, Bartok,
George Crumb, Elliott Carter, and Ellen Zwilich. Development of the musical styles since 1780, the place
of the composer in society, and relationship of program music to the text are among the subjects to be
considered. Emphasis on listening.
Two lectures per week.
Evaluation will be based on two hour exams from listenings and readings, one short paper and a final
exam.
No prerequisites.
D. MOORE
MUS 110 Chamber Music (Not offered 2000-2001)
An introductory survey of chamber music from the early-eighteenth through the twentieth centuries. De-
fined for this course as ensemble music for from three to eight players, we will consider string quartets,
works for strings and piano, and examples of wind and brass chamber music by Bach, Haydn, Mozart,
Beethoven, Bartok, Mendelssohn, Beach, Hailstork and many others. Several live performances will be
presented in class by faculty and visiting chamber musicians, and attendance at a chamber concert in Wil-
liamstown or another city will be expected.
Two lectures per week.
Evaluation will be based on several listening quizzes or short exams, a paper based on research or listening,
and a final exam.
D. MOORE
MUS 111(F) Popular Music: Revolutions in the History of Rock
This course will trace the history of rock music from the 1950s to the present, focusing on those musicians
who revolutionized the genre in various periods. Such "revolutions" are discovered in the use of new
sounds and musical forms, in the relationship between lyrics and musical setting, and in the conception of
rock's role in society. Three objectives will underpin our studies: to develop listening skills with music that
one often hears, but perhaps rarely listens to intently; to determine in what ways popular music can be
interpreted as reflecting its cultural context; and to encounter the work of several of the more innovative
musicians in the history of rock. Finally we will interrogate our own activities by asking why the study of
the "merely popular" should be pursued in a liberal arts education, whether new approaches can be devel-
oped for this endeavor, and what makes music "popular."
Lecture format.
Evaluation will be based on two tests, one paper, and a final exam.
No prerequisites or musical background assumed. Enrollment limited to 80.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR A. SHEPPARD
MUS 114(S) American Music
A survey of musical development in this country from the seventeenth-century psalters and eighteenth-
century New England tunesmiths through the genteel tradition, the rise of jazz, and the growth of art-music
from the Boston academic tradition to the major American composers of the twentieth century.
Three lectures per week.
Evaluation will be based on two tests, two short papers, and a final exam.
Enrollment limited to 20.
Hour: 12:00-12:50 MWF ONDERDONK
MUS 115 Introduction to Twentieth-Century Music (Not offered 2000-2001)
Twentieth-century Euro-American art music involved a persistent exploration of the limits of musical pos-
sibility. Encounters with this music often challenge our ears and musical minds and require us to reconsider
fundamental conceptions of music itself. Throughout the course, we will investigate in what ways the basic
elements of music (e.g., harmonic organization, rhythm, timbre, instrumentation and performance conven-
Music
­ 244 ­
tions) were extended and revolutionized. Topics and styles to be discussed include: atonality, expression-
ism, exoticism, twelve-tone techniques, neoclassicism, electronic and computer music, music theatre, sto-
chastic music, minimalism, and neoromanticism. We will also consider the music of this century in relation
to contemporary developments in the other arts and to popular musical styles. The syllabus will include
works by such composers as Debussy, Mahler, Stravinsky, Schoenberg, Webern, Bartók, Weill, Milhaud,
Shostakovich, Ives, Copland, Babbitt, Stockhausen, Messiaen, Boulez, Berio, Cage, Górecki, and Glass.
Evaluation will be based on two tests, two short papers, and a final exam.
A. SHEPPARD
MUS 116 Music in Modernism (Not offered 2000-2001)+
The synthesis of the arts was a primary pursuit of modernist composers, artists, choreographers, and writ-
ers. Seeking either to realize Wagner's "total work of art" in the theater, or to uncover the more general
correspondences celebrated by Baudelaire, modernists consistently looked beyond their own media. Col-
laborations on works of "total theater" were common: Satie, Cocteau, Massine, Picasso; Brecht, Hinde-
mith, Weill; Stravinsky, Nijinsky, Bakst; Claudel, Honegger, Rubinstein. Modernists explored new con-
nections between music and color (Scriabin, Kandinsky), music and literature (Joyce, Mann), and music
and dance (Duncan, Graham). Occasionally, modernists attempted to unite the arts on their own: Schoen-
berg painted, Pound composed, and Kokoschka wrote. Our focus will be on those works of music, art,
dance, and literature that explored new relationships between the arts. One goal will be to investigate
whether specific equivalents exist between techniques of modernist painting, poetics, choreography, and
composition. Aware of the risks and rewards of interdisciplinary study, we will attempt our own theories of
artistic synthesis. This course is designed to bring multiple perspectives to the study of music in modern-
ism.
Evaluation based on three papers and class participation.
No prerequisites.
A. SHEPPARD
MUS 117 Mozart (Not offered 2000-2001)
A study of the musical culture of the late eighteenth century and a look into how Mozart did and did not fit
into this world. The class will examine selected Mozartean compositions with emphasis on the listening
experience.
Two lectures per week.
Evaluation will be based on class preparation and discussion, a series of listening quizzes, and a final
project.
K. C. ROBERTS
MUS 118(S) Bach
An introduction to the life and music of the German Baroque composer Johann Sebastian Bach. We will
consider both matters of cultural context (such as the social milieu in which Bach developed his art and the
use and perception of his music by his contemporaries), and matters of purely musical content (the styles
and forms of his prodigious oeuvre). Both instrumental and vocal music will be surveyed, including the
Brandenburg Concerti, the Goldberg Variations, the Magnificat, and the B Minor Mass. The course will
conclude with an exploration of the attitudes towards Bach and treatments of his music in the almost 250
years since his death.
Three lectures per week.
Evaluation will be based on several short listening quizzes and papers, and a final project/paper.
Enrollment limited to 15.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF MCGRADE
MUS 119(F) Romantic Spirit in Nineteenth Century Music
Many nineteenth-century writers and artists considered music to be the most romantic of all the arts. In this
course, we will explore the artistic attitudes that were identified with Romanticism, and we will consider
how music both reflected and shaped these beliefs. Six themes typically associated with Nineteenth-Centu-
ry Romanticism will guide our choice of musical repertory; they are 1) a new responsiveness to the beauty
of nature, 2) the composer/musician as hero or genius, 3) a fascination with the macabre, 4) the celebration
of folk culture and nationalism, 5) an enchantment with past and distant cultures, and 6) the arts as a path to
spiritual truth. We will listen to works by Beethoven, Schubert, Berlioz, Weber, Liszt, Wagner, Rossini,
Verdi, Schumann, Chopin, Rimsky-Korsakov, Dvorak, Tchaikovsky, Brahms, Mahler, and others.
Requirements: two exams based on readings and listening, one paper, and a final exam.
No prerequisites.
Enrollment limited to 15, with preference given to first-year students.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF MCGRADE
MUS 120 Beethoven (Not offered 2000-2001)
A consideration of selected compositions from each of Beethoven's creative periods. Special emphasis
will be placed on the "Eroica" symphony, the piano sonatas, the string quartets, "Fidelio," and the Ninth
Symphony. The course will examine Beethoven's music in its historical context and evaluate the changes
brought about by his art.
Two lectures per week.
Music
­ 245 ­
Evaluation will be based on class preparation and discussion, a series of listening quizzes, and a final proj-
ect.
K. C. ROBERTS
MUS 122(F) African-American Music*+
This course will survey the history of African-American music in the United States from its African origins
through the mid-twentieth century. Focus on the following themes: the survival of Africanisms in African-
American music, the relationship of African-American music in the U.S. to the music of Africa and the
African diaspora, the process of acculturation, African and African-American aesthetics in music, and the
impact of social conditions on African-American music in the U.S.
No prior musical experience required, but students without musical backgrounds must learn a vocabulary
of terms for describing musical sound. There will be an emphasis on listening.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR E. D. BROWN
MUS 123(F,S) Music Technology I
Designed for students with some music background who wish to learn basic principles of Musical
Technology and practical use of current software and hardware. Topics include acoustics, MIDI sequenc-
ing, digital recording and editing, sampling, analog and digital synthesis, digital signal processing, and in-
strument design. Lectures will provide technical explanations on those topics covered in class and an his-
torical overview of electronic music.
Evaluation will be based on weekly assignments, a midterm exam, and a final project. Some background
in acoustics/physics is desirable.
Students will be required to attend one skills lab per week.
Knowledge of and proficiency with musical notation is required. Due to the limitations of the Electronic
Music Studio facility, enrollment will be limited to 12. Preference given to music majors or potential music
majors, first or second year students, and students with experience in related fields.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF Lab: 8:30-9:45 T, R First Semester: PEREZ VELAZQUEZ
1:10-2:25 MR Lab: 8:30-9:45 T, R Second Semester: PEREZ VELAZQUEZ
MUS 125 Music Cultures of the World (Not offered 2000-2001)*+
A case-study approach to the music of selected areas including Africa, Native America, India, and Afro-
America. Focus is on analyzing the concepts and behaviors that shape musical sound in different music
cultures.
No prior musical experience required, but students without musical backgrounds must learn a vocabulary
of terms for describing musical sound. There will be an emphasis on listening.
E. D. BROWN
MUS 126(S) Musics of Asia*
This course offers an introduction to the great diversity of Asian music. Our survey will span from East
Asia (China, Korea, and Japan) to Southeast Asia (Thailand and Indonesia) to the Indian subcontinent,
Central Asia (Tibet and Afghanistan), to the Middle East (Iran and the Arabian peninsula), and will end
with the extension of Asian music across North Africa and into Eastern Europe. Within this broad survey,
we will focus on selected and representative musical cultures and genres. In each section of the course,
aspects of cultural context (including music's function in religious life and its relationship to the other arts),
will be emphasized. While our focus will be on the traditional and classical musics of these cultures, we
will also briefly consider the current musical scene. Encounters with this music will include attendance at
live performances when possible.
Lecture/discussion.
Evaluation will be based on two tests, two short papers, and a final exam.
No prerequisites and no musical experience are necessary. Enrollment limited to 35.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W A. SHEPPARD
MUS 128 Masters of Russian and Soviet Music (Not offered 2000-2001)
An introductory survey of music from the late-eighteenth-century period, the rise of a national style, the
great composers of late-nineteenth-century Russia (Borodin, Mussorgsky, Tchaikovsky, Rimsky) and the
major figures of the twentieth century (Prokofiev, Shostakovich), with a special look at the ever-present
conflict between "Europeanization" versus Inner-Russian ideals and the peculiarities of musical life in the
old Soviet Union and in Russia today. Emphasis on listening, background reading, and class discussions of
assigned listening and historical topics.
Evaluation will be based on class participation and discussion, a series of listening quizzes, and a final
project.
K. C. ROBERTS
MUS 130(S) History of Jazz*+
This course surveys the history of jazz from its origins to the present. Emphasis is on the relationship be-
tween music and the social experience of African Americans, the aesthetics of jazz, and the on-going rela-
tionship between jazz and the music of Africa and the African diaspora.
No prior musical experience required, but students without musical backgrounds must learn a vocabulary
of terms for describing musical sound. There will be an emphasis on listening.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF E. D. BROWN
Music
­ 246 ­
MUS 136 Music in the Baroque Era (Not offered 2000-2001)
This course will survey the history of European art music from the early-seventeenth century to the middle
of the eighteenth. We will consider the emergence and development of several musical genres, including
(but not limited to) the cantata, oratorio, instrumental suites and concertos, and opera. In addition to tracing
musical changes, we will also discuss the social, cultural, and intellectual trends that influenced these
changes. Composers whose works will be considered include Monteverdi, Purcell, Couperin, Lully,
Schütz, Scarlatti, Vivaldi, Handel, Bach.
Evaluation will be based on two short quizzes, two short writing assignments, and a final exam.
MUS 137 Great Conductors/Great Orchestras (Not offered 2000-2001)
An examination of the rise of the conductor in the nineteenth century and the growth of the orchestra in the
late-nineteenth and twentieth centuries with special attention to the role of the maestro in building the musi-
cal organization and repertoire in Europe and in North America. Special attention will be given to figures
for whom we have major legacies of recorded and visual materials: Bernstein, Toscanini, Koussevitzky,
Stokowski, Karajan, Solti, Szell, etc.; together with their respective musical organizations and the rise and
influence of the recording industry in the twentieth century.
Music covered will include both opera and the traditional symphonic repertoire of the nineteenth and twen-
tieth centuries. The role of the orchestra as the center of North-American musical life will be examined
historically together with the changed status due to a change of patronage now. Students will be encour-
aged to work on a project of a particular orchestra and related conductors to produce a research project
reported both orally and in written form at semester's end.
No prerequisites. Students from the disciplines of the social sciences particularly welcome.
K. C. ROBERTS
MUS 140 Introduction to the Music of Duke Ellington (Not offered 2000-2001)
This course will survey the career and compositional style of Edward Kennedy (Duke) Ellington
(1899-1974). Students will learn to listen to and analyze music from throughout Ellington's five-decade
career as a bandleader, composer, arranger, and writer. Particular emphasis will be placed on development
of aural analysis skills, in terms of form, style, orchestration, and the ability to identify the individual
sounds of key Ellingtonian soloists. Ellington's importance as a key figure in American cultural history,
and the relationships between his music and parallel stylistic developments and influences from both with-
in and outside of the jazz tradition will also be discussed.
Requirements: weekly listening and reading assignments, one biographical paper examining the career of
an Ellingtonian, as well as participation in a group presentation to the class of one of Ellington's extended
works; midterm and final exams will also be given.
JAFFE
MUS 141(F) Introduction to the Music of John Coltrane
This course will survey the career and musical style of saxophonist and composer John Coltrane
(1926-1967), one of the most influential musicians of the twentieth century. Students will explore the de-
velopment of Coltrane's style through the study of representative recordings. Emphasis will be placed on
the relationships between Coltrane's musical style and those of his contemporaries within the jazz tradition.
We will also examine Coltrane's exploration of various non-Western sources and their incorporation into
his music, as well as Coltrane's own influence on other musicians practicing in a range of non-jazz styles.
Readings will include biography and related criticism.
Requirements: a paper on an approved topic of the students' choice, participation in an in-class group pre-
sentation of a recorded example of their choice, midterm and final exams.
Enrollment limited to 25.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR JAFFE
MUS 201(F), 202(S) Music Theory and Musicianship II
Music 201-202 presents the harmonic practices of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries (c. 1825-1950)
through analysis, performance, dictation, and composition of characteristic examples of "romantic" and
"modern" harmony.
In Music 201 the development of chromatic harmony is presented from Beethoven through Debussy and
Mahler by means of analysis, composition, sightsinging, keyboard application and dictation. In Music 202
the principles of twentieth-century harmony, from Schoenberg to Varese and the "avant-garde," are pres-
ented by means of analysis, composition, sightsinging, performance application and dictation.
To supplement the development of musical skills appropriate to the period, students are expected to attend
weekly skills labs in eartraining, sightsinging, and keyboard application, as well as to develop, outside of
class, their vocal, aural, and keyboard competence through regular practice of the materials supplied.
Three lectures and one skills lab session per week.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, written projects of various lengths, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Music 104 or permission of instructor.
Hour: 12:00-12:50 MWF Lab: 9:55-11:10 T PEREZ VELAZQUEZ
MUS 203T(F), 204T(S) Composition
This is a beginning course in free composition taught in tutorial format. Students will meet twice weekly;
once with regard to student's own creative projects (for acoustic and/or electronic media), and once in
Music
­ 247 ­
meeting with other composition students in which presentations are given, such group meetings to cover
areas such as contemporary compositional techniques, contemporary fashions of musical analysis, and
compositional trends since World War II.
Student presentations will develop these areas via the tutorial format. Also, each student is expected to
arrange for the performance of his or her work(s) at least twice a year.
Prerequisites: Music 201 and 202 or permission of the instructor.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR First Semester: SUDERBURG
2:35-3:50 MR Second Semester: D. KECHLEY
MUS 207(S) Music in History I: Antiquity-1750
A survey tracing the development of music in Western society from the Medieval through the Renaissance
and Baroque periods. Representative works by composers such as Machaut, Josquin, Palestrina, Montev-
erdi, Vivaldi, and Bach will be studied. Emphasis will be placed on relating changing musical styles and
genres to their sociological context. Issues such as the use and purpose of music and the musician's place in
his or her society will be addressed.
Three lecture/discussions per week.
Evaluation will be based on several short papers, a series of quizzes, and a final exam.
Required of music majors. Open to qualified non-majors with permission of instructor.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF MCGRADE
MUS 208(F) Music in History II: 1750-1900
A survey exploring the development of music in Western society from the Classical through the Romantic
and the turn into the twentieth century. Emphasis will be on the contextual study of works by such compos-
ers as Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven, Schumann, Berlioz, Wagner, and Richard Strauss. Changing musical
styles will be examined within the framework of the philosophy and aesthetics of the period, with special
attention paid to the use and purpose of music and the role of the musician in his or her society.
Three lecture/discussions per week.
Evaluation will be based on several short papers, a series of quizzes, and a final exam.
Required of music majors. Open to qualified non-majors with permission of instructor.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF K. C. ROBERTS
MUS 209(F) Music in History III: Musics of the Twentieth Century*
A survey of musics in both Western and non-Western society from the close of the nineteenth century to
the present. Emphasis will be on the contextual study of the music of major composers of Western art
music, on the musical expressions of selected areas of world music such as Africa, Asia, India, and the
Americas, and on the intermingling of musical influences of pop, jazz, and art music of the electronic age.
Two lecture/discussions per week.
Evaluation will be based on written assignments, in-class reports, participation, quizzes, a midterm, and a
final exam.
Required of music majors. Open to qualified non-majors with permission of instructor. Enrollment limited
to 15.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MW A. SHEPPARD
MUS 211(F) Arranging for Voices
The elements of arranging music for vocal ensembles will be studied from numerous angles. In addition to
regular assignments involving arranging in various styles, the class will study successful vocal arrange-
ments from throughout history. Analysis of the various components involved in good arranging--includ-
ing voice leading, range, balance and voicing, key relationships, and motivic and structural cohesiveness--
will be addressed.
Weekly arranging assignments will be combined with supporting musical analyses, and the midterm and
final exams will be comprised of larger scale arranging projects.
Prerequisite: permission of instructor.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TR B. WELLS
MUS 212(F) Jazz Theory and Improvisation I
The theory and application of basic techniques in jazz improvisation including blues forms, swing, bebop,
modally based composition, Afro-Cuban, etc. Appropriate for students with very little specific experience
in jazz as well as more experienced students. Knowledge of all key signatures, major/minor keys and
modes, intervals, triads and basic seventh chords (including inversions) and their functions within keys,
and competence on an instrument is essential. Alternates between lecture style exposition of theoretical
topics and their specific applications in an informal performance/rehearsal setting.
In addition to the development of skills, written work consists of assignments (e.g. harmonic analysis and
realization as well as exercise in transposition and transcription) and a final project (e.g. transcription of a
recorded solo or a composition).
Evaluation will be based on quizzes, a final exam, a final project and performance, as well as improvement
as measured in weekly class performance and studios if appropriate. Cannot be taken pass/fail.
Prerequisite: Music 103 or permission of the instructor. Music 104 strongly recommended. Enrollment
limited to 15.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TR JAFFE
Music
­ 248 ­
MUS 213(S) Jazz Theory and Improvisation II
A continuation of Music 212, this course builds upon theoretical knowledge, performance and aural skills
developed previously. Students will deal with more complex theoretical and performance issues, such as
modal interchange and minor key harmony, use of symmetric scales, commonly-used reharmonizations of
the blues and "I Got Rhythm" chord progressions, and Coltrane's "Three Tonic" harmonic system.
The format is the same as for Music 212, with two weekly meetings, alternating between theory and per-
formance sessions.
Requirements: two transcription projects and an original composition, as well as a midterm and final exam
and participation in a recital at the end of the semester.
Prerequisite: Music 212. Enrollment limited to 15.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TR JAFFE
MUS 214 Basic Conducting (Not offered 2000-2001)
This course will introduce and develop a broad range of skills associated with conducting. Primarily focus-
ing on score reading and baton technique, the course will include exercises in sightsinging, keyboard skills,
vocal/instrumental skills, musicological pursuits, rehearsal techniques, aural training, and organizational
skills.
Weekly conducting and score reading assignments will form the core of the work load and larger projects
involving conducting existing ensembles (vocal and/or instrumental) will be the basis of the midterm and
final exams.
Prerequisite: permission of the instructor.
B. WELLS
MUS 215(S) Choral Conducting
Choral conducting techniques will be developed through exercises and projects that encompass the many
facets of this activity. Using the class as the primary practice choir, students will focus on conducting pat-
terns applied to elements of interpretation, keyboard and vocal skills, issues of tuning and blend, rehearsal
techniques, score study, and style and repertoire. Regular videotaping of student instructors will provide
opportunities for students to study themselves. Repertoire will include works from the early Renaissance
through the late-twentieth century, accompanied and a cappella, and issues of conducting ensembles at
various skill levels will be addressed.
Prerequisite: permission of the instructor.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR B. WELLS
MUS 223T Music Technology for Musicians (Not offered 2000-2001)
Designed for students with musical literacy and some music background who wish to learn basic prin-
ciples of musical technology and practical use of current software and hardware. Students will work indi-
vidually in the studio using both MIDI digital recording/editing applications. At times students will present
work in progress to the rest of the class. Some limited lectures will provide appropriate historical context
and technical explanations in the areas of acoustics, analog electronics, basic computer function, digital
processes, and MIDI. Although it is not a composition course, some original composition may be done as
part of a final project, etc. Nevertheless, emphasis will be on technical rather than intuitive matters.
Students will complete a number of assignments designed to develop knowledge and skill with various
aspects of the technology in addition to quizzes, midterm and final. In some cases the exams will consist of
demonstrating practical facility in the studio. A final project may be required.
Some background in acoustics/physics is desirable. Knowledge of and proficiency with musical notation is
required. Due to the limitations of the MIDI Studio facility, enrollment will be limited to 8.
PEREZ VELAZQUEZ
MUS 230(S) Seminar in Caribbean Music*+
This seminar will examine the music of several Caribbean islands, especially Trinidad, Cuba, Puerto Rico,
Jamaica, and Haiti. Although the focus of this seminar is Caribbean music, students with sufficient back-
ground may write about Caribbean dance. Potential topics to be investigated include: African and Euro-
pean influences in the music of the Caribbean, Creolization in music, the colonial legacy as it has affected
music, the effect of migration and globalization on music, the impact of Caribbean music abroad, gender
roles in Caribbean music, the creativity of Caribbean musicians, and nationalism in music.
Students will write four 5- to 8-page papers on the above topics. Classes will consist of presentations by
students and their professor. Student papers will be read beforehand by all students and the instructor and
discussed in class. In order to allow time for the professor and the students to read and think about the
papers to be discussed, all papers must be e-mailed to the instructor and other students at least 24 hours
before the class. No late papers accepted. Paper presentations should be illustrated with audio or video
examples when possible.
Prerequisites: substantial knowledge of the history, culture, and the society of at least one Caribbean coun-
try or prior course work in (or substantial knowledge of) music. Interested student should submit an essay
describing background and interest in the subject matter.
Enrollment limited to 10.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR E. D. BROWN
Music
­ 249 ­
MUS 251-258 Individual Vocal and Instrumental Instruction
Private lessons in voice, keyboard and most orchestral instruments offered for one-half course credit per
semester. Must be taken in addition to four full-credit courses. May be taken as graded or pass/fail as with
all fifth courses.
Lessons given once each week (TBA). Student is expected to practice one hour per day. All private instruc-
tion involves an extra fee which is partially subsidized by the department. For further information and
guidelines, or to secure a contract for lessons, see the Coordinator of Private Instruction.
Register for course number 251, with the appropriate section number from the following paragraph. Stu-
dents will be reassigned to course numbers 252-258 based on the number of semesters of instruction al-
ready taken.
Register for specific instrument or voice by the appropriate section number. (01 Bassoon, 02 Cello, 03
Clarinet, 04 Double Bass, 05 Flute, 06 Guitar, 07 Harpsichord, 08 Horn, 09 Jazz Piano, 10 Oboe, 11 Organ,
12 Percussion, 13 Piano, 14 Saxophone, 15 Trumpet, 16 Viola, 17 Violin, 18 Voice)
Prerequisite: Music 103 or permission of the Coordinator of Private Instruction.
Hour: TBA STAFF
MUS 301 An Introduction to Modal and Tonal Counterpoint (Not offered 2000-2001)
The study of modal or tonal counterpoint is prepared by study of traditional species counterpoint after Fux.
The introduction to the techniques of modal or Renaissance (sixteenth century) counterpoint is based on
the study and analysis of countrapuntal techniques in the works of Josquin, Willaert, Lassus and Montever-
di, as well as the study of theorists applicable to these techniques, i.e., Tinctoris, Zarlino, etc. The study of
tonal or Baroque counterpoint is focused on the works of J. S. Bach, i.e., on his two-and three-part key-
board inventions, and on his three-part keyboard fugues.
Meets three times per week.
Evaluation will be based on assignments, quizzes, final exam.
Prerequisite: Music 202.
SUDERBURG
MUS 308(S) Orchestration and Instrumentation
Study of and practical exercises in the individual instruments of the orchestra, both in terms of traditional
and advanced instrumental techniques. Following this study is an analysis of the characteristics and make-
up of the modern orchestra. Emphasis is placed on practical orchestrations from the styles of Haydn and
Beethoven through Ravel and Mahler. Consistent reference shall be made to the "classic" sources of instru-
mentation/orchestration: Strauss, Berlioz, Forsyth, Kenan, Blatter, etc. Required text: A. Blatter Orchestra-
tion.
Evaluation: midterm, final, and periodic assignments in scoring and orchestration.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF SUDERBURG
MUS 394(S) Junior Thesis
This course involves independent study in history or theory of music, under the supervision of a member of
the department, as preparation for the senior thesis.
MUS 402(S) Senior Seminar in Music
The course will have two parts. Before the spring recess, an examination of several of the major unfinished
works of important composers, with a look at how various persons have attempted to complete them. After
the spring recess, we shall examine the development of music and musical life in North America, with
attention to the current state of institutions, patronage, and the marketplace. We will also consider problems
which have developed, sometimes due to the unique "new" world situation not stemming from a tradition
of court or royal patronage.
Evaluation will be based on weekly papers/presentations and class participation.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR K. C. ROBERTS
MUS 493(F)-W031-494(S) Senior Thesis
Required for all students approved for thesis work in music.
MUS 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
SPECIAL STUDIES IN THE MUSICAL ART
MUS 325, 326, 427, 428 Musical Studies
Tutorial in nature, these courses are for work of a creative nature, based upon the talents and back-
grounds of the individual student, working under the close guidance of a member of the department to
fulfill some project established by the consent of teacher, student, and department. The election is utilized
to supplement the department's course offerings, and may include such projects as:
a. independent study in the performance of and literature for voice, piano, organ, or an orchestral instru-
ment with participation in periodic Performance Seminar required;
b. independent lessons in composition;
c. coaching, rehearsal, and performance of instrumental or vocal chamber music;
d. advanced work in music theory (critical methods and analysis, solfeggio, keyboard harmony, ear-
training and dictation, counterpoint and orchestration). Prerequisite: Music 202;
Music, Neuroscience
­ 250 ­
e. advanced studies in modal counterpoint (composition and analysis of contrapuntal structure from
1150-1600, from Leonin through Lassus). Prerequisite: Music 301;
f. advanced studies in tonal counterpoint (composition and analysis of contrapuntal structures from
1600-1914, from Monteverdi through Schoenberg). Prerequisite: Music 301;
g. studies in issue areas such as acoustics and perception, philosophy and aesthetics of music, women
and minorities in music, music of non-Western cultures, music and technology;
h. advanced work in music history;
i. advanced studies in jazz improvisation.
The project may be continued by the election of the next-higher numbered course or another facet of
the musical art. The specific name of the project elected is to be specified after the title, "Musical Stud-
ies."
The numbers 325, 326, 427, 428 should be used for four sequence courses in the same subject. If a different
subject is elected, the numbering sequence should start again at 325. These numbers are selected without
regard to semester taken or class year of student.
Prerequisites, Music 103, 104, 201, 202, and permission of the instructor and department. (Intended pri-
marily for music majors.)
Students must obtain a special form for this course election from the Music Department Office. These
forms must be completed, and all necessary departmental and faculty permissions secured, by the end of
the preregistration period in the semester before the semester in which the students wish to do this course.
Additional guidelines for instrumental or vocal lessons for full credit must be secured at the Music Depart-
ment office.
Note: Music 325, 326, 427, 428 must be taken as a graded course and it is strongly recommended that it be
taken only as part of a four-course load.
CHAIR and Members of the Department
NEUROSCIENCE (Div. III)
Chair, Professor BETTY ZIMMERBERG (First Semester)
Professor HEATHER WILLIAMS (Second Semester)
Advisory Committee: Professors: DEWITT, G. GOETHALS, P. SOLOMON***, H. WILLIAMS**,
ZIMMERBERG*, ZOTTOLI. Assistant Professor: ADLER.
Neuroscience is a rapidly growing interdisciplinary field concerned with understanding the relationship
between brain, mind, and behavior. The interdisciplinary nature of the field is apparent when surveying
those who call themselves neuroscientists. Among these are anatomists, physiologists, chemists, psycholo-
gists, philosophers, computer scientists, linguists, and ethologists. The areas that neuroscience addresses
are equally diverse and range from physiological and molecular studies of single neurons, to investigations
of how systems of neurons produce phenomena such as vision and movement, to the study of the neural
basis of complex cognitive phenomena such as memory, language, and consciousness. Applications of
neuroscience research are rapidly growing and include the development of drugs to treat neurodegenera-
tive disorders such as Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease, the development of noninvasive tech-
niques for imaging the human brain such as PET scans and MRI, and the development of methods for
repair of the damaged human brain such as the use of brain explants. Combining this wide range of disci-
plines, areas of research, and application for the study of a single remarkably complex organ--the brain--
requires a unique interdisciplinary approach. The Neuroscience Program is designed to provide students
with the opportunity to explore this approach.
THE PROGRAM
The program in neuroscience consists of five courses including an introductory course, three electives,
and a senior course. In addition, students will be required to take two courses, Biology 101 and Psychology
101, as prerequisites to the program.
Introduction to Neuroscience (Neuroscience 201) is the basic course and provides the background for
other neuroscience courses. Ideally, this will be taken before the end of sophomore year. Either Biology
101 or Psychology 101 serves as the prerequisite. Electives are designed to provide in-depth coverage in-
cluding laboratory experience in specific areas of neuroscience. At least one elective course is required in
Biology (Group A) and one in Psychology (Group B). The third elective course may also come from
Group A or Group B, or may be selected from offerings from other departments. Topics in Neuroscience
(Neuroscience 401) is designed to provide an integrative culminating experience. Most students will take
this course in the senior year.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN NEUROSCIENCE
The degree with honors in Neuroscience provides students with the opportunity to undertake an original
research project under the supervision of one or more of the Neuroscience faculty. In addition to complet-
ing the requirements of the Neuroscience Program, candidates for an honors degree must enroll in Neuro-
science 493-W031-494 and write a thesis based on an original research project. Presentation of a thesis,
Neuroscience
­ 251 ­
however, should not be interpreted as a guarantee of a degree with honors. Students interested in pursuing a
degree with honors should contact the Neuroscience Advisory Committee in the spring of their junior year.
REQUIRED COURSES
Neuroscience 201 Introduction to Neuroscience
Neuroscience 401 Topics in Neuroscience
PREREQUISITE COURSES
Biology 101 The Cell
Psychology 101 Introductory Psychology
(Both courses should be completed by the end of the sophomore year.)
ELECTIVES
Three elective courses are required. At least one elective must be fromGroup A and at least one elective
must be from Group B. The third elective may come from either Group A or Group B or the student may
wish to petition the advisory committee to substitute a related course from another department.
Group A
Biology 204 Animal Behavior
Biology 205 Physiology
Biology 304 Neurobiology
Biology 411 Plasticity in the Nervous System
Group B
Psychology 312 Drugs and Behavior
Psychology 313 Human Neuropsychology
Psychology 314T Left Brain, Right Brain--The Great Divide? (Deleted 2000-2001)
Psychology 315 Hormones and Behavior
Psychology 316 Clinical Neuroscience
Psychology 318 Neural Systems and Behavior
Psychology 362 Psychoneuroimmunology
Some examples of related courses that have been accepted as electives in previous years are:
Biology 202 Genetics
Biology 301 Developmental Biology
Biology 306 Advanced Molecular Genetics
Computer Science 373 Artificial Intelligence
Psychology 252 Psychological Disorders
NSCI 201(F) Introduction to Neuroscience (Same as Biology 212 and Psychology 212)
A study of the relationship between brain, mind, and behavior. Topics include a survey of the structure and
function of the nervous system, neuroethology, development, learning and memory, sensory and motor
systems, language, consciousness, assessment of human brain damage, and clinical disorders such as
schizophrenia, Parkinson's Disease, and Alzheimer's Disease. The laboratory portion of the course focuses
on current topics in neuroscience.
Requirements: two hour exams, a final exam, and laboratory demonstrations.
Prerequisite: Psychology 101 or Biology 101. Open to first-year students.
Satisfies one semester of the Division III requirement.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR Lab: 1-4 M, T, W ADLER and P. SOLOMON
NSCI 401(F) Topics in Neuroscience
This course considers contemporary and controversial issues in neuroscience. Students use their knowl-
edge of brain, mind, and behavior to discuss and evaluate scientific, ethical, and public policy issues re-
garding neuroscience. Topics will vary from year-to-year, but in all cases the course will emphasize an
integrative approach in which students will be asked to consider issues from a range of perspectives includ-
ing molecular, developmental, systems, and behavioral neuroscience.
The course will center around student led discussions and debates.
Requirements: participation in class discussions and debates and two position papers.
Prerequisite: enrollment in the Neuroscience Program or permission of the instructor.
This course is required of all senior students in the Neuroscience Program.
Hour: 7:00-9:30 p.m. T ADLER
NSCI 493(F)-W031-494(S) Senior Thesis
Independent research for two semesters and a winter study under the guidance of one or more neurosci-
ence faculty. After reviewing the literature in a specialized field of neuroscience, students design and con-
duct an original research project, the results of which are reported in a thesis.
Hour: TBA H. WILLIAMS
­ 252 ­
PERFORMANCE STUDIES
Advisory Faculty: Professors: BUCKY, EPPEL, HOPPIN, OCKMAN*, DARROW, Coordinator.
Associate Professors: D. EDWARDS. Assistant Professors: BEAN**, Coordinator, BURTON,
CASSIDAY, S. HAMILTON, KAGAYA, A. SHEPPARD. Lecturers: BROTHERS, JAFFEE.
Performance Studies provides an opportunity to inhabit a place where the making of artistic and cultural
meaning intersects with critical reflection on those processes. The cluster has as its primary goal the bring-
ing together of those students and faculty engaged in the creative arts, i.e., studio art, creative writing,
dance, film and video, music, and theater with those departments that reflect in part on those activities, e.g.,
Anthropology and Sociology, Art History, Classics, foreign languages, English, History, Literary Studies,
Music, Philosophy, Psychology, Religion and Theater.
The cluster allows faculty and students to conduct intensive and focussed interdisciplinary studies in
performance. The central ideas which performance studies confronts--action, body, frame, representation,
race, ethnicity, gender, politics, history and transcultural experience--circulate within and through the sub-
jects and fields upon which the cluster draws.
Students in Performance Studies are encouraged to do three things: 1) try different artistic media, both in
the curriculum and beyond; 2) move between the doing of art and performance and thinking about that
process; and 3) prepare a portfolio of their work in different media. The list of courses below is divided
between doing courses (practicums) and reflection/criticism courses. Voluntary portfolios are entirely op-
tional. What we suggest is that portfolios should draw on at least four projects or productions. They should
show critical self-reflection on the creative processes, comparison of the artistic media employed and also
demonstrate performance criticism on the work of others. Preparation of the portfolio should normally be-
gin in the second semester of the junior year. It will be done under the supervision of a member of the
advisory committee and will be presented in the senior year to faculty and students interested in the cluster.
Reflection and Criticism Courses
ANSO 328T Emotions and the Self
ANTH 402 Ritual and Power
ArtH 365 Non-Fiction and Experimental Film
English 351 Queer Theories
English 369 Queer World Making in Literature, Film and Performance
English 376 Documentary Technologies
English 373 Modern Critical Theory
English 387 American Gothic Video
EXPR 242 Cyberscapes
Japanese 276 Japanese Performance Traditions
Literary Studies 202 Literary Genres: The Nature of Narrative
Music 106 Opera
Music 112 Music and the Dramatic Imagination
Music 130 History of Jazz
Music 140 Introduction to the Music of Duke Ellington
Music 141 Introduction to the Music of John Coltrane
Philosophy 308 Wittgenstein's Investigations
Philosophy 327 Foucault: Gender, Power and the Body
Religion 302 Religion and Society
Theatre 205 Culture of Carnival
Theatre 207 History of Dance
Theatre 210 Multicultural Performance
Theatre 323 Theatre of Images
Practicum Courses
ArtS 230 Drawing II
ArtS 241 Painting
ArtS 257 Photography
ArtS 288 Video
English 281 The Writing of Poetry
English 283 Introductory Workshop in Fiction
Music 203, 204 Composition
Music 212, 213 Jazz Theory and Improvisation
Music 214 Basic Conducting
Music 215 Choral Conducting
Physical Education Dance, Pilates Method Matwork
Theatre 201 The Design Response
Theatre 208 Dance Composition
Theatre 306 Advanced Acting
Theatre 307 Stage Directing
Theatre 322T Performance Criticism
Theatre 323 Theatre of Images
Theatre 324 Theatre for the Ear: Telling Stories through Sound
­ 253 ­
PHILOSOPHY (Div. II)
Chair, Professor ALAN WHITE
Professors: SAWICKI, WHITE. Associate Professor: GERRARD*. Assistant Professors: CRUZ,
DUDLEY, MLADENOVIC*. Visiting Professor: KOJEN. Visiting Assistant Professor: BULL-
WINKLE.
To engage in philosophy is to ask a variety of questions about the world and our place in it. What can we
know? What should we do? What may we hope? What makes human beings human? These questions, in
various forms, and others like them are not inventions of philosophers; on the contrary, they occur to most
people simply as they live their lives. Many of us ask them as children, but later either ignore them, or
accept answers we can live with. Philosophers, however, seek to keep such questions open, and to address
them through reasoned discussion and argument, instead of accepting answers to them based on opinion or
prejudice.
The program in philosophy is designed to aid students in thinking about these issues, by acquainting
them with influential work in the field, past and present, and by training them to grapple with these issues
themselves. The program emphasizes training in clear, critical thinking and in effective writing. Philosophy
courses center around class discussions and the writing of interpretive and critical essays.
MAJOR
Philosophy is a discipline with a long and intricate history, a history that remains an integral part of the
discipline. In this way, it differs dramatically from the natural sciences: for example, although no contem-
porary physicists or biologists embrace Aristotle's physics or biology, among philosophers there continue
to be champions of Aristotle's metaphysics and of his ethics. Because of the richness and continuing im-
portance of the history of philosophy, the program is designed to give majors a historical background that
will acquaint them with a wide variety of approaches in philosophical issues, and will provide them with a
basis for evaluating and contributing to contemporary debates.
A total of nine courses is required for the major in Philosophy. Students should begin with Philosophy
101 and 102, in either order; both are required for the major. These courses provide historical introductions
to the two major areas of philosophical inquiry, i.e., practical inquiry into issues of ethics and politics, and
theoretical inquiry into issues of knowledge, belief, understanding, and reality. Following 101 and 102,
students should take 201 and either 202, 204, or 206 again in either order; neither is required for the major,
but both are prerequisites for many upper-level courses and both are strongly recommended for students
who think they may be interested in pursuing graduate study in philosophy. The final required course is the
Senior Seminar, Philosophy 401.
Following your completion of 201 and either 202, 204, or 206, you will have the background you need
in order to decide which five additional courses will best complete your major. Members of the department
will gladly advise you, but you will have discovered which areas, topics, and figures are most important to
you. Non-majors are invited to ask the chair for advice on course selection.
Students considering graduate study in philosophy are strongly urged to develop reading competence in
German, French, or Greek before graduation.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN PHILOSOPHY
The degree with honors in Philosophy is awarded to the student who has demonstrated outstanding
achievement in a program of study that extends beyond the requirements of the major. The extension be-
yond major requirements may take the form either of independent work culminating in a senior essay or
thesis (the independent-study route) or of additional course work (the directed-study route). Candidates
must have GPAs of 3.6 or higher in their courses in philosophy, both at the time of applying for candidacy
and at the end of senior year.
The independent-study route to honors requires the completion and defense of either a senior essay pro-
duced in the fall semester plus winter study period (maximum 40 pages)or a year-long senior thesis (maxi-
mum 75 pages). Plans for either essay or thesis (including a brief proposal and bibliography, worked out in
consultation with an advisor) must be submitted to the department in April of the junior year. A recommen-
dation for graduation with honors will be made on the basis of the thoroughness, independence, and origi-
nality of the student's work.
The directed-study route to honors required the completion of two courses in philosophy in addition to
the nine required for the major. Candidates taking this route must also submit to the department copies of
two term papers (10 pages or longer) written for philosophy courses they have taken; the papers may be
revised on the basis of instructors' comments. A recommendation for graduation with honors will be made
on the basis of the scope of the student's course work, the quality of the student's participation in Philoso-
phy 401, and the thoroughness, independence, and originality reflected in the submitted papers.
PHIL 101(F,S) Introduction to Moral and Political Philosophy+
Throughout the history of Western philosophy, there have been debates concerning how human beings
should live: What should we do both with our lives as wholes and in specific problematic situations? The
debates have addressed us both as individuals and as members of political communities. This course aims
to aid us in responding to these debates, and in living our lives, on the basis of reasoned conclusions rather
than from unrecognized presuppositions. The course concentrates on Plato'sRepublic, the most influential
Philosophy
­ 254 ­
ethical and political text within Western philosophy, but we assess the Republic in light of elaborations and
criticisms that have developed over the past 2500 years, in works by Aristotle, Kant, Mill, and Nietzsche.
Emphasis on class discussion and the writing of critical papers.
Requirements: frequent short papers, totaling 20-30 pages. This course is writing-intensive.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 19 per section.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF, 1:10-2:25 MR, 2:35-3:50 MR First Semester: KOJEN, WHITE
9:00-9:50 MWF, 10:00-10:50 MWF Second Semester: BULLWINKLE
PHIL 102(F,S) Introduction to Metaphysics and Epistemology+
Metaphysics and epistemology are the two core pursuits of theoretical philosophy (as opposed to practical
philosophy, the focus of Philosophy 101). Metaphyics is concerned with the ultimate character of reality.
The metaphsician seeks to develop knowledge (as opposed to mere opinion or belief) of all things natural,
human, and divine. She asks, for example: Are we free , or are our acts determined? Is there a God? If so,
what must God be like?
Epistemology is concerned with how we determine the difference between knowledge and mere opinion.
The epistemologist thus asks: What does it mean truly to know something? How can we acquire such gen-
uine knowledge? Answers to these epistemological questions are essential if we are to have any confidence
in the methods and results of our metaphysical investigations.
This course will emphasize the established historical classics that provide the basis for understanding con-
temporary work on metaphysics and epistemological issues; we will consider, among others, the work of
Descartes, Hume, and Kant
Emphasis on class discussion and the writing of critical papers.
Requirements: frequent short papers, totaling 20-30 pages; this course is writing-intensive.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 19 per section.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF, 10:00-10:50 MWF First Semester: DUDLEY
11:00-11:50 MWF, 11:20-12:35 TR Second Semester: CRUZ, WHITE
PHIL 103(F) Logic and Language
Logic is the study of reasoning and argument. More particularly, it concerns itself with the difference be-
tween good and bad reasoning, between strong and weak arguments. We all examine the virtues and vices
of good arguments in both informal and formal systems. The goals of this course are to improve the critical
thinking of the students, to introduce them to sentential and predicate logic, to familiarize them with
enough formal logic to enable them to read some of the great works of philosophy, which use formal logic
(such as Wittgenstein'sTractatus), and to examine some of the connections between logic and philosophy.
Requirements: a midterm, a final, frequent homework and problems sets.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF BULLWINKLE
PHIL 201(S) Continental Philosophy: From Hegel to Poststructuralism+
This course is designed to introduce students to the complicated history of post-Kantian philosophical
thought in France and Germany. Figures to be considered may include Hegel, Marx, Kierkegaard,
Nietzsche, Husserl, Heidegger, Sartre, Habermas, Gadamer, Derrida, and Foucault; movements discussed
may include phenomenology, existentialism, hermeneutics, continental feminism, and poststructuralism.
By introducing them to main currents and figures in the modern continental tradition, Philosophy 201 will
prepare students for more advanced courses drawing from this tradition; relevant courses are offered in a
variety of departments, including Anthropology and Sociology, English, Literary Studies, Philosophy,
Political Science, and Religion.
Requirements: attendance, participation, weekly précis or responses to study questions, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: none, although Philosophy 101 and/or 102, or upper-division theory courses in other depart-
ments are highly recommended. Open to first-year students only with the permission of the instructors.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF DUDLEY and WHITE
PHIL 206(F) Language and Mind: An Introduction to Analytic Philosophy
Language and mind are two of the central topics of analytic philosophy. Understanding language demands
an investigation into the nature of linguistic meaning and reference. Understanding mind demands a reso-
lution of the mind-body problem. We will engage both of these challenges. In addition, we will pursue
attempts to understand language and mind together in cases where theories from one of these domains are
used to illuminate the other.
This course, like Philosophy 204, is a thematic introduction to analytic philosophy, while Philosophy 202 is
an historical introduction. Students are permitted to take all three courses; students strongly interested in
analytic philosophy are encouraged to take 202 as well as 204 or 206.
Requirements: short writing assignments each week, and a longer final paper.
Prerequisite: at least one course in Philosophy.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF CRUZ
PHIL 209(F) Philosophy of Science
At least since Newton's time, philosophers have taken science to be the epitome of human knowledge, and
have used it to focus their epistemological inquiries. Some of those inquiries concern problems of the spe-
cial sciences, including the nature of space, time and causality (physics), the relation of organic to inorganic
nature (biology), the evidential basis for claims about other people's minds (psychology), and the objectiv-
ity of historical accounts (social sciences). Others address more general problems about science as such:
Philosophy
­ 255 ­
What distinguishes science from nonscience? What counts as a scientific explanation? How do scientists
justify their claims? How do scientists choose between rival theories, and how are these choices related to
the historical context? In this course, which presupposes no scientific training, we will evaluate historical
and contemporary contributions to a range of problems both special and general.
Requirements: class participation, frequent short writing assignments, midterm, final paper.
Prerequisite: Philosophy 102 or 103 or permission of the instructor.
Hour: 7:00-9:30 p.m. T BULLWINKLE
PHIL 210 Philosophy of Medicine (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
The aim of the course is to analyze and discuss philosophical questions about the nature, domain, methods
and social role of medicine, thereby generating some understanding of both the nature of philosophical
thinking and of medical practices. Some of the questions we will focus on include: What is medicine?
What are its goals? What is the nature of medical explanation? How are the concepts of "health" and "dis-
ease" to be defined? What is medical reductionism and what are its limits? Are there metaphysical and
ideological assumptions in contemporary Western medical theory and if so, should they be avoided? Can
we avoid them, and if so, how? Some of the specific topics we will focus on in discussing these general
questions include: psychiatry as a branch of medicine, overmedicalization of everyday life, the conceptual-
ization of the human body, gender bias in medical research and practice, medical explanations of human
sexuality and gender, the rise of medical authority, and iatrogenesis.
Requirements: four short papers and a larger (6-8 pages) final paper.
No prerequisites.
MLADENOVIC
PHIL 221(F) Greek Philosophy (Same as Classics 221)
What is now called Greek philosophy was, in Classical Athens, one current in a larger intellectual debate
about what kind of knowledge, and hence what kind of education, a person needed to live well. This course
will begin with an examination of Plato's views on this question, considered in the context of two rival
views about knowledge and the good life: that of rhetoric or the art of persuasion (Gorgias), and that of
politics or the art of citizenship (Protagoras). Plato's criticisms of these two positions and his own positive
attempts to specify the contents of knowledge and to develop an educational program open up further
questions: Is the kind of knowledge needed for living well possible, given our cognitive faculties and our
social environment? Is there any benefit in seeking approximations of this kind of knowledge?
After Plato, we will turn to three different ancient responses to him: Aristotle, the Stoics, and the Skeptics.
We will look at their criticisms of Plato's views and at their own alternative views about the content of
knowledge, the possibility of acquiring it, the purposes and methods of education, and the relationship be-
tween knowledge and living well.
Requirements: one in-class presentation, four 4- to 5-page papers and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Philosophy 101 or 102.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR KOJEN
PHIL 230(S) Philosophy of Psychology
It is popularly alleged that all of science reduces to physics. If this is true, it presents an obvious puzzle:
Why do people waste time pursuing chemistry, geology, biology, or psychology? One standard answer is
that it would be too difficult to conduct all the sciences in terms of physics. This is right, but illuminates
only the least interesting part of the picture. Our focus in this course will be on psychology, as psychology
presents some of the more difficult and exciting challenges in the philosophy of science. We will critically
investigate the claim that psychology engages in a manner of explanation all its own. Along the way, we
will tour the history of psychology from the Enlightenment through this century. This is a course for philos-
ophers who are hoping for an introduction to the philosophy of psychology, for psychologists who are
seeking a better understanding of what an explanation in psychology is, and for the scientist who wonders
whether physics exhausts scientific inquiry.
Requirements: weekly short writing assignments (3-4 pages) and one longer final paper (12-15 pages).
No prerequisites, although Philosophy 102 and at least one course in psychology, computer science, or
neuroscience are highly recommended.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF CRUZ
PHIL 231(F) Ancient Political Thought (Same as Political Science 231)
(See under Political Science for full description.)
PHIL 232(S) Modern Political Thought (Same as Political Science 232)
(See under Political Science for full description.)
PHIL 237(S) Environmental Philosophy (Same as Environmental Studies 237)
Since debates about the environment surfaced in the early 1960's, they have sprouted up everywhere from
corporate boardrooms to anarchist chat rooms and presidential elections. In this course, we will take a criti-
cal look at some central issues in these debates. Following a selective survey of local and regional prob-
lems (e.g., industrial pollution, energy production, waste management, etc.), we will take up some broader
philosophical questions about the environment. What are the criteria for membership in the moral commu-
nity, and do they apply to animals, organic nature, ecosystems or the environment as a whole? If the goal of
protecting the environment necessitates changes in our economic, social and political practices, how radi-
Philosophy
­ 256 ­
cal and feasible are those changes? Do science and technology presuppose a violent attitude toward na-
ture? Is there a link between the oppression of women and environmental abuse? Do some social groups
bear a disproportionate share of environmental hazards? As positions and perspectives emerge, we will
bring them to bear on the problems surveyed at the start of the course. Readings are interdisciplinary but
primarily philosophical.
Requirements: class participation, frequent short writing assignments and peer responses, field trips, final
paper, and possibly the organization of a student conference on the environment.
Prerequisites: Philosophy 101 or permission of the instructor.
Hour 9:55-11:10 TR BULLWINKLE
PHIL 238 Knowledge and Reality in Indian Thought (Same as Religion 244) (Not offered
2000-2001)*
(See under Religion for full description.)
PHIL 242(F) Philosophy of Religion: Faith and Reason (Same as Religion 294)
What is the relationship between faith and reason? Most often they are thought to be antithetical: if rational
grounds can be provided to support a particular knowledge claim (for example, by developing an argument
that proves the existence of God), then faith is unnecessary; conversely, if faith is the basis for a particular
knowledge claim, then this amounts to an admission that no rational grounds of support are available. In
other words, it seems that either one can be rigorously rational--accepting as true only what can be dem-
onstrated on the basis of empirical evidence and argument--or one can accept the truth of certain claims on
faith, but only at the cost of admitting to irrationality. The greatest European thinkers of the eighteenth
century confronted this dilemma head-on. Defenders of the Enlightenment firmly rejected irrationality, so
those who also rejected atheism strove to produce sound arguments for the existence of God and the im-
mortality of the soul. Skeptics insisted that these arguments all failed, and that atheism is therefore a neces-
sary consequence of a commitment to reason that disdains all faith. Kant, however, suggested a third possi-
bility: namely, that faith itself might be rational. In other words, he argued that although religious claims
cannot be proven, reason nonetheless commands us to adopt a certain form of faith. This course will ex-
amine the relationship between faith and reason by means of a careful study of these eighteenth-century
debates. Authors to be read may include Leibniz, Lessing, Mendelssohn, Herder, Jacobi, Kant, and Hegel.
Requirements: final paper, several shorter assignments, attendance and participation.
Prerequisite: Philosophy 102 recommended but not required.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF DUDLEY
PHIL 243 Buddhist Philosophy (Same as Religion 243) (Not offered 2000-2001)*
(See under Religion for full description.)
PHIL 290(S) The Phenomenology of Vision: Seeing to the Second Power (Same as Religion
290)
(See under Religion for full description.)
PHIL 292(S) Secular Space/Sacred Place (Same as Religion 292)
(See under Religion for full description.)
PHIL 304T Authenticity: From Rousseau to Poststructuralism(Not offered 2000-2001; to be
offered 2002-2003)+
The eighteenth-century aesthetician Edward Young once asked: "Born originals, how comes it to pass we
die copies?" In the same century, Jean-Jacques Rousseau answers this question about the origins of authen-
ticity by charting the individual's "fall" into society; that is, into artifice, hypocrisy, vanity, and conformism.
This tutorial begins with Rousseau's reflections on authentic individuality as they are developed in several
of his works. We then trace the idea of authenticity (as an aesthetic and ethical category) in both literary and
philosophical texts associated with romanticism, existentialism, Marxian critical theory, and the self-analy-
sis of the psychoanalytic tradition (e.g. Stendhal, Nietzsche, Marx, Oscar Wilde, Joseph Conrad, Gide,
Heidegger, and Freud). We conclude with recent challenges to the coherence, viability, and value of the
ideal of authenticity as it applies not only to individuality, but also to group identities and "artifacts" (e.g.
Benjamin, Foucault, Derrida). Themes and questions investigated include the following: (1) Must "authen-
ticity" refer to some notion of an innate core or deep self? Are there other terms in which we can imagine
"being ourselves"?; (2) Can one adopt authenticity as a project? Or, do analysis and reflection invariably
defeat such a project?; (3) Does being authentic require that one defy social conventions in favor of the
"natural" or "instinctual"? Is it compatible with adopting conventional roles or forms of selfhood, with
belonging to a community, with being "civilized" or with an artful self-styling?; (4) What impact do the
rise of bourgeois society, the machine age, consumerism, and mass media have on the possibilities for au-
thenticity?; (5) Is the voice and style of authenticity necessarily simple, direct, and sincere? For example,
what truth if any can be found in Oscar Wilde's remark: "Man is least himself when he talks in his own
person. Give him a mask and he will tell you the truth"?; (6) Are particular versions of the ideal of authen-
ticity either gender- or racially-inflected?
Students will work with partners. Each student will write and present orally an essay of 5-6 pages every
Philosophy
­ 257 ­
other week on an assigned topic in the reading for that week. Students not presenting an essay will offer
critiques of their partner's essay.
Evaluation will be based on written work, oral presentation of essays, critiques, and a final essay.
Prerequisite: one course in Philosophy or permission of instructor.
SAWICKI
PHIL 308 Wittgenstein's Investigations (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
Bertrand Russell claimed that Ludwig Wittgenstein was "perhaps the most perfect example I have ever
known of genius as traditionally conceived--passionate, profound, intense, and dominating."
Wittgenstein's two masterpieces, the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus and the Philosophical Investiga-
tions, stand like opposing poles around which schools of twentieth-century analytic philosophy revolve.
The Wittgenstein of the Tractatus is known as the "earlier Wittgenstein," the Wittgenstein of the Investiga-
tions is known as the "later Wittgenstein." This course is an intensive, line-by-line study of the Investiga-
tions--one of the greatest (and thus, one of the most controversial) books in the history of philosophy.
Aside from its overwhelming influence on late-twentieth-century philosophy and intellectual culture, any
book which contains the remark, "if a lion could talk, we could not understand him," deserves serious
attention. Assigned secondary literature will include: Anthony Kenny, Wittgenstein; Robert Fogelin, Witt-
genstein; Oswald Hanfling, Wittgenstein's Later Philosophy; and Ray Monk, Ludwig Wittgenstein: The
Duty of Genius.
Requirements: one short midterm paper (5-7 pages) and one longer final paper (12-15 pages).
Prerequisite: Philosophy 102 required; Philosophy 202, 204, 206 or another course in analytic philosophy
highly recommended.
GERRARD
PHIL 310 Heidegger (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
Martin Heidegger is the most important and influential continental philosopher of the twentieth century. We
begin the semester with a careful reading of his first major work,Being and Time (1927), which both trans-
figured phenomenology and initiated contemporary existentialism and hermeneutics. In the second half of
the semester, we follow the development of Heidegger's thought over the following fifty years of his life, as
he moves from the analysis of existence to reflections on language, poetry, and technology, and as his focus
shifts from human being to the question of the meaning of being, a question that, he argues, we have been
led to forget by the "metaphysics of presence" that has been dominant in the West since the time of Plato.
Requirements: two 3- to 5-page précis and one 10- to 15-page term paper.
Prerequisite: Philosophy 101or 102 or 201, or permission of the instructor; Philosophy 201 recommended
but not required.
WHITE
PHIL 313 Appearance/Reality (Same as EXPR 313 and Religion 313) (Not offered 2000-2001)
(See under Religion for full description.)
PHIL 314(S) Hegel: Art, Religion, and Philosophy (Same as Religion 296)
What do art, religion, and philosophy have to do with each other? According to Hegel, they are the "high-
est" activities in which human beings can engage. This is because, he claims, we are defined by our capac-
ity for freedom, and it is through art, religion, and philosophy that this capacity is most fully realized. Thus,
if Hegel is right, although art, religion, and philosophy seem to be very different kinds of endeavor, they
actually amount to three ways of doing basically the same thing. Art, religion, and philosophy are obvious-
ly not identical, however, and Hegel is as interested in their differences as he is in their similarity. Specifi-
cally, he is interested in the different ways these three liberating activities contribute to our freedom. He
ultimately concludes that although artistic and religious practices are indispensable to human freedom, it is
in and through philosophy that our liberation is most complete. In this course, we will read Hegel's discus-
sions of art, religion, and philosophy, to try to make sense of and evaluate his fascinating and perplexing
claims.
Requirements: final paper, several shorter assignments, attendance and participation.
Prerequisite: Philosophy 101 or 102, or Aesthetics, or Philosophy of Religion.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR DUDLEY
PHIL 327 Foucault: Gender, Power, and the Body (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered
2002-2003)
Anglo-American feminist appropriations of the work of French poststructuralist Michel Foucault have re-
sulted in pathbreaking and provocative social and cultural criticism. Original analyses of anorexia nervosa,
masculinity and femininity, sexual desire and identity, and rape law have been developed from this collab-
oration. Of course, the feminist reception of Foucault has not been uncritical. Many have argued that Fou-
cault's analysis of power and subjection is nihilistic, normatively confused, and pessimistic. Others point to
the gender-blind nature of his inquiries and to the allegedly masculinist features of his emphasis on plea-
sure and power and his later turn to a virile Greek ethics. This course begins with a brief introduction to
some of Foucault's early writings but focuses on a close reading of middle and late texts that have become
central to feminist debates about the significance of his work; i.e., Discipline and Punish, The History of
Sexuality (Vols. I-III), Herculine Barbin, and selected interviews and lectures. We examine debates about
Philosophy
­ 258 ­
Foucault as well as uses of his critical and genealogical tools in an effort to assess the value of his work for
emancipatory politics.
Requirements: weekly critical essays or outlines and three 5- to 7-page papers.
Prerequisite: Philosophy 101 or 102 or 201 or Women's and Gender Studies 101 or permission of instruc-
tor.
SAWICKI
PHIL 331(F) Epistemology
In this course, we will study the contemporary literature in analytic philosophy on the nature of knowledge
and rational belief. Epistemologists seek answers to the following kinds of questions:
--When is it rational to have a particular belief?
--What is knowledge (as opposed to opinion)?
--In order to be justified in holding a belief, must someone know (or believe) that she is justified in
holding that belief?
--What, if anything, justifies our scientific knowledge?
These questions are typically asked within a framework where the overarching goal is attaining truth and
avoiding falsity. Beyond this common ground, however, epistemologists are much divided. Some maintain
that epistemological issues are solely the province of philosophy. Others maintain that these questions will
only yield to methods that incorporate our broader insight into the world including, perhaps, feminist
thought or science. Further, even where there is agreement as to the proper way of answering epistemolog-
ical questions, there is a stunning variety of possible answers to each question. Our goal will be a rigorous
appraisal of the contemporary epistemological literature.
Requirements: weekly short writing assignments (3-4 pages) and one longer final paper (12-15 pages).
Prerequisite: Philosophy 102 required; Philosophy 202, 204, 206 or another course in analytic philosophy
highly recommended.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR CRUZ
PHIL 332(S) Aristotle's Ethics
Aristotle's ethics exemplifies an approach to moral questions and to the issues of moral theory that is sig-
nificantly different from both Kantianism and utilitarianism, the two most influential positions in contem-
porary moral philosophy. In examining Aristotle's doctrine as it is presented in the Nichomachean Ethics,
we shall concentrate on the distinctive features of his position: his conception of the way of proceeding in
ethics; the nature of eudaimonia or "happiness" (if "happiness" is understood to entail "living well" or
"flourishing"), which is identified as the final end of human action; the account of virtue and the associated
characterization of right action; the characterization of practical reasoning and its rationality; and the com-
plex account of human motivation, including the phenomena of akrasia or "weakness of will." We shall
also consider how some of Aristotle's ideas have been restated in modern terms, or developed further, by
such contemporary philosophers as Philippa Foot, John McDowell and Rosalind Hursthouse.
Requirements: class participation and four short papers.
Prerequisite: Philosophy 101.
Hour: 7:00-9:30 p.m. T KOJEN
PHIL 341(S) Textual Meaning and Interpretation
Ideas developed by J.L. Austin and H.P. Grice in the fifties have been used recently by other philosophers
and literary theorists to throw light on the nature of textual meaning and the interpretation of literary (and
other) texts. We shall first explore the salient features of Austin's and Grice's approach to meaning, con-
centration on the notions of illocutionary force (Austin) and non-natural meaning (Grice), and shall then
see how these notions may be exploited in the consideration of various long-standing issues in the theory of
literary, and more generally textual, interpretation. Among the issues discussed will be the contribution of
specific genre conventions and broader contextual matters to the interpretation of literary texts, along the
lines suggested by Quentin Skinner; the possibility of using intention to rule out mistaken and arrive at
acceptable interpretations, if not a single correct interpretation (a possibility denied by such relativists as
Stanley Fish); and the host of questions surrounding the "intentional fallacy," the alleged result of invoking
intention to determine textual meaning.
Requirements: class participation and four short essays.
Prerequisites: Philosophy 101 or Philosophy 102; Philosophy 202 or Philosophy 204 are highly recom-
mended.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR KOJEN
PHIL 354(S) Complexity (Same as EXPR 314 and Religion 314)
(See under Religion for full description.)
PHIL 401(F) Senior Seminar: Time and Time Consciousness
As the capstone seminar, this course is required of all senior majors, and open to others only if space is
available, and only with permission of the instructor. For 2000-2001, the topic of the seminar is "Time and
Time Consciousness." The semester will be divided roughly into thirds, so that we may consider how
problems of time have been addressed in the history of philosophy (Aristotle through Kant), in analytic
philosophy, and in contemporary continental philosophy.
Students will take active roles in leading discussions.
Philosophy, Physical Education
­ 259 ­
Requirements: class reports and a substantial research project.
Prerequisite: senior major status or permission of instructor.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W WHITE
PHIL 491(F)-W030 Senior Essay
This course involves Independent Study under the supervision of a member of the department. The objec-
tive is the presentation and writing of a senior essay (approximately 40 pages).
PHIL 493(F)-W031-494(S) Senior Thesis
This course involves Independent study under the supervision of a member of the department. The objec-
tive is the preparation and writing of a senior thesis (approximately 75 pages).
PHIL 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
PHYSICAL EDUCATION, ATHLETICS, AND RECREATION
Chair and Director, HARRY C. SHEEHY III
Assistant Professors: BARNARD, BURTON, FARLEY, FISHER, FARWELL, GREENWOOD,
GREES, D. JOHNSON, KANGAS, LAMB, S. LEWIS, MANNING, MASON, MCCORMACK,
MELENDY, MILAN, J. MOORE, POHLE, RUSSO, P. WELLS, WHALEN. Instructors: BROOKS,
CALLAHAN-KOCH, KUSTER.
The instructional Physical Education Program at Williams is an integral part of the student's total educa-
tional experience. The program is designed to provide opportunities to acquire fitness and to develop an
appreciation and enjoyment of lifetime sports likely to be pursued after graduation.
Eight credits of Physical Education represents one of the requirements for the College degree. There are
five physical education units during the year. In the fall academic semester, there are two six-week physical
education quarters, Winter Study is another unit, and there are two physical education quarters in the spring
academic semester. Four sections meet two times per week in seventy-five-minute periods and two sec-
tions meet three times per week in fifty-minute periods.
The following courses are offered sometime during the year. A schedule listing all courses offered is
issued to every student before each quarter and Winter Study. Classes may vary according to availability of
instructors and interest of students.
Aerobics
Badminton
Basketball
Broomball
Canoeing
CPR and First Aid
Curling
Dance (African, ballet, modern)
Decathlon
Diving
Fencing
Figure Skating
Fly Fishing
Golf
Hiking
Horseback Riding
Ice Climbing
Ice Hockey
Kayaking
Lifeguard Training
Lifetime Fitness (semester course)
Martial Arts
Method Matwork, Pilates based
Mountain Biking
Nautilus
Outdoor Living Skills
Pickleball
Quickness and Speed for Athletics
Rock Climbing
Rowing
Running
Sailing
Scuba Diving
Ski Patrol
Skiing (alpine and cross country)
Snowboarding
Snowshoeing
Soccer
Squash
Step Team
Swimming
Swing Dance
Tai Ji
Telemarking
Tennis
Trail Crew
Volleyball
Water Aerobics
Weight Training
Wilderness Leadership Training
Women's Self Defense
Yoga
­ 260 ­
PHYSICS (Div. III)
Chair, Professor KEVIN M. JONES
Professors: CRAMPTON*, K. JONES, WOOTTERS. Associate Professor: STRAIT***. Assistant
Professors: AALBERTS*, S. BOLTON, MAJUMDER. Visiting Assistant Professor: WEBER.
Lecturer: BABCOCK. Laboratory Supervisor: FORKEY.
What is light? How does a transistor work? What is a proton made of? Why are metals shiny? Why is
glass transparent? There are people for whom questions like these are of more than passing interest; some
of them become physics majors. A physics student experiments with the phenomena by which the physical
world is known and explores the mathematical techniques and theories that make sense of it. The major
serves as preparation for further work in pure or applied physics, other sciences, engineering, medical re-
search, science teaching and writing, and other careers involving insight into the fundamental principles of
nature.
In addition to the physics major, the Physics Department also offers a major in astrophysics, in coopera-
tion with the Astronomy Department. That major is described elsewhere in the Bulletin.
MAJOR
Introductory courses
Students considering a major in physics should take both physics and mathematics as first-year students.
A student normally begins with either Physics 131 or Physics 141:
1) Physics 131 Particles and Waves. This is designed as a first course in physics. It is suitable for stu-
dents who either have not had physics before or have had some physics but are not comfortable solving
"word problems" that require calculus.
2) Physics 141 Particles and Waves--Enriched. Students in this course should have solid backgrounds
in science and calculus, either from high school or college, including at least a year of high school physics.
The Department of Mathematics will place students in the appropriate introductory calculus course. The
physics major sequence courses all make use of calculus at increasingly sophisticated levels. Therefore,
students considering a Physics major should continue their mathematical preparation without interruption
through the introductory calculus sequence (Mathematics 103, 104, and 105). Students are encouraged to
take Physics 210 as early as possible. Mathematics 210 may substitute for Physics 210 but Physics 210 is
recommended.
Advanced Placement
Students with unusually strong backgrounds in calculus and physics may place out of Physics 141 and
begin with Physics 142 in the spring. On rare occasions a student with an exceptional background will be
offered the option of enrolling in Physics 201.
Placement is based on AP scores, consultation with the department, and results of a placement exam
administered during First Days. The exam can also be taken later in the year by arrangement with the de-
partment chair. The exam covers classical mechanics, basic wave phenomena, and includes some use of
calculus techniques.
Requirements for the Major
A total of ten courses in physics and mathematics are required to complete the Physics major.
Required Physics Sequence Courses
Physics 141 Particles and Waves--Enriched
or Physics 131 Particles and Waves
Physics 142 Physics Today
Physics 201 Electricity and Magnetism
Physics 202 Waves and Optics
Physics 210 Mathematical Methods for Scientists
Physics 301 Introductory Quantum Physics
Physics 400 Thermal and Statistical Physics
Required Mathematics Course
Mathematics 105 Multivariable Calculus
Students entering with Advanced Placement in mathematics may obtain credit toward the major for the
equivalent Mathematics 105 taken elsewhere.
Electives
At least two more physics or other approved courses must be taken, bringing the total number of courses
for the major to ten. The following provisions apply to these elective courses:
1) Mathematics 104 may be counted if taken at Williams
2) Mathematics 210 may substitute for Physics 210.
3) Astronomy 111 may count in place of Physics 141 if a student places out of 141 (see below).
4) An additional Astronomy or Astrophysics course above the introductory level that is acceptable for
the astrophysics major may be counted.
Physics
­ 261 ­
5) Two approved Division III courses above the introductory level may be substituted for one Physics
course. Approval is on an individual basis at the discretion of the department chair.
Preparation for Advanced Study
Students who may wish to do graduate work in physics or engineering should elect courses in both
physics and mathematics beyond the minimum major requirements. The first-year graduate school curric-
ulum in physics usually includes courses in quantum mechanics, electromagnetic theory, and classical me-
chanics that presuppose intermediate level study of these subjects as an undergraduate. Therefore, students
planning graduate work in physics should elect all of the following courses:
Physics 402T Applications of Quantum Mechanics
Physics 405T Electromagnetic Theory
Physics 411T Classical Mechanics and Fluid Mechanics
Advising
Both majors and non-majors are encouraged to consult with the department chair or course instructors
about course selections or other matters.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN PHYSICS
The degree with honors in Physics will be awarded on the basis of a senior thesis presenting the results
of a substantial experimental or theoretical investigation carried out under the direction of a faculty mem-
ber in the department. There is no rigid grade point average required for admission to the program or for the
awarding of the degree with honors, but it is normally expected that honors students will maintain at least a
B average in physics and mathematics. Students will normally apply for admission to the program early in
the spring of their junior year and during senior year these students will normally elect Physics 493, W031,
and 494 in addition to the usual requirements for the major. At the end of winter study, the department will
decide whether the student will be admitted to honors candidacy. Both a written thesis and a colloquium
presentation of the results are required. The degree with honors will be awarded to those who meet these
requirements with distinction. The degree with highest honors will be awarded to those who fulfill them
with unusually high distinction.
Honors candidates will also be required to participate in departmental colloquium talks.
OPTIONS FOR NON-MAJORS
Many students want to take a self-contained and rigorous full-year survey of physics. For such students,
the most appropriate sequence will be either Physics 131 or Physics 141 followed by Physics 132, depend-
ing on the student's background in science and mathematics (see Introductory Courses above). Either of
these sequences satisfies the physics requirement for medical school.
The department also offers less quantitative or more specialized courses for non-majors. This year there
are two such offerings: Physics 100 and Physics 109.
PHYS 100(F) Physics of Everyday Life
How do things work? What makes a car go or a bird fly? Why do microwaves heat food? How does a CD
player work? Why are diamonds hard and metals shiny? How do we see?
Science is all around us. From common objects to high technology, science is part of our everyday lives.
Amazingly, with a few powerful principles we can understand the materials that make up our world and
the rules that govern their behavior--that's physics.
In this course we will explore the world we know and the microscopic components from which it is made,
and we will extract from this exploration the central concepts underpinning contemporary physics. The
mathematics used in the course will be basic algebra and trigonometry.
Evaluation will be based on weekly homework, two hour exams, and a final exam.
No prerequisites.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR STRAIT
PHYS 109 Sound, Light, and Perception (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
Light and sound allow us to perceive the world around us, from appreciating music and art to learning the
details of atomic structure. Because of their importance in human experience, light and sound have long
been the subject of scientific inquiry. How are sound and light related? How do physiology and neural
processing allow us to hear and see the world around us? What are the origins of color and musical pitch?
This course introduces the science and technology of light and sound to students not majoring in physics.
We will start with the origins of sound and light as wave phenomena, and go on to topics including color,
the optics of vision, the meaning of musical pitch and tone, and the physical basis of hearing. We will also
discuss some recent technological applications of light, such as lasers and optical communications.
The class will meet for two 75-minute periods each week, including some lectures and some conference
sections, in which small groups of students work together on hands-on, interactive experiments. A detailed
week-by-week schedule of activities will be presented at the beginning of the semester.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, periodic homework, one in-class exam, a short oral presen-
tation, and a final exam.
No prerequisites.
Physics
­ 262 ­
PHYS 131(F) Particles and Waves
We focus first on the Newtonian mechanics of point particles: the relationship between velocity, accelera-
tion, and position; the puzzle of circular motion; forces; Newton's laws; energy and momentum; and gra-
vitation. The historical context in which these ideas developed will be discussed. We then turn to the basic
properties of waves, such as interference and polarization, with emphasis on light waves. Finally, we bring
the two strands together with a brief discussion of the wave-particle duality of modern quantum mechan-
ics.
This course is intended for students who have not studied physics before or who have had some physics,
but are not comfortable solving "word problems" that require calculus. (Students with strong backgrounds
in the sciences are encouraged to consider taking Physics 141 instead.) Physics 131 can lead to either Phys-
ics 132 (for students wanting a one-year survey of physics) or Physics 142 (for students considering a
physics major).
Lectures three hours a week; laboratory three hours every other week.
Evaluation will be based on problem sets, hour tests, labs, and a final exam.
Corequisite: Mathematics 103.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 M, T, W WOOTTERS
PHYS 132(S) Electromagnetism and the Physics of Matter
This course is intended as the second half of a one-year survey of physics. In the first half of the semester
we will focus on electromagnetic phenomena. We will introduce the concept of electric and magnetic
fields, and study in detail the way in which electrical circuits and circuit elements work. The deep connec-
tion between electric and magnetic phenomena is highlighted in a discussion of Faraday's Law of Induc-
tion. In the second half of the semester, we introduce several of the most central topics in twentieth-century
physics. We will discuss Einstein's theory of special relativity as well as aspects of quantum theory. We will
end with a treatment of nuclear physics, radioactivity, and uses of radiation.
Lectures three hours a week; laboratory three hours every other week.
Evaluation will be based on problem sets, labs, hour tests, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Physics 131 or 141 or permission of the instructor, and Mathematics 103.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 M, T, W WEBER
PHYS 141(F) Particles and Waves--Enriched
This course covers the same topics as Physics 131, but with a higher level of mathematical sophistication
and more emphasis on waves. It is intended for students with solid backgrounds in the sciences, either from
high school or college, who feel comfortable solving "word problems" that require calculus. Physics 141
can lead to either Physics 132 (for students wanting a one-year survey of physics) or Physics 142 (for stu-
dents considering a physics major).
Lectures three hours a week; laboratory three hours every other week.
Evaluation will be based on problem sets, hour tests, labs, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: high school physics and Mathematics 103 (or equivalent placement).
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 T, W, R MAJUMDER
PHYS 142(S) Physics Today
The twentieth century has been an extremely productive and exciting time for physics. Special relativity
has extended physics into the realm of high speeds and high energies. Quantum mechanics has successful-
ly described phenomena at small energies and small distance scales. Our understanding of atoms, mole-
cules, and solids has developed from a few revolutionary ideas into a sophisticated framework which today
supports technologies that were unimagined in 1900.
This course will introduce many important developments in physics, including special relativity, the Bohr
model of the atom, Schrodinger's wave mechanics in one dimension, the chemical bond, energy bands in
solids, and nuclear physics.
Lectures, three hours a week; laboratories, three hours every other week.
Evaluation will be based on problem sets, laboratory participation, two hour tests, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Physics 141 and Mathematics 103, or equivalent. Physics 131 may substitute for Physics
141 with the permission of the instructor.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 T, W, R S. BOLTON
PHYS 201(F) Electricity and Magnetism
In this course, we study electromagnetic phenomena and their mathematical description. Topics include
electromagnetic induction, alternating circuits, and the electromagnetic properties of matter. We also
introduce Maxwell's equations, which express in remarkably succinct form the essence of the theory.
Lectures and discussion; laboratory, three hours a week; weekly problem sets.
Evaluation will be based on problem sets, lab work, hour tests, and a final.
Prerequisite: Physics 142. Corequisite: Mathematics 105.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 M, T WEBER
PHYS 202(S) Waves and Optics
Wave motions are characteristic of almost every type of material, including strings, springs, water, and
solids. They also describe the behavior of electromagnetic fields and elemental matter. Despite these di-
verse settings waves exhibit many common characteristics, so that the understanding of a few simple sys-
Physics
­ 263 ­
tems can provide insight into a wide array of phenomena. In this course we begin with the study of oscilla-
tions of simple systems with only a few degrees of freedom. We then move on to study transverse and
longitudinal waves in continuous media in order to gain a general description of wave behavior. The rest of
the course focuses on electromagnetic waves, and in particular on optical examples of wave phenomena.
In addition to well known optical effects such as interference and diffraction, we will study a number of
modern applications of optics such as short pulse lasers and optical communications. Throughout the
course mathematical methods useful for higher-level physics will be introduced.
Lecture and discussion, three hours per week; laboratory, three hours per week.
Evaluation will be based on problem sets, lab work, a midterm, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Physics 201. Corequisite: Physics 210 or permission of the instructor.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 T, R K. JONES
PHYS 210(S) Mathematical Methods for Scientists
This course covers a variety of mathematical methods used in the sciences, focusing particularly on the
solution of ordinary and partial differential equations. In addition to calling attention to certain special
equations that arise frequently in the study of waves and diffusion, we develop general techniques such as
looking for series solutions and, in the case of nonlinear equations, using phase portraits and linearizing
around fixed points. We study numerical techniques applied not only to differential equations, but also to
ordinary integration and curve fitting, and we discuss the estimation of error in numerical calculations. It is
expected that most students in the class will be familiar with a programming language and able to do
homework assignments requiring simple programming; however, we will offer a series of optional ses-
sions on programming in TrueBasic for students who do not have this background.
Evaluation is based on weekly homework, a midterm exam and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 105 and familiarity with Newtonian mechanics at the level of Physics 131.
Students may not normally get credit for both Mathematics 210 and Physics 210.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR WOOTTERS
PHYS 301(F) Introductory Quantum Physics
This course serves as a one-semester introduction to the history, formalism, and phenomenology of quan-
tum mechanics. We begin with a discussion of the historical origins of the quantum theory, and the Schroe-
dinger wave equation. The concepts of matter waves and wave-packets are introduced. Solutions to one-
dimensional problems will be treated prior to introducing the system which serves as a hallmark of the
success of quantum theory, the three-dimensional hydrogen atom. In the second half of the course, we will
develop the important connection between the underlying mathematical formalism and the physical pre-
dictions of the quantum theory. We then go on to apply this knowledge to several important problems with-
in the realm of atomic and nuclear physics.
Lectures and discussion, three hours per week; problem sets; laboratory, three hours per week.
Evaluation will be based on problem sets, lab reports, a midterm exam, and final exam.
Prerequisites: Physics 202 and Physics 210.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 T, W, R S. BOLTON
PHYS 316(S) Protecting Information: Applications of Abstract Algebra and Quantum Physics
(Same as Mathematics 316)
Living in the early decades of the information age, we find ourselves depending more and more on codes
that protect messages against either noise or eavesdropping. We begin this course by studying the history of
this subject, including, for example, the story of the Enigma code from World War II. We then examine
some of the most important codes currently being used to protect information, including linear codes,
which in addition to being mathematically elegant are the most practical codes for error correction, and the
RSA public key cryptographic scheme, popular nowadays for internet applications. Looking ahead by a
decade or more, we show how a "quantum computer" could crack any RSA code in short order, and how
quantum cryptographic devices will achieve security through the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
Evaluation will be based on homework sets and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 211 or Mathematics 210 or Physics 210 or permission of the instructors.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF WOOTTERS and LOEPP
PHYS 318 Materials Science: The Chemistry and Physics of Materials (Same as Chemistry
318) (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
Materials Science is a broad study of the physical properties of substances, such as hardness, elasticity,
electrical conductivity, and optical properties. This course investigates the relationship between microscop-
ic structure and macroscopic properties of polymers (plastics, elastomers, liquid crystals), electronic mate-
rials (semiconductors, conducting polymers, and superconductors) and solids (metals, magnets, ceramics,
minerals, and glasses). We approach these topics from both physical and chemical perspectives, reflecting
the interdisciplinary nature of the field. For instance, we explore how the underlying structure of materials
arises from quantum mechanics and how temperature determines collective response properties such as
elasticity or conductivity. This course also studies the design of new materials and their synthesis at the
molecular level.
Lectures: three hours a week.
Evaluation is based on weekly problem sets, reviews of research articles, one hour exam, and a final exam.
Physics
­ 264 ­
Prerequisites: one year of introductory Chemistry (101,102 or 103-104), one year of introductory Physics
(131,132 or 141,142), and one 200-level course in either Chemistry or Physics; or permission of instruc-
tors.
S. BOLTON and L. PARK
PHYS 400(S) Thermal and Statistical Physics
This course approaches thermal phenomena in two ways. First, we study systems in terms of temperature,
pressure, volume, and other macroscopic parameters which characterize their equilibrium states. This leads
to the notions of internal energy, heat, and entropy which lie at the heart of the laws of thermodynamics.
Then we take a microscopic approach, combining classical and quantum mechanics with statistical meth-
ods to show how macroscopic behavior emerges from microscopic physics. Some applications include
blackbody radiation, quantum fluids, and the thermal properties of solids.
Evaluation will be based on weekly problem sets, a midterm exam, a final exam, and a paper/presentation.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF MAJUMDER
PHYS 402T(S) Applications of Quantum Mechanics+
This course will explore a number of important topics in quantum mechanics such as perturbation theory
and the semiclassical interaction of atoms and radiation. Research or review articles from the physics litera-
ture will be assigned to supplement standard texts and to help motivate discussion. Applications and exam-
ples will be taken mostly from atomic physics with some discussion of precision measurements and funda-
mental symmetries.
The class as a whole will meet once a week for 50 minutes to discuss questions on the reading. Each stu-
dent will also be assigned to a tutorial meeting with the instructor and one or two other students, at which
the students will take turns presenting solutions to assigned problems. Written solutions to selected prob-
lems will be due a few days later.
Evaluation will be based on tutorial participation, written problem set solutions and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Physics 301.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR MAJUMDER
PHYS 405T Electromagnetic Theory (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)+
We will review Maxwell's equations and use them to study a range of topics--electric fields and matter,
magnetic materials, light, radiation--exploring phenomena and seeking to gain an intuitive understanding.
We will also learn some useful approximation techniques and some beautiful mathematical tools.
The class will meet as a whole once per week for an hour lecture on new material and to discuss questions
on the readings. Each week a second tutorial meeting with the instructor will be scheduled; here, students
will take turns working problems on the chalkboard. Written solutions to problems will be due a few days
after the tutorial meeting.
Evaluation will be based on weekly problem sets, tutorial participation, occasional papers and presenta-
tions, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Physics 202 and Physics 210 or Mathematics 210.
AALBERTS
PHYS 411T(F) Classical Mechanics and Fluid Mechanics+
We will study a wide range of phenomena--planetary motion, vibrations in matter, phase transitions, Ber-
noulli's principle and flight, weather, and chaos to name a few--with the Hamiltonian and Lagrangian
formulations of classical mechanics. We will explore how symmetry considerations govern the allowed
range of possible behavior.
Most of the topics will be covered by the entire class, but students will also explore special topics individu-
ally, and present their findings to the entire group. The class will meet as a whole once per week for an hour
to discuss questions on the readings. A second tutorial meeting with the instructor will be scheduled for
each student where students will take turns working problems on the chalkboard. Written solutions to
problems will be due a few days after the tutorial meeting.
Evaluation is based on weekly problem sets, tutorial participation, occasional papers and presentations, and
a final exam.
Prerequisites: Physics 202 and Physics 210 or Mathematics 210.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 F K. JONES
Courses numbered 450 through 459 are independent reading courses in advanced topics. Students will
read a textbook or other material and work problems. Once a week the students and the instructor will
meet for discussion and student presentations. Due to the initiative and independence required, interested
students should consult with the instructor before registering for one of these courses. Enrollments will be
limited, usually to 4 or fewer.
PHYS 451(S) Solid State Physics
This course will explore the physics of metals, insulators, and semiconductors, with particular attention to
structure, energy bands, and electronic properties. After developing the appropriate background, we will
examine some simple semiconductor devices. Independent reading and discussion.
Evaluation will be based on problem sets, weekly presentations, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Physics 301 and permission of the instructor.
Hour: TBA S. BOLTON
Physics, Political Economy
­ 265 ­
PHYS 493(F)-W031, W031-494(S) Senior Research
An original experimental or theoretical investigation is carried out under the direction of a faculty member
in Physics, as discussed above under the heading of The Degree with Honors in Physics.
Prerequisite: permission of the department. Senior course.
PHYS 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
POLITICAL ECONOMY (Div. II)
Chair, Associate Professor JAMES E. MAHON, Jr.
Advisory Committee: Professors: BRADBURD, MACDONALD. Associate Professors: C. JOHN-
SON, MAHON. Assistant Professors: FRANKL, GOLLIN**, M. LYNCH.
The Political Economy major is designed to give students a grasp of the ways in which political and
economic forces interact in the shaping of public policy. The major includes substantial study of the central
analytical approaches in both political science and economics and seeks to surmount the sometimes artifi-
cial barriers of specialization that may characterize either discipline taken by itself. In the junior and senior
years a conscious merging of the approaches in the two fields is undertaken in the three required Political
Economy courses. (These courses are designed by, and usually are taught jointly by, political scientists and
economists.) Political Economy 301 examines major writings in political economy and analyzes economic
liberalism and critiques of economic liberalism in the context of current policy issues. Political Economy
401 examines interactions of political and economic forces in contemporary international affairs. Political
Economy 402 examines such interactions in selected current public policy issues. Background for these
senior courses is acquired through a course in international economics and courses in domestic and in-
ternational/comparative politics and policy.
Students in Political Economy 402 visit Washington, D.C. Sunday night through Wednesday of the first
week of spring vacation to conduct interviews relating to their Political Economy 402 group projects. This
is a course requirement.
MAJOR
Economics 101 Introduction to Economics
Political Science 201 Power, Politics, and Democracy in America
or Political Science 203 Justice: Introduction to Political Theory
Political Science 202 World Politics: An Introduction to International Relations
or Political Science 204 Introduction to Comparative Politics: The Powers of Nationalism
Economics 215 The World Economy
or Economics 358 International Economics
or Economics 360 International Monetary Economics
or Economics 507 International Trade and Development
or Economics 509 Money and Public Finance
or Economics 373/513 Open-Economy Macroeconomics
(Note that Economics 215 satisfies the Economics Department requirement for a 200-level economics
course before taking Economics 251 and Economics 252.)
Economics 251 Price and Allocation Theory
Economics 252 Macroeconomics
Economics 253 Empirical Economic Methods
or Economics 255 Econometrics
Political Economy/Economics 301/Political Science 333 Analytical Views of Political Economy
Political Science 316 Public Policymaking in the U.S.
or Political Science 208 The Politics of Family Policy
or Political Science 209 Poverty in America
or Political Science 214 (formerly 313) Congressional Politics Today
or Political Science 216 Constitutional Law II: Individual Rights
or Political Science 218 Presidential Politics
or Political Science 219 Constitutional Law I: Structures of Power
or Political Science 308 Environmental Policy
Political Science 341 The Politics of the Global Economy: Wealth and Power in East Asia
or Political Science 100(F) Asia and the World
or Political Science 223 (formerly 322) Governing the World: Treaties, Laws and Institutions
or Political Science 224 Ethnic Conflict in World Politics
or Political Science 225 International Security
or Political Science 227 Ethics and Interests in Foreign Policy
or Political Science 264 Politics of Global Tourism
or Political Science 267 Arab-Israeli Relations
or Political Science 321 Regionalism in International Politics
Political Economy 401 Politics of the International Economy
Political Economy 402 Political Economy of Public Policy Issues
Political Economy
­ 266 ­
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN POLITICAL ECONOMY
Due to the special demands of this interdisciplinary major, the only route to honors in Political Economy
is the thesis. Seniors may pursue the honors thesis course (Political Economy 493-W031) during the fall
semester and winter study period. The third course contributing to such an honors program would normal-
ly be an elective in Political Science, Economics, or Political Economy, taken during the junior year. This
course, which may be one of the required electives, must be closely related, indeed must prepare the
ground for the honors thesis.
Juniors in the Political Economy major with at least a 3.5 GPA in the program may apply for the honors
thesis program by means of a written proposal submitted to the chair before spring registration. Written
guidelines for such proposals are available in the chair's office. The proposal should have been discussed
with at least two faculty members, and at least one faculty advisor from each discipline should be solicited
by the student prior to submission of the proposal.
Final decisions about admission to the honors program will be made in early summer, when spring
grades become available.
To achieve the degree with honors in Political Economy, the thesis must be completed by the end of
winter study period and be judged of honors quality by a committee consisting of the two advisors and a
third reader. A thesis judged to be of particular distinction will qualify its author for the degree with highest
honors.
COURSE NUMBERING SYSTEM
The numbering system for courses offered and required in Political Economy is identical to the system
outlined in the Williams College Bulletin on page 43 except that first-year students who have passed Eco-
nomics 101 may enroll in a 201- to 240-level economics course, to accelerate completion of the introduc-
tory courses required in the program.
POEC 301(F) Analytical Views of Political Economy (Same as Economics 301 and Political
Science 333)
This course explores the relationship between politics and economics by surveying influential works of
political economy. Its first part examines three major systems of thought in relation to the historical devel-
opment of capitalism in Western Europe: the classical liberalism of Adam Smith, Karl Marx's revolution-
ary socialism, and the reformist ideas of John Stuart Mill, R. H. Tawney, and John Maynard Keynes. The
second part considers more recent writings that revise and critique liberalism from a variety of perspec-
tives. The historical focus of the course permits you to appreciate the ongoing dialogue between classical
and contemporary views of political economy, while classroom discussion involves frequent reference to
current public policy issues. Required in the Political Economy major but open to non-majors.
Discussion/lecture.
Requirements: eight 2-page papers and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Economics 101 and either Political Science 201 or 203 or AP credit in American Politics (or
permission of the instructor). Enrollment limited to 35. Preference given to Political Economy majors.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR MAHON
POEC 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
Open to juniorsorseniorsmajoring in PoliticalEconomy,withapproval ofafacultysupervisorand thechair.
POEC 401(F) Politics of the International Economy
This course examines major issues in the politics of the international economy. After briefly considering
various theoretical perspectives on international political economy, it analyzes important issue-areas in-
cluding: trade; capital movements; the organization of production; immigration; and the role of internation-
al organizations in addressing global economic and ecological issues.
Seminar format.
Requirements: several short papers, a group project, and a final exam. In addition, class attendance and
participation are essential.
Prerequisites: a course in international economics: Economics 215 or 358 or 360, or the equivalent; satis-
faction of the international/comparative Political Science course requirement (see list of major require-
ments above) prior to or concurrently with this course.
Required in the major.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF FRANKL and MAHON
POEC 402(S) Political Economy of Public Policy Issues
The core of this course consists of analyses by student study groups of current issues of public policy. The
student groups investigate the interacting political and economic aspects of an issue, do extensive reading,
conduct interviews in Washington (during spring recess) with public and private officials, write a major
report on their findings and recommendations, and defend it orally in a public session.
Seminar with student presentations.
Prerequisites: Economics 253 or 255; satisfaction of the Political Science U.S. institutions and policymak-
ing course requirement (see list of major requirements above).
Required in the major and open only to Political Economy majors.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR GOLLIN and C. JOHNSON
POEC 493(F)-W031 Honors Thesis
­ 267 ­
POLITICAL SCIENCE (Div. II)
Chair, Professor MICHAEL D. MACDONALD
Professors: COOK***, JACOBSOHN, MACDONALD, MARCUS, A. WILLINGHAM. Associate
Professors: CRANE, C. JOHNSON, MAHON, REINHARDT, SHANKS. Assistant Professors: M.
DEVEAUX, KIM**, M. LYNCH, MCALLISTER*. Visiting Assistant Professor: SILVER-
STONE. Adjunct Professor: K. LEE.
Politics is most fundamentally about community--it is how we manage to live together and craft a com-
mon destiny. Communities, however, need power, and political science therefore attends to the ways pow-
er is grasped, maintained, challenged, or justified. The contest over power gives politics its drama and pa-
thos. Since power may be used wisely or foolishly, rightly or cruelly, politics affects our lives most pro-
foundly. No matter whether we find it distasteful, inspiring, appalling or alluring, politics is for high stakes.
For this reason, the effort to understand politics aims not only to describe and explain, but also to improve
political life.
The Political Science major is structured to allow students either to participate in the established ways of
studying politics or to develop their own foci. To this end, the department offers two routes to completing
our major, both requiring nine (9) courses. On the one hand, we invite students to organize their major
through the subfields that structure the discipline of political science (American politics, international rela-
tions, political philosophy, and comparative politics). On the other, we encourage students to develop indi-
vidual concentrations reflecting their particular interests regardless of subfields.
MAJOR
SUBFIELD CONCENTRATION ROUTE: Upon declaring a major, students choose a subfield from
American politics, international relations, political theory, and comparative politics. The subfield con-
centration draws at least four (4) of the nine courses from one subfield, and includes the appropriate core
course from 201-204, two electives at the 200 or 300 level of the student's choice and the senior seminar
(or an individual project) in the student's subfield. (A degree with honors in Political Science requires one
(1) or two (2) additional courses which DO NOT count toward the nine (9) major requirements.) With
permission of the department chair, students may take a senior seminar in a different subfield, providing the
student takes a third elective in the subfield of concentration. In addition, students must take courses in two
subfields outside the subfield of concentration to satisfy the breadth requirement (all courses at the 100
level and all methods courses also count toward the breadth requirement).
INDIVIDUAL CONCENTRATION ROUTE: Alternatively, students may devise a concentration of their
own. In this event, the student prepares a curricular plan in consultation with a faculty advisor, explaining
the nature of the concentration and the courses the student will take. The individual concentration also
requires nine (9) courses, with at least five (5) thematically linked courses constituting the concentration.
Of these five courses, four are electives at the 200 or 300 level, including one from 201-204, and one is a
senior seminar or individual project. In addition, students pursuing an individual concentration must take at
least two other courses that illustrate breadth in political science. To complete the requirement, the student
has his or her choice of any two other courses within the Political Science Department. The faculty advisor
and the department chair must approve the student plan.
ADVISEMENT
When a student chooses to major in Political Science (usually at the end of the sophomore year), he or
she may register with any Political Science faculty member at the designated time and places. The register-
ing faculty member will ask for preferences for a permanent faculty advisor and will assist undecided stu-
dents in finding an advisor whose interests match theirs. In all cases students will be paired by the end of
their sophomore year with an advisor who will continue with them through graduation.
COURSE NUMBERING
The course numbering used by the Political Science Department reflects the format and specialization of
a course more than its level of difficulty. The 100-level courses are designed to address questions of broad
political interest. The courses are pitched both to those considering and not considering political science as
a major. The 200-level courses are divided between our core courses and our electives. The core courses,
numbered between 201-204, serve as introductions both to the substance of the politics and the subfields
organizing the study of politics. The core courses, which were previously numbered at the 100 level, are
open to all students, including first-year students and non-majors. The 200-level elective courses provide
general overviews of political processes, problems and philosophies in a way generally accessible without
prerequisites. 300-level courses are more specialized and usually require prerequisites. 400-level courses
are senior seminars offered for students in the major; senior seminars also are open to juniors and to non-
majors.
WINTER STUDY PROJECT
The department welcomes relevant WSP 99 proposals that can make important contributions to the stu-
dent's understanding of public affairs and politics. Majors, seniors, and students without previous WSP 99
experience have preference.
Political Science
­ 268 ­
THE JUNIOR YEAR ABROAD
A major in Political Science can be readily and usefully combined with study in a foreign country. Nor-
mally, no more than two semester courses taken abroad in a program approved by the College may be
counted toward the requirements for a degree in Political Science.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN POLITICAL SCIENCE
The Political Science Department grants honors to candidates who, (1) complete the Senior Seminar, (2)
receive at least a grade of 3.50 on either a Senior Essay (491-W030 or W030-492: Honors Route One) or a
Senior thesis (493-W031-494: Honors Route Two), and (3) have a minimum GPA of 3.4 in Political Sci-
ence.
To become a candidate for honors, (1) the student must apply in the second semester of junior year, (2)
the research proposal must be acceptable to the department's honors committee, and (3) the applicant's
GPA in Political Science courses for the first six semesters must be at least 3.4. (A degree with honors in
Political Science requires one (1) or two (2)additional courses which DO NOT count toward the nine (9)
major requirements.)
ADVANCED STUDY IN AMERICAN POLITICS
The Department of Political Science provides the opportunity for an unusually gifted student to engage
in an entire year's advanced research in American politics under singularly favorable conditions. Sup-
ported by income derived from an endowment fund, the student, designated the Sentinels of the Republic
Scholar (after the name of the fund), receives a substantial research stipend to cover costs associated with
the proposed project.
This unique research course (Political Science 481-W033-482) is designed to encourage the pursuit of
excellence among the most talented Williams students of Political Science. Admission to it is awarded to
the most distinguished candidate on the basis of demonstrated capacity for outstanding work and of the
project's promise for creative contributions to the understanding of American politics, political institutions
and thought.
PSCI 100(F) (Section 01) Asia and the World (Same as Asian Studies 201)*
Asia looms large in contemporary world politics: Japan is gradually assuming an expanded regional na-
tional security role; The People's Republic of China is emerging as a multifaceted Great Power; India is
challenged by rising ethno-nationalism; and Indonesia is wracked by the economic dislocations of the
1997 financial crisis. This course will explore both the historical background and current dynamics of
political and economic issues in these four countries, drawing on themes of imperialism, nationalism, and
globalization.
Lecture format.
Requirements: two short papers and a final exam.
No prerequisites. It is an introductory class and, therefore, no prior coursework in Political Science or
Asian studies is necessary.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR CRANE
PSCI 100(S) Politics and Freedom (Same as American Studies 100)
We all want to be free--at least most of us say we do. The desire for political freedom goes back to the
ancient world. That desire has rarely seemed as powerful as it does now, as struggles waged in the name of
freedom transform the political landscape on several continents. But what do we mean when we claim to
want freedom? What institutions and social conditions make political freedom possible? Do the claims of
individual freedom conflict with those of community? With equality? Is freedom compatible with author-
ity? Does it really make us happy? Is it what we want, after all? This lecture course confronts these ques-
tions through readings drawn from a variety of classic and contemporary sources, including works of fic-
tion, autobiography, drama, journalism, law, philosophy, and social science. Lectures and discussions will
address such topics as slavery and liberation, equality and economic freedom, sexual freedom and gender
politics, freedom of speech and religion, citizenship and civil disobedience, and the uses and limits of state
power.
Requirements: one 6- to 8-page paper, a midterm and a final exam.
No prerequisites; designed for students at all levels.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR REINHARDT
PSCI 100(F) (Section 03) Lying, Deceit, and Manipulation in Political Campaigns
Most people nowadays don't have much good to say about campaigns and campaigners in America. Can-
didates now depend on television over face-to-face campaigning and exploit sophisticated marketing tech-
niques to sell themselves; the news media and the voters, in turn, expect that candidates will engage in
ambiguity, evading the issues and mudslinging. But do lying, deceit and manipulation characterize Ameri-
can political campaigns? How different is today's campaign from those in the past? Do candidates talk
more or less about issues? If less, what do they spend their time communicating, and how? In television
and ads, do the visuals overwhelm the words, and images obliterate ideas? Is that a problem if issues are
not the bottom line for voters? And is there a good way to distinguish lies from truth, deceit from honesty
and manipulation from open-ness in campaigns necessarily marked by rhetoric, ideals and symbolism?
This course investigates these questions using the ongoing 2000 presidential campaign as its laboratory. By
Political Science
­ 269 ­
examining the ads, debates, speeches and photo opportunities of the candidates, we can assess: the role of
issues alongside symbols, myth and ritual in political communication; differences and similarities in politi-
cal ads and commercial ads; what happens to campaigns, voting and politics when marketing techniques
become central; and possible remedies against lying, deceit and manipulation.
The format will largely consist of lectures, with some opportunities for discussions and debates.
Requirements: several short analyses of 2000 campaign communications; and one longer paper on the
techniques and possible effects of one presidential campaign.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 60.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR COOK
PSCI 101 (Section 01) Seminar: Cultural Imperialism (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered
2001-2002)+
Upset by the dominance of American pop music and movies, the French grant a multimillion dollar subsi-
dy to the most expensive French movie ever made. The plot? Plucky Gauls (in horned hats and hides) fight
off cultural invasion. China welcomesMulan but would have preferred Mickey Mouse. The Iranian Parlia-
ment bans the word "sandwich"; McDonald's opens in Moscow to a waiting line of hundreds. Bombs go
off in a Planet Hollywood restaurant in Cape Town. If Americans notice these events, they respond either
by pointing out that cultural restrictions are not only antidemocratic but also thinly disguised economic
protectionism, or by feeling embarrassed and guilty over the power of their trashy culture--or both. Yet
small-town Americans, as Emily Thorson points out, often react with the same outrage to a proposed new
Walmart. This seminar will focus on the (alleged) phenomenon of cultural imperialism, exploring its na-
ture, its extent, its effects, its mechanisms, its variety, its defensibility.
Requirements: four papers, class participation.
No prerequisites. Restricted to first- and second-year students and limited to 18.
PSCI 101(F) (Section 02) Seminar: Moral and Political Reasoning+
How do we make difficult moral decisions: from empathy and concern, or impartial reason? How should
we make moral decisions? Do justice and morality require that we give equal consideration to everyone in
society? And what about concern for the lives and conditions of people outside one's country? Moral and
political thinkers have always disagreed on the motives and considerations that should guide people's
judgements. Nowhere is this disagreement more apparent than in political theory and practice. When con-
sidering whether a public policy is fair and just, some say we should consider only whether it contributes to
the overall or public good. Others say we should pay attention to how a policy affects specific groups--or
even how a policy or action affects those we love. This course examines these and other dilemmas in our
moral and political reasoning and decision-making by examining both classic texts in moral and political
theory and recent readings on concrete issues, such as abortion, the morality of public officials, refugee
policy, and human rights.
Seminar style, discussion based format.
Requirements: class participation, a weekly 1-page critical response piece, three written assignments of 5
to 8 pages (with mandatory drafts and rewrites), and final exam.
Enrollment limited to 18. Open only to first-year students; others with permission of instructor.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF M. DEVEAUX
PSCI 201(F,S) (formerly 110) Power, Politics, and Democracy in America
A survey of American politics critically examining and questioning the vitality and viability of democracy
in the United States. It begins by examining what kind of political system the founders had in mind and
reviews recent theories of power and of how and whether the people rule. We will consider how important
it is to broaden participation and to include groups, such as women and minorities, who have been histori-
cally excluded from politics. After an overview of the politics of American national institutions--elections,
Congress, the presidency, and the Supreme Court--the course concludes by addressing three questions:
How well does American democracy anticipate, assess, and solve problems? Does everyone have some
power in the political process? Does democratic practice produce public policy which has equitable out-
comes?
First semester is lecture format. Second semester is lecture/discussion.
Requirements: participation in class discussion, a midterm and/or final exam, and two short papers.
No prerequisites. This is an introductory course, open to all students, including first-year students.
American Politics Subfield
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF First Semester: C. JOHNSON
8:30-9:45 TR, 9:55-11:10 TR Second Semester: MARCUS
PSCI 202(F,S) (formerly 120) World Politics: An Introduction to International Relations
International politics differs from domestic politics in the absence of centralized, legitimate institutions.
Anarchy characterizes the world of sovereign states--there is no world government, nor agreement that
one is desirable or even possible. This lack of a common authority means that any dispute among countries
is up to the countries themselves to settle, by negotiating, appealing to shared norms, or using force. For
this reason, while international relations involves many of the same topics that consume domestic poli-
tics--ethnic antagonisms, spending on aid, war, national identity, inequality, weapons manufacture, fi-
nance, loans, pollution, migration--it shares few of the same processes for dealing with them. This course
covers problems central to international relations. It considers the importance that this radical decentraliza-
Political Science
­ 270 ­
tion has for achieving values we hold, and examines processes that might undermine or support the anar-
chical system in which we live.
The class format for fall semester is lecture, possible discussion sessions.
The class format for spring semester is a "lecture" class and requirements are two papers, a final exam, and
class participation.
No prerequisites. This is an introductory course, open to all students, including first-year students.
International Relations Subfield
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF, 11:20-12:35 TR First Semester: M. LYNCH
9:55-11:10 TR, 11:20-12:35 TR Second Semester: MACDONALD
PSCI 203(S) (formerly 130) Justice: Introduction to Political Theory
This course serves as an introduction to several key issues and questions in Western political theory: What
is the nature of justice? What is the nature of the "good life"? And how should we organize ourselves
socially and politically if we are to secure justice and human flourishing? The diversity of answers to these
and other questions provided by political thinkers and philosophers over the centuries will serve as the
broad theme for this course. Our readings will draw upon texts by ancient, modern and contemporary
political thinkers, including Plato, Niccolò Machiavelli, Thomas Hobbes, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Karl
Marx, John Stuart Mill, and John Rawls. These works will be complemented by readings on concrete mor-
al and political issues, particularly those that bring into sharp relief tensions and conflicts between individu-
al rights and freedoms on the one hand and collective goods and community norms on the other. Of partic-
ular interest are dilemmas surrounding free speech, affirmative action, the right to die (euthanasia), and
international justice or aid to distant others.
Lecture/discussion format.
Requirements: class participation, regular small group meetings, weekly 1-page reaction papers, two 5- to
7-page papers, and a final exam.
No prerequisites. This is an introductory course; open to all students, including first-year students.
Political Theory Subfield
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR, 2:35-3:50 MR M. DEVEAUX
PSCI 204(S) (formerly 140) Introduction to Comparative Politics: The Powers of Nationalism*
Nationalism demands our attention. The recent dissolutions of various states are only the most obvious
expressions of the power of certain collective identities and the weakness of others. This class will there-
fore focus on how national identity is constructed and how national communities might succeed or fail to
coalesce around a shared sense of belonging. The first part of the course will review some of the enduring
questions about nationalism: What is a "nation"? Are nations primordial human affinities or are they mod-
ern creations of state managers? Why does nationalism appear to be such a potent force in contemporary
politics? The second section of the course will consider historically specific expressions of national identity
and related political issues in four countries: Russia, China, Nigeria and the United States. Finally, we will
consider how the forces of economic and cultural globalization might confound or promote national defi-
nition.
Lecture/discussion format.
Requirements: course requirements include three short (1-2 page) discussion papers, one medium (5-page)
paper on the readings, and a final exam.
This is an introductory course; open to all students, including first-year students.
Comparative Politics Subfield
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR CRANE
PSCI 205 Latino Politics (Not offered 2000-2001)*
Does "Latino Politics" exist? That is, is there an overarching political agenda shared by "Latino" groups, or
is there simply "Chicano politics," "Cuban politics," etc.? We will try to answer this question by looking at
the politics of individual groups. The course will focus on Mexican American political history and interac-
tion with institutional politics. Topics will include the incorporation of Mexican Americans into the U.S.,
the Chicano movement, and contemporary electoral politics and political behavior. We will also compare
Puerto Ricans' and Cubans' incorporation, political status, and experience with citizenship. We will close
the course by examining issues of identity and citizenship, returning to our question of whether there is a
Latino identity and politics.
Lecture/discussion format.
Requirements: a midterm exam and two 6- to 8-page papers.
No prerequisites. Open to first-year students and all students.
American Politics Subfield
PSCI 206 Racial Politics in America (Not offered 2000-2001)
Rodney King, Ward Connerly, John Rocker. Racial politics seem to be intensifying despite our progress in
the past thirty five years. This class will focus on contemporary political issues and policy debates about
race. Topics will include affirmative action, multiculturalism in education, immigration, the English Only
movement, redistricting, poverty, welfare and enterprise zones, and inequities in law enforcement and the
prison resistance movement. This is a companion class to Racial Theory, but can be taken alone.
Requirements: students will participate in a group research project and formal debate on one topic during
Political Science
­ 271 ­
the semester. Other assignments include two analyses of media coverage of one of these issues and partici-
pation in an on-line discussion forum.
Lecture/discussion format.
No prerequisites.
American Politics Subfield
PSCI 207(F) Political Elections
Elections in American politics are dynamic events in which many different groups struggle to gain control
of political institutions at the local, state, and federal levels. During the campaigns, candidates and their
supporters move across the land, appear on television, radio, and through the printed press. Simultaneous-
ly, various organizations and interest groups attempt to gain influence with the candidates and with public
opinion by raising money, making endorsements, running political appeals in the various media, and sup-
plying activists to work for the candidates they favor. This course explores the factors that shape the out-
come of political elections in America. Among the factors we will consider are: the state of the economy,
international events, the role of political parties at the state and national levels, the current partisan balance,
ideology, media, special interests, money, candidates, the "hot" issues of the moment and long enduring
issues, campaign debates, media, and campaign polling and public opinion. Public opinion polling and its
various uses in campaign politics will be a special focus of attention. We will consider in detail the 2000
national elections both at the Federal level (President, Senate and House) and State.
Lecture format.
Requirements: a midterm, a final, and a research paper.
No prerequisites. Open to first-year students with Advanced Placement credit in American Politics.
American Politics Subfield
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR MARCUS
PSCI 208(S) The Politics of Family Policy
Since the 1950s the structure of the family in the United States has changed considerably. Fewer Ameri-
cans live in two-parent families with children, and more live in single-person households. Mother-only
families have increased as a percentage of all families. Fertility rates have dropped so that both single-par-
ent and two-parent families have fewer children. Gay and lesbian couples have challenged laws that pre-
vent them from forming families recognized by the states. In light of the changes in families over the last
forty years, in this class we will address a series of questions about the formation and adoption of family
policy in the United States. What family problems have been recognized as problems deserving govern-
ment attention? When do personal concerns become public problems? What kinds of policies have been
proposed, and why have others been ignored? Will policies help us to ameliorate these problems?
Lecture/discussion format.
Requirements: several short papers, one research paper.
No prerequisites. Open to first-year students with Advanced Placement credit in American Politics.
American Politics Subfield
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF C. JOHNSON
PSCI 209 Poverty in America (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
Scholars and politicians have argued about the extent of inequality and the intractability of poverty in the
United States. This course will address the phenomena of inequality and poverty. The issues we will ex-
plore include: What is poverty and who are the poor? What economic, historical, and sociological theories
have been advanced to explain poverty? What policies has the United States government adopted to ame-
liorate poverty and what policies should the government adopt? We will discuss the validity of these theo-
ries and policies from an empirical as well as a normative perspective.
Requirements: class participation, two short papers, and a final paper.
No prerequisites. Open to first-year students with Advanced Placement credit in American Politics.
American Politics Subfield
C. JOHNSON
PSCI 210 Border Politics and Policy (Not offered 2000-2001)
How do borders structure politics? This course examines the politics created by drawing a line--a national
boundary--by focusing on the politics of the U.S.-Mexico border region. We will examine the politics
created by the meeting of two cultures and economic and political institutions, as well as treat the border as
a region with its own unique set of concerns. Topics include conflicts over immigration, the militarization
of the border, the environment, and NAFTA, and instances of transnational cooperation. In addition, we
will explore the border region as a transnational space, discussing the meaning of borders, border culture,
and how borders construct identities. Sources will include history, policy, journalism, oral histories, and
novels.
Requirements: one map quiz, one midterm, and two 6- to 8-page papersor one map quiz, one midterm and
one policy analysis project.
No prerequisites. Open to first-year students and all students.
American Politics Subfield
SHERIDAN
Political Science
­ 272 ­
PSCI 211 Public Opinion and Political Behavior (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered
2001-2002)
After the Progressive Era, citizenship became to be defined as individual citizens making vote judgments
based on information about the public state of affairs and their own individual preferences. As such, the
definition presumes that citizens can be informed about public issues and can form rational judgments. At
the same time, given the great distance from events common for most citizens, voters would have to rely
on outside sources of information, whether from the media, political parties, special interests, or political
elites. Who would win in the ensuing struggle to determine public opinion? The focus of this course is the
role of public opinion in democracy. How do events and crises influence the formation of and change of
public opinion? When and under what conditions can pressure groups and the mass media influence the
formation of public opinion on current domestic and international issues? Can public opinion influence
individual voter's choices? What strengthens or weakens public opinion's influence on political leaders?
Each student selects an area of public opinion of particular interest (e.g., racial attitudes, abortion, foreign
policy, changing ideological beliefs, equality) to analyze what is known about public opinion in that area.
Requirements: midterm exam, final exam, and a project report.
American Politics Subfield
MARCUS
PSCI 212 Mass Media in American Politics (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
This course investigates the role of the mass media in the American political process. We consider: how the
media decide what is and is not "news"; the role and power of political actors relative to journalists in
shaping the news; what political difference it makes that the news media are very big (and profitable) busi-
nesses; the impact of the medium of television on its political messages; and how political processes and
outcomes change as newsmaking becomes increasingly central to holding and exercising political power.
A section at the close addresses the future of media power, as the media system shifts from broadcast me-
dia like television and newspapers to narrowcast media such as 500-channel cable television and the Inter-
net.
Requirements: one short exercise, one longer paper based on original research, and a self-scheduled final
exam.
No prerequisites. Open to first-year students with Advanced Placement credit in American politics.
American Politics Subfield
COOK
PSCI 213 Theory and Practice of Civil Rights Protest (Not offered 2000-2001)*+
Analysis of the ideas, leadership, tactics, and pivotal episodes of the American Civil Rights Movement.
The course will focus on the period from post-World War II through the 1960s with attention to primary
writings about race segregation, civil disobedience, mass political movements, and the conditions that pro-
mote and hinder the effective exercise of citizenship rights by racial minorities.
Requirements: a midterm, a paper, and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Open to first-year students with Advanced Placement credit in American Politics.
American Politics Subfield
A. WILLINGHAM
PSCI 214 (formerly 313) Congressional Politics Today (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered
2001-2002)
The Republicans who took control of both the House of Representatives and the Senate in 1994 for the first
time in 40 years promised a transformation of that powerful but also unpopular American political institu-
tion, the Congress. Yet institutions often have a life of their own, which suggests that today's Republican
Congress, even under self-described revolutionaries like Newt Gingrich and Trent Lott, may have a great
deal in common with its Democratic predecessors. This course investigates changes and continuities in the
politics of Capitol Hill since the Republican takeover. We look at Congress's abilities, then and now, to
both represent the people and act on behalf of the public interest in passing legislation. The first half of the
course focuses on congressional elections--in particular, whether they impose accountability to the people
that elected them and/or to their "cash constituents" who financed their campaigns. The second half turns
to how Congress is organized (or not) to make decisions, where power lies on Capitol Hill and what that
means for the prospects of congressional leadership, and the nature of congressional policymaking and
policies.
Requirements: two critical essays and a self-scheduled final exam.
No prerequisites. Open to first-year students with Advanced Placement credit in American politics.
American Politics Subfield
COOK
PSCI 215 American Citizenship and Identity (Not offered 2000-2001)
When women got suffrage in 1920 and went to vote for the first time, some of them discovered that they
had lost their U.S. citizenship because they married a non-citizen. How and why did this happen? This
course will examine the development and meaning of American citizenship by viewing its twists and turns
through the lens of race, class and gender. We will discuss the rights, privileges and responsibilities of citi-
zenship over time and we will examine the bases for citizenship in American political thought. Specific
topics will include voting rights, the gendered nature of citizenship, privileges bestowed due to military
Political Science
­ 273 ­
service, welfare and citizenship, non-white immigrants' struggle to gain citizenship, whether the Constitu-
tion is colorblind, and the challenges of including cultural minorities.
Discussion format.
Requirements: assignments will include three papers responding to the readings, and participation in an
on-line discussion group.
No prerequisites.
American Politics Subfield
PSCI 216(S) Constitutional Law II: Individual Rights
Constitutional Law is offered in two courses. Students are encouraged to take them in sequence but may
elect not to, or to enroll in only one. The focus of both courses is on one of the most vital aspects of politics:
interpreting and applying the nation's fundamental rules. The emphasis is on the United States Supreme
Court and the exercise of judicial review. In this class we examine the ways in which the Constitution
protects individual rights while accommodating the often competing claims of groups and communities.
Some of the topics to be considered include: equal protection under law, substantive and procedural due
process, freedoms of speech and religion, and privacy. Under these rubrics are to be found such issues as
affirmative action, capital punishment, hate speech, property rights, abortion, and gender discrimination.
Much of the reading is of Supreme Court opinions that highlight the politics of constitutional development.
Lecture/discussion format.
Requirements: a midterm, a final exam, and a critical paper of short to medium length.
No prerequisites. Open to first-year students with Advanced Placement credit in American politics.
American Politics Subfield
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR JACOBSOHN
PSCI 217 Immigration Politics and Policy (Not offered 2000-2001)
Should we continue to be a "nation of immigrants?" We are experiencing some of the highest levels of
immigration in history. Is this good for America? What should our policies toward immigrants be and how
can we design effective policies? This class will begin by reviewing immigration history and law as a win-
dow through which to view contemporary debates over immigration politics and policy. Topics on current
politics will include immigrants' impact on the economy and particularly on certain states, the problem of
undocumented immigration, immigrant rights, immigration as a U.S. foreign policy tool, pressures for rais-
ing the quotas for skilled workers, changes in the laws about detention and deportation of criminals who
are immigrants, and the issue of assimilation and our lack of an immigrant settlement policy.
Lecture/discussion format.
Requirements: students will do a research project, presentation and two short papers.
No prerequisites.
American Politics Subfield
PSCI 218(F) Presidential Politics
The American presidency is commonly seen as the focal point of American politics and the most powerful
component of the federal government. But the executive branch is only one of three, the presidency is only
part of the executive branch, and there is much more to the presidency than just the president. All of this
poses serious questions about such an activist role, given the organizational context. We begin the course
by examining three exemplars of modern presidents: the power-seeking flexibility of Franklin Roosevelt,
the consensus-building teamwork of Dwight Eisenhower, and the ideological, publicity-minded approach
of Ronald Reagan. Then, turning to comparisons across presidencies, we consider: the gap between pres-
idential authority and presidential influence; the president's personal impact on the presidency and the
executive branch; and how the Cabinet, executive bureaucracy, Congress, the news media and the mass
public provide opportunities for, and/or constraints against, presidential leadership.
Requirements: one short thought paper; one longer research paper exploring one of the domestic successes
or failures of the Clinton presidency from the perspectives of the three models; a self-scheduled final exam.
Discussion format.
No prerequisites. Enrollment Limited to 35. Open to first-year students with Advanced Placement credit in
American politics.
American Politics Subfield
(This course is part of the Leadership Studies cluster.)
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR COOK
PSCI 219(F) Constitutional Law I: Structures of Power
Constitutional Law is offered in two courses. Students are encouraged to take them in sequence but may
elect not to, or to enroll in only one. The focus of both courses is on one of the most vital aspects of politics:
interpreting and applying the nation's fundamental rules. The emphasis is on the United States Supreme
Court and the exercise of judicial review. In this class we examine the structure of power in a constitutional
democracy, exploring contests over authority from John Marshall and Thomas Jefferson to Bill Clinton
and Kenneth Starr. Some of the topics to be considered include: the powers of the federal and state govern-
ments, the executive's emergency powers, and the Supreme Court's authority to nullify the acts of other
branches. Under these general headings are to be found such issues as the power to regulate firearms, the
power to establish an office of independent counsel, the power to overturn a judicial decision through con-
Political Science
­ 274 ­
gressional action, the power to deprive citizens of rights during wartime, and the power to define the terms
of impeachment. Much of the reading is of Supreme Court opinions that highlight the politics of constitu-
tional development.
Requirements: a midterm, a final exam, and a critical paper of short to medium length.
Lecture/discussion format.
No prerequisites. Open to first-year students with Advanced Placement credit in American politics.
American Politics Subfield
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR, 11:20-12:35 TR JACOBSOHN
PSCI 220(S) The Future of World Politics+
The end of the Cold War is often said to mark the beginning of a period of fundamental change in the
competitive and often violent nature of world politics. The end of the nuclear balance of terror, the rapid
globalization of communication technology, travel, trade and investment, a surge of interest in human
rights, environmentalism, global democracy and the UN, have all been noted as harbingers of a "new
world order." Others argue, however, that the essential features of international relations have not changed
since Athens and Sparta struggled for power in the Greek city-state system or the great powers of Europe
competed for security and advantage. Our objective in this course is to assess these contending perspec-
tives by examining both change and continuity in international relations. How relevant are the lessons of
history for the problems we face today? Are there fundamental features of world politics that have en-
dured? What features have changed completely? What new features must we now contend with? After
examining a number of historical cases in detail, the course addresses these questions by studying the im-
plications of the end of the Cold War and new issues in world politics for introducing change in the nature
of international relations.
Writing intensive seminar.
Requirements: midterm exam, final exam and a 7- to 8-page paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 18. Preference given to political science majors.
International Relations Subfield
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR SILVERSTONE
PSCI 221(F) The Causes of War
Developing a general theory of the causes of war has been one of the most important tasks for students of
international relations. This course will survey the most influential theoretical perspectives on the causes of
war, including approaches at the systemic, national, and individual levels of analysis. We will then examine
how well these general theories help us to understand the specific origins of the First and Second World
Wars, as well as the absence of Great Power war after 1945. The final part of the course will examine the
possible causes of future wars and conflicts in the twenty-first century.
Requirements: one 7- to 8-page paper, a midterm, and a final exam.
No prerequisites.
International Relations Subfield
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR SILVERSTONE
PSCI 222(S) The United States and Latin America*
This course is a historical survey of the most important political divide in the Western Hemisphere, be-
tween the U.S. and the countries of Latin America. The first part of the course will emphasize topics such
as U.S. diplomacy toward revolutions and independence movements in Haiti and the Spanish colonies;
imperialism and the so-called Spanish-American war of 1898; the Panama Canal; and the Good Neighbor
Policy. The middle part of the course will concentrate on the Cold War period, considering how enduring
economic interests and new strategic priorities shaped the U.S. response to leftist movements and regimes
in Guatemala, Cuba, Chile and Nicaragua, as well as the role of human-rights concerns in policymaking.
The final part of the course will discuss, in historical perspective, the main issues that have arisen with the
end of the Cold War: trade and investment, drugs, immigration, "post-modern" guerrilla movements, and
the embargo on Cuba.
Lecture/discussion format.
Requirements: two short (5-page) papers and either a third short paper and a regular final exam or a me-
dium-length (12-page) research paper and an abbreviated final exam.
No prerequisites.
International Relations Subfield
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR MAHON
PSCI 223 (formerly 322) Governing the World: Treaties, Laws and Institutions (Not offered
2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
Given the anarchic nature of the international system--the lack of a world government--how do we ex-
plain peace? As the world globalizes, occasions for conflict grow exponentially. Yet each day, the world's
200 countries fail to start tens of thousands of possible wars, decline to seize each other's assets, and ne-
glect to shoot down each other's satellites or to refuse incoming travelers, mail, or television signals. Most
countries, most of the time, coexist without violence in an increasingly complicated, uncontrollable world.
Peace is, apparently, in their interest. And it is a particular sort of peace, one that is governed by value-laden
rules, not one enforced solely by coercion and fear. This course examines the ways that countries have
historically sought to forge and entrench cooperation: international treaties, international law, and interna-
Political Science
­ 275 ­
tional organizations. How important are these networks of rules and institutions? Are they sufficient? And
are they good?
Requirements: two medium-length papers, one weighty quiz, one final exam; active and constructive par-
ticipation in class discussion.
International Relations Subfield
SHANKS
PSCI 224(S) Ethnic Conflict in World Politics*
Since the end of the Cold War, civil wars and genocides from Yugoslavia to Rwanda have aroused fears
that national and ethnic conflict threatens the foundations of international order. Observers fear that the end
of the Cold War has unleashed uncontrollable ethnic and national violence. Not all divided states have
experienced such polarization and conflict, however. The focus on sensational examples of state collapse
and ethnic violence obscures the existence of stability and cooperation in other settings. Why have some
states experienced serious ethnic conflict while others have not? Is it possible to use the examples of peace-
ful coexistence to avoid violence and civil wars? Is partition the only answer to ethnic divisions, or are there
ways to build peaceful coexistence? Among the cases to be discussed include the former Yugoslavia, the
new states of the former Soviet Union, India, Canada, Iraq, and Lebanon.
Seminar format.
Requirements: a research paper, a couple of response papers and an exam.
No prerequisites.
International Relations Subfield
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR M. LYNCH
PSCI 225(S) International Security
What is security? While international security once primarily referred to military conflict and the threat of
nuclear war, today it often refers to the environment, the movement of peoples, biological and chemical
weapons, and other non-traditional sources of insecurity. This class examines a wide range of conceptions
and problems of international security, traditional and non-traditional, and considers the prospects for
cooperation to overcome these threats. It first asks whether the focus of security studies should be individu-
al human beings, states, the world as a whole, or something else. It then asks whether security should be
seen as primarily competitive, so that one's security can only be enhanced by threatening the security of
another, or primarily cooperative, so that one's security is best protected by increasing the security of
others. It also evaluates the various mechanisms by which states and non-state actors can act to increase the
security of individuals, groups, and the world, as well as the extent to which they are likely to act in these
ways.
Lecture/discussion format.
Requirements: final exam and several short papers.
No prerequisites.
International Relations Subfield
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF M. LYNCH
PSCI 227(S) Ethics and Interests in Foreign Policy
People often claim that we cannot, or should not, judge states' actions in moral terms. Some argue that such
standards are irrelevant; others believe that any ethical standard would be unrealistic because the environ-
ment within which states operate is too uncertain to allow moral considerations. Yet discussing foreign
policy in terms of duty, or justice, or right does not indicate that we are crazy. We judge foreign policies in
terms of practicality and efficiency, but we also say that sanctions against Iraq are right or wrong, the inter-
vention in Kosovo was just or unjust, the WTO's trade policies are fair or unfair. We expect leaders to be
honorable as well as cunning, to serve some public good even if its not one we ourselves would choose.
This course examines ethical problems facing policymakers and publics by focusing on a series of specific
cases from the recent past, including the decision to use the atomic bomb, wartime propaganda, economic
sanctions, child labor, sex tourism, ecotourism, secrecy and espionage, religious fundamentalism, humani-
tarian intervention, trade in toxic waste, etc.
Lecture/discussion format.
Requirements: class attendance and participation in in-class exercises; two op/ed pieces (also sent to a pub-
lication); a midterm and a final exam.
No prerequisites.
International Relations Subfield
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF SHANKS
PSCI 230 American Political Thought (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
Political thinking in this country arose at the complicated intersection of empire and independence. The
land upon which settlers sought to build a "city on a hill," to lay freedom's foundations, to reinvent them-
selves, or to improve their material circumstances was seized by force and held through violence. This
course attempts to make sense of that fateful entanglement between freedom and subjugation. As we move
from the nation's birth in conquest through its repeated struggles over social subordination, we will explore
some of the most important ways in which both dominant and dissident figures have handled such themes
as authority, community, equality, liberty, slavery, and pluralism. We will examine significant American
answers to fundamental questions about the appropriate scope of federal and state power, the structure of
Political Science
­ 276 ­
the political economy, the workings of constitutional democracy, the meaning of citizenship and national
identity, and the character of American political culture. Readings may include works by Winthrop, Row-
landson, Paine, Jefferson, Madison, Calhoun, Emerson, Fuller, Thoreau, Douglass, Apess, Melville, Lin-
coln, Anthony, Du Bois, Addams, Goldman, Veblen, Dewey, and King.
Requirements: three 5- to 7-page papers.
No prerequisites.
Political Theory Subfield
REINHARDT
PSCI 231(F) Ancient Political Thought (Same as Philosophy 231)
This discussion seminar considers a range of ancient political thinkers, including Sophocles, Thucydides,
Plato, Aristotle, Epictetus, and Augustine. We will also consider, from a political point of view, selections
from the Hebrew Bible and New Testament. Among the questions that we will address: What is justice?
How can it be known and pursued? How is political power generated and exercised? What are the social
and ethical prerequisites--and consequences--of democracy? Must the freedom or fulfillment of some
people require the subordination of others? Does freedom require leading (or avoiding) a political life?
What does it mean to be "philosophical" or to think "theoretically" about politics? Although we will at-
tempt to engage the works on their own terms, we will also ask whether the vast differences between the
ancient world and ours make those terms irrelevant or unappealing to us or whether, on the contrary, the
texts' concerns still illuminate the dilemmas of political life.
Requirements: four 5-page papers.
No prerequisites.
Political Theory Subfield
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR REINHARDT
PSCI 232(S) Modern Political Thought (Same as Philosophy 232)
This seminar surveys the major themes, canonical texts, and central figures of modern political thought.
Beginning with Machiavelli and the uniquely modern question of the separation between statecraft and
soulcraft, the course then moves on to a sustained study of the development of liberalism, understood as a
way of coping with the challenge of modernity. Through readings from Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, Smith,
Kant, Constant, Tocqueville, and Mill, we will explore such topics as the social contract and popular sover-
eignty, moral pluralism and political tolerance, limited government and individual rights, negative and pos-
itive liberty, the laissez-faire state and private property, and fear of democracy. The latter half of the course
interrogates liberal modernity from the perspectives of its conservative and radical critics. By engaging
with Burke, Hegel, Marx, Nietzsche, Weber, Gramsci, Schmitt, and Arendt, we will examine issues like
alienation, revolution, class hegemony and ideology, reason and rationality, society versus community,
power and knowledge, disenchantment of authority, and the politics of self. In the final week, we will ex-
amine the recent claims of the final triumph of liberalism in our post-cold war world.
Lecture/discussion format.
Requirements: active seminar participation, presentations, and four short essays (5-6 pages each).
No prerequisites.
Political Theory Subfield
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF KIM
PSCI 233 Beyond Double Consciousness: Gunnar Myrdal and the Construction of Race as
Dilemma (Same as African-American Studies 200) (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered
2001-2002)*+
The course will be devoted to the reading of a primary document--Gunnar Myrdal's An American Dilem-
ma--about race and the constitution of national identity in the United States. After its publication in 1944,
the book was to be enormously influential in the way Americans thought about race and in framing the
politics, including civil rights protest, that developed in the years after World War II. The bulk of the course
will be devoted to an examination of the text giving attention to the way Myrdal crafted an argument about
race and about social science investigation. We look as well at the social and political context in which it
emerged, the critical reception, and its increasing consignment as a document for liberal politics that set the
atmosphere for dramatic changes that led eventually to the full affirmation of racial equality as a public
policy goal.
Requirements: class participation, short papers and final paper.
Political Theory and American Politics Subfield
A. WILLINGHAM
PSCI 234 Racial Theory (Not offered 2000-2001)*
Race, it can be argued, is the story of American politics and has defined American political development.
This course will examine theories of race and racism. We will begin by chronologically reviewing theories
of race that have been dominated in different epochs (scientific racism, the new racism, etc.). We will
compare the continuities and differences in strains of racial theory across time. We will trace the develop-
ment of race as a concept and question how we know we are black, white, or Asian. Readings will include
texts published in the 1920s, African-American political thought (including black feminist thought), stud-
ies of whiteness, colorblindness, the multiracial movement, and critical race theory. The course will ex-
Political Science
­ 277 ­
plore what constitutes "race," a changing concept, and whether it remains relevant to contemporary poli-
tics.
Seminar format.
Requirements: assignments will include three analytic essays and short bi-weekly reaction papers.
No prerequisites.
American Politics and Political Theory Subfield
PSCI 235 Multiculturalism and Political Theory (Not offered 2000-2001)
Some cultural minority groups in democratic states demand "special" social and political arrangements to
accommodate their distinct identities, languages and ways of life. Is this a requirement of justice in plural
societies? What exactly is the basis for these claims? Do demands for community autonomy--such as
separate religious schools, instruction in one's own language, or native self-government--jeopardize dem-
ocratic commitments to universal rights and citizenship, or to a division of church and state? Or are such
arrangements required in order to make good on liberal and democratic commitments to justice for all in
culturally plural societies? We'll look at recent responses by several political philosophers to the justice
claims of cultural minority groups.
Requirements: one midterm exam, one final paper (6-8 pages), and a final exam.
No prerequisites.
Political Theory Subfield
M. DEVEAUX
PSCI 239 Political Thinking About Race: Resurrecting the Political in Contemporary Texts on
the Black Experience (Not offered 2000-2001)*
This course reviews texts about racial purpose, focusing on the black experience in the United States since
mid-century. A first section of the course will isolate and examine readings on the construction of race as a
social category. The course then reviews the use of race by writers in several genres including scientific
racism, the construction of whiteness, double consciousness, the American Dilemma, and diaspora and
Afrocentric moods. The course will familiarize students with important texts and personalities and chal-
lenge students to identify and evaluate political meanings often embedded in the terms of racial complaint,
or affirmation.
Requirements: class participation, short papers and a final paper of 12-15 pages dealing with race in con-
temporary black biography.
No prerequisites.
Political Theory and American Politics Subfields
A. WILLINGHAM
PSCI 244 Middle East Politics: State Formation and Nationalism (Not offered 2000-2001; to
be offered 2001-2002)*
Across the Middle East, political movements have rejected the very foundations of the modern state sys-
tem. Arab nationalist movements have worked to erase existing borders, while religious movements have
challenged the legitimacy of secular states, sometimes in violent ways. Israel has faced equally profound
challenges to its identity, with political struggles over its borders, its religious and national character, and its
relationship to the Jews outside of Israel. Directly comparing Israel and the Arab states of the Fertile Cres-
cent, the course examines the domestic and international consequences of contested borders, disputed
identities, and challenged legitimacy. How do these struggles affect the stability and development of the
states of the Middle East? Can religious movements be incorporated peacefully into their political systems?
What are the prospects for democracy and civil society?
Requirements: a research paper, a couple of response papers, and an exam.
No prerequisites.
Open to first-year students with Advanced Placement credit in Comparative Politics.
Comparative Politics Subfield
M. LYNCH
PSCI 247(S) Political Power in Contemporary China*
The People's Republic of China presents us with two grand political narratives: socialism and democracy.
In the Maoist era, a distinctive understanding of socialism, which claimed to be a more genuine democra-
cy, brought hope and, ultimately, tragedy, to hundreds of millions of people. In the post-Mao era, Chinese
politics has been driven by the need to redefine socialism in the wake of the world-historic calamities of the
Great Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution and, more recently, the end of the Cold War. The state
cannot simply give up the socialist myth because without it the rationale for Communist Party hegemony
evaporates. But China's rulers cannot avoid political reform, both ideological and institutional, because to
do so heightens the legitimacy crisis born of Maoist failures. Within this context has emerged the contem-
porary Chinese democracy movement which, in all of its complexity, looks to both socialist discourse and
Western practice to create a new politics that checks tyrannical abuses of state power and engenders a civil
society. What is Chinese democracy now? What are its prospects and what is its relationship to the ideas of
socialism?
Lecture/discussion format.
Requirements: two short papers and a final exam.
Political Science
­ 278 ­
No prerequisites. Open to first-year students with Advanced Placement credit in Comparative Politics.
Comparative Politics Subfield
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR CRANE
PSCI 249(S) Latin-American Politics*
This course surveys Latin-American politics, with some emphasis on political economy. Its first half is
historical and comparative. We briefly examine the colonial, Independence, and postindependence periods
in explicit contrast with the same stages in U.S. history. Then, after considering how twentieth-century
popular movements in Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico have shaped the political landscape in each country,
we discuss the region's elite-sponsored encounter with the global economy and its culture. In the second
half of the course we address topics of current interest, including U.S. relations with Cuba and Mexico,
narcotics trafficking, religion and politics, women and social change, politics and television, environmental
preservation, and race.
Lecture/discussion format.
Requirements: a short map quiz, a 5- to 7-page paper, three 1-page essays, and either a regular final exam
or a short final plus another paper.
No prerequisites. Open to first-year students with Advanced Placement credit in Comparative Politics.
Comparative Politics Subfield
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF MAHON
PSCI 262 American Foreign Policy Since 1945 (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered
2001-2002)
This course will survey American foreign relations since 1945. We will critically examine competing
theoretical and historical interpretations of American foreign policy toward Europe and the Third World.
Topics to be examined in depth include the origins of the Cold War, the causes and consequences of Amer-
ica's involvement in the Vietnam War, and the rise and fall of détente with the Soviet Union. The final part
of the course will examine some of the major issues and choices that have confronted, and are likely to
confront, American policymakers in the aftermath of the Cold War.
Requirements: one medium-length paper, one midterm and a final exam.
No prerequisites.
International Relations Subfield
MCALLISTER
PSCI 263(S) Making Foreign Policy
It is common to study the values and interests that motivate states in their foreign policies, and the means
by which states pursue their goals. But how do states actually decide what goals to pursue? How do they
determine their security needs, manage international crises, or develop policies on the range of challenges
and opportunities presented by the international system? In most political systems, foreign policy making
is both a competitive and collaborative process involving numerous institutions, government bureaucra-
cies, prominent leaders, social groups, and individual citizens. To understand the policies states pursue, it is
essential to understand how these various groups and individuals interact to shape the foreign policy be-
havior we observe. This course examines how foreign policy is made in the United States and how the
American policy process is similar to or different from other countries. It will explore the role of the Presi-
dent and Congress and their interaction in foreign policy making, the organization of the executive branch
and how different departments and agencies affect policy. The course also examines political competition
over foreign policy, between the President and Congress, between the political parties, and among different
regions of the United States.
Requirements: midterm exam, final exam and a 7- to 8-page paper.
No prerequisites.
International Relations Subfield.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR SILVERSTONE
PSCI 264 Politics of Global Tourism (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
In 1996, tourism finally surpassed oil as the world's most valuable export. This perhaps tackiest of indus-
tries accounts for 10.7 percent of global GDP--an annual 3.6 trillion dollars--and employs 255 million
people worldwide. Indeed, tourism accounts for a huge share of the revenue received by most countries:
the two dozen small island countries list their exports as "tourism, fish," while presidents and prime minis-
ters from the world's most powerful countries--men and women with the ability to launch nuclear war--
make TV commercials begging foreign audiences to "discover the wonder" of this national park or that
recreated historical village. What is going on here? This class examines international tourism from several
angles, considering its origins and effects, its promoters and critics, its beneficiaries and victims. Is it the
perfect form of environmentally-sustainable development; a degrading enterprise that sells "happy tropical
primitives" to jaded white-collar workers; a democratic avenue to global understanding; the ultimate com-
modification--of experience? Readings will include selections from literature, as well as works in the so-
cial sciences.
Requirements: weekly short papers, one medium-length.
No prerequisites.
International Relations Subfield
SHANKS
Political Science
­ 279 ­
PSCI 265 The International Politics of East Asia (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered
2001-2002)*
How have global political and economic transformations influenced relations among countries in East
Asia? How have domestic forces in these countries shaped their responses to international challenges? This
course pursues these questions through an analysis of the international relations of East Asia since 1945.
Special attention is paid to Sino-Japanese relations, confrontation on the Korean peninsula, tensions in the
Taiwan Strait, and recent efforts at regional economic and security policy coordination.
Requirements: two 5- to 7-page papers and a final exam.
Comparative Politics and International Relations Subfields
CRANE
PSCI 267(F) Arab-Israeli Relations*
Since 1948, Israel and its Arab neighbors have been involved in five major wars, while Middle East poli-
tics have been consumed by the political struggle between Israel and the Palestinian nationalist movement.
The Arab-Israeli conflict has been one of the most deeply-contested relationships in international politics in
the twentieth century. On the other hand, Israel has signed peace treaties with two of its Arab neighbors and
is involved with negotiations with others. It is involved in negotiations with Palestinians--and with it-
self--over the future of the West Bank. What are the foundations of conflict and cooperation in the Middle
East? What are the prospects for war and peace? What are the implications of the creation--or the failure
to create--a Palestinian state? This course provides a theoretically and historically grounded framework to
address such questions and examines the potential for cooperative solutions.
Seminar format.
Requirements: a research paper, a couple of response papers and an exam.
No prerequisites.
International Relations Subfield
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF M. LYNCH
PSCI 268(S) Great Powers and International Order
At key points in history, major states have attempted to organize the political, military, economic and social
dimensions of the international system in ways that best suit their own political and economic structures or
ideological perspectives. This course explores how great powers, through war, imperialism, post-war
peace settlements, and the creation of international organizations, have competed over and collaborated in
shaping the international order. The course begins by examining the concept of international organization
and how state power may shape and reshape the international system. The course then looks at several
cases, from the Holy Roman Empire, Imperial and Revolutionary France and the Concert of Europe, to
Great Britain's maritime hegemony and German efforts to shape the European and world order in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The course examines how American concepts of international
order have shaped its goals, strategies and policies since World War I, and the far-reaching effects of these
policies on the actual organization of the international system after World War II. The final part of the
course will examine the contemporary debate over the relationship between state power and international
order after the Cold War.
Requirements: midterm exam, final exam and a 7- to 8-page paper.
No prerequisites.
International Relations Subfield.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR SILVERSTONE
PSCI 300(F) Research Design and Methods
When it comes time to forward a serious argument, most of us incline toward closed-minded laziness. We
look for evidence that supports positions that we already hold, and either fail to consider alternatives, or fail
to take those alternatives seriously. Unfortunately, since what we produce in this way can't withstand even
the mildest criticism or public scrutiny, we have wasted our time. This course on research methods teaches
students how, by contrast, to produce a strong and nuanced argument--to treat their own ideas as condi-
tional, and to assess and revise them in accordance with all the materials that count as evidence. We will
discuss how to state an appropriate, researchable question and how to determine what counts as an answer
to that question. We will also spend time discussing what constitutes valid evidence, how to identify and
evaluate alternative explanations for the same event, and how to separate coincidence from cause. Along
the way, students will become acquainted with a variety of research techniques, such as interviews, sur-
veys, archival research, case studies and field studies. The course assumes no statistics, nor will it cover
statistics; instead, our focus will be on more fundamental issues involved in conceiving and executing a
research project in the social sciences.
Class will meet 3 times a week and one class will be a lab.
Lecture/discussion format.
Requirements: weekly papers applying a method or research problem to a topic chosen by the student or
class.
Prerequisite: junior or senior standing. This course is for juniors and seniors interested in writing a major
Political Science
­ 280 ­
research paper, and is designed specifically for advanced students doing independent projects, semester-
long seminar papers or senior theses.
Counts for all subfields.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF C. JOHNSON
PSCI 305(F) Census 2000: A Survey of the Issues (Offered 2000-2001 only)
This course will review the 2000 Census conducted in the context of public policy debate that could make
it the most controversial ever. This course will review issues involved in debate about counting the U. S.
population, and proposals to reform the process. Readings will consist of material about the legal basis and
other historical and contemporary rationales for a census, the various ways the count as been conducted,
and the use of the data.
Requirements: four short papers and a final paper.
Prerequisites: permission of the instructor.
American Politics Subfield
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR A. WILLINGHAM
PSCI 308(S) Environmental Policy (Same as Environmental Studies 308)
(See under Environmental Studies for full description.)
PSCI 309(S) Comparative Constitutionalism
One way to mark the end of the twentieth century is to note the extraordinary amount of constitution mak-
ing going on around the world. The heightened activity surrounding recent fundamental restructurings of
polities has led to a renewed interest in the old subject of constitutionalism. This course will explore alter-
native traditions of constitutionalism, connecting them to the broader political cultures from which they
have emerged. It will examine the various shades of meaning underlying political values and moral theo-
ries that inform concepts--for example, liberty, autonomy, equality, and community--within various
constitutional traditions. It will seek to account for the similarities and differences within the constitutional
ideas and arrangements of the nations under consideration. It will also look closely at the ways in which
foreign constitutional experience might illuminate and possibly improve American constitutional under-
standings. This will be done through a study of such issues as abortion, hate speech, religious freedom,
judicial review, federalism, and constitutional change. The countries receiving closest examination will be
Germany, Canada, India, and Israel. However, in our quest for a public philosophy that might suggest a
more perfect constitutional polity.
Seminar format.
Requirements: a final exam and two short to medium length papers.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 18.
Comparative Politics Subfield
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF JACOBSOHN
PSCI 310(F) Political Psychology (Same as Psychology 345)
Issues central to political psychology are at the heart of most disputes in politics about what is possible. For
example, many political philosophers begin their analyses with a statement about "human nature." Claims
about progress presume that human nature will be positively developed by political change. The enlighten-
ment held that rationality would be strengthened by progress, and thereby make democracy more viable.
Those who defend authoritarian regimes often do so by proclaiming that the general public is incapable of
self-rule. Much of these disputes rest on evidence of various sorts that speak to the degree of rationality,
capacity for justice, and empathy of people. We explore what psychology tells us about the capacity for
justice and rationality among mass publics and leaders. Political psychology explores how people per-
ceive, and misperceive, the world around them, how and when people attend to politics, and how people
make political judgments. The course pays special attention to the surprising roles that emotions play in
enabling rationality in politics.
Lecture/discussion format.
Requirements: one short analysis paper, a term paper, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: any of the following: Political Science elective at the 200 or 300 level, or Psychology 101,
212, 221, 232, 242, 251, or 300 level course.
American Politics Subfield
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR MARCUS
PSCI 313 Power and Protest in American Political Development (Not offered 2000-2001; to
be offered 2001-2002)
American politics, it has been argued, is unique because of its relative lack of social revolution. This course
will examine this claim critically by asking how we account for the emergence and disappearance of politi-
cal protest and social movements in American political history. How do we explain their character? How
does the American political system create protest groups and then subdue them by partially incorporating
their concerns? After grounding ourselves in theories of political power, we will examine instances of mass
political protest, and small group resistance. Case studies will include the abolitionist movement, the Popu-
list movement, mass labor strikes in the 1920s and 30s, and the Civil Rights movement, as well as contem-
porary social movements and grassroots neighborhood groups organizing for change. We will analyze
what strategies are effective and explore the limits of protest in the American political context, what hap-
Political Science
­ 281 ­
pens when movement demands are co-opted by mainstream politics and integrated into institutions, and
why the claim that America lacks conflict (particularly class conflict) resonates in our political culture.
Requirements: one 6- to 8-page paper, one midterm and one case study analysis.
Prerequisites: any class in American Politics or Political Theory or permission of the instructor.
American Politics Subfield
SHERIDAN
PSCI 315 American Political Parties (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
This course examines the various essential roles that political parties play in the American political system.
Some have concluded that political parties are becoming weaker, as over time American voters in declin-
ing numbers identify themselves with either major political party, or indeed any political party. Yet Ameri-
can politics seems as partisan as ever. How can we reconcile these conflicting views? Moreover, what does
it matter? A system of competitive parties has been the principal mechanism of popular control in demo-
cratic societies. By choosing among competing candidates, most commonly identified with a specific party
and party program, voters can influence who controls governments and their policies. Do American politi-
cal parties still perform this organizing and mobilizing task? The introduction section of the course begins
with a review of the birth of American political parties and the impact they had over the course of the
history of the Republic. The major part of the course studies the contemporary role of parties in controlling
the actions of local, state and national governments. A major aspect of the course is an empirical study of
party organization, strength, and control of elections at the state level. Students select two states to explore
their recent electoral history using voting returns and to explain the changes, if any, over time.
Requirements: midterm, a medium-length paper and final exam.
No prior training in empirical or statistical methods is required.
American Politics Subfield
MARCUS
PSCI 316 Public Policymaking in the U.S. (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
When Clinton was elected in 1992, he vowed that united control of government would bring policy
change. When Republicans took control of the House and Senate after the 1994 elections, they proclaimed
they would pass a revolution. But what really happened? What leads to policy change, and what inhibits it?
In this course, we will examine the making of public policy in the United States. We will discuss how
problems get defined as public problems worthy of government attention, and the kinds of solutions that
are seriously considered by policymakers. Through several case studies, we will consider the ability of the
U.S. to adopt comprehensive policies, and evaluate the effectiveness of the solutions adopted.
Requirements: weekly 1-page discussion paper, two short papers, and a research paper.
Prerequisite: Political Science 110 or another course in U.S. politics.
American Politics Subfield
C. JOHNSON
PSCI 317(F) Environmental Law (Same as Environmental Studies 307)
(See under Environmental Studies for full description.)
PSCI 318 The Voting Rights Act and the Voting Rights Movement (Not offered 2000-2001)*
This course examines a key example of struggle over government policy after it becomes law. We investi-
gate efforts to implement policy and the counter-offensive to subvert the same, often while retaining the
letter of the law. The major focus of the course is the U.S. V
oting Rights Movement, a product of the V
oting
Rights Act of 1965, and one prime illustration of the debate over a policy consensus in the context of frag-
mentation represented by federalism, separation of powers, and racial and ethnic diversity in the polity. The
course selects from a range of contemporary policy areas for comparison including abortion rights, envi-
ronmental protection, educational equity, immigration, regulation of business, and public support for the
arts.
Discussion format.
The course will require five short papers.
Prerequisite: permission of the instructor.
American Politics Subfield
A. WILLINGHAM
PSCI 319 The First Amendment (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
The focus of this course is the constitutional politics of the First Amendment. The goal is to consider the
political, economic, sociological, and ideological significance of this critical, but frequently misunder-
stood, section of the Constitution. What does the constitutional history and interpretation of the Amend-
ment tell us about the type of polity we have as well as the intentions of those who originated it? We will
investigate various theories of the First Amendment, relating them to alternative understandings of the
structure and distribution of power in American society. Thus, issues such as pornography, libel, campus
speech, campaign financing, political protest, religious exemptions, polygamy, and prayer in the schools
will be studied as case studies in American politics and political thought. Much of the reading will be in
Political Science
­ 282 ­
constitutional cases, but most of it will consist of books and articles from the increasingly voluminous liter-
ature in this area of public law.
Requirements: a final exam and two short- to medium-length papers.
Prerequisite: one Political Science course, or permission of the instructor.
American Politics Subfield
JACOBSOHN
PSCI 321 Regionalism in International Politics (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered
2001-2002)
In contrast to the predictions of an emerging globalized, unified world, many observers of international
politics have seen indications that the world may be dividing into competitive regional blocs. European
unification, NAFTA, suggestions of a rising Asia, and projections of either a more peaceful New Middle
East or an Islamist Middle East all point toward the growing centrality of regionalism. Analysts are divided
on whether such regionalization is likely to make the world more or less stable, warlike, and prosperous.
This course asks whether the perception of the increasing primacy of regional orders is accurate, and then
explores the theoretical and policy implications of regionalization. Should the United States support or op-
pose regionalism? The course then compares different regions, to determine the extent to which cultural,
institutional, economic and political differences among regions make for differences in the prospects for
conflict or cooperation. Among the regions to be compared include the Middle East, Europe, the post-So-
viet zones, and Asia.
Requirements: research paper and several short papers.
No prerequisites.
International Relations Subfield
M. LYNCH
PSCI 322 The German Question in European Politics (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered
2001-2002)
Why has Germany been so often involved in wars with its neighbors over the last century? What domestic
and international factors made a Nazi regime possible in such an advanced industrial society? This course
surveys the leading theoretical and historical explanations that scholars have developed to account for Ger-
many's internal and external behavior. We will also examine the division of Germany after the Second
World War, focusing on West Germany's role in the origins of European integration and NATO. The final
part of the course will focus on contemporary issues such as German reunification, the future of the Euro-
pean Union, the Goldhagen controversy, the resurgence of nationalism, and Germany's place in the future
of Europe.
Requirements: two 5- to 7-page papers and a final exam.
No prerequisites.
Comparative Politics and International Relations Subfields
MCALLISTER
PSCI 325(S) Genocide, Exile and Famine
Environmental and political crises have devastated populations throughout human history, but became a
global political problem only in the twentieth century. This course will examine the origins of, and chang-
ing international responses to, humanitarian disasters in a variety of countries and regions. Cases covered
include Bangladesh, Cambodia, Ethiopia, the Sudan, Somalia, Yugoslavia, Rwanda and Kosovo. Each of
these crises has been handled by a combination of private and public, national and international agencies,
whose interactions are complex, and which have left an enduring legacy for local institutions. We will ex-
amine how the international response to disaster has evolved--why we have done what we have, but no
more.
Seminar/discussion format.
Requirements: one paper describing and analyzing the result of the student's attempt to achieve refugee
status in two countries; one 5- to 7-page comparative paper; one final research paper; weekly short re-
sponses to readings; active and constructive participation in class discussions.
Prerequisites: two classes in Political Science or junior or senior standing.
International Relations Subfield
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF SHANKS
PSCI 327(F) Democracy and International Relations
This course examines what has become a prominent and controversial question in international relations:
does democracy matter in world politics? More specifically, how do democratic institutions and liberal
values influence the foreign policies pursued by democratic states? These questions have become particu-
larly significant in the post-Cold War period, as the promotion of democracy and liberal values seems to be
a dominant feature in the globalization of political ideas. This course begins by examining what democracy
is as a distinctive political system, how the ancient Greeks and Enlightenment philosophers of the eigh-
teenth and nineteenth centuries thought of democracy and international politics, and the influence of these
ideas on American liberals in the twentieth century. The second part of the course examines whether de-
mocracies are less war-prone in their relations with other states. The third part of the course examines the
effects of democratic institutions and liberalism on the foreign policies of the United States and its role as a
Political Science
­ 283 ­
great power. The final part of the course examines the prospects and problems of promoting democracy
and liberalism around the world.
Seminar.
Requirements: midterm exam, final exam and a 8- to 10-page paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 25. Preference given to political science majors.
International Relations Subfield
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR SILVERSTONE
PSCI 330 Equality (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
What does it mean to be "equal" in society today? Why has equality increasingly come to be seen as a
requirement of basic justice in liberal democracies? This course serves as an introduction to the subject of
equality and its importance to liberal and democratic political theory and practice. Some central questions
posed in the course include: Is it is enough to be formally equal in the eyes of the law, or do people require
tangible forms of equality in terms of resources, opportunities and capacities in order to be truly "equal"?
And can liberal democratic states deliver on promises of justice and fairness in the absence of comprehen-
sive social equality and equitable economic distribution? And is it the state's role to foster such equality?
The course disentangles different forms of equality (such as economic, political, sexual, racial and cultural
equality) and assesses the merit of several concrete solutions to inequality, such as affirmative action and
policies promoting multiculturalism.
Requirements: class participation and presentations, two 6- to 8-page essays, one 8- to 10-page paper.
Prerequisite: one previous course in political theory or philosophy, or the permission of the instructor.
Political Theory Subfield
M. DEVEAUX
PSCI 331T(S) Non-Profit Organization and Community Change+
This tutorial is based on two converging realities: an evolving recognition of the vitality of private sector
supported community organization work; and the challenge now presented that such organizations may
have to assume a larger role due to reductions in public agency support and declining participation among
the poor and racial minorities. In the United States these agencies--essentially NGO's--played important
roles in communities and movements, often modeling the very programs adopted by the government.
Some, like the Highlander Center, have near-mythical status in our memories about what it means to
struggle for social change; others, including HARYOU, were critical in structuring thought about anti-pov-
erty strategies; in recent years some like Teach for America have plunged into the thick of the effort to keep
public education a viable option. This tutorial will examine the role of non-profits and social justice work in
the United States focusing on the non-profit as a type, governance and staffing, fund-raising and persecu-
tion. The tutorial will examine research and writing on the non-profit in U.S. social justice advocacy as
well as focus on specific cases.
Tutorial format.
Prerequisite: an interest in the financing and conduct of community-based organizations involved in advo-
cacy work with adult citizens on race, economics, equity, or other issues. Enrollment limited to 10.
American Politics Subfield
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF A. WILLINGHAM
PSCI 332 Fugitive Identities: Slavery and the Boundaries of American Politics (Same as
American Studies 332) (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)*
This course examines the stories told by and about fugitive slaves in this country, exploring the ways in
which these stories have been used in struggles over the basic terms of political identity and the boundaries
of American governance. By reading such primary sources as slave narratives, fiction, newspaper stories,
court decisions, and political tracts, we will explore how antebellum Americans--black and white--
thought and fought about not only the status of individual slaves but the meaning of race and gender, free-
dom and subjection, property, law, sovereignty, constitutionalism, and citizenship. By reading recent schol-
arly and literary writing about slavery, particularly the fiction of contemporary African-American writers,
we will investigate how and why the story of the escape from slavery is being reworked and what these
revisions tell us about the problems and possibilities of American society.
Requirements: three short essays and one longer final paper.
Prerequisite: at least one prior course in theory, American politics, American history, or American litera-
ture; or permission of the instructor.
Political Theory and American Politics Subfields
REINHARDT
PSCI 333(F) Analytical Views of Political Economy (Same as Economics 301 and Political
Economy 301)
(See under Political Economy for full description.)
PSCI 334 Political Representation (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
Why do we feel it is so important to be fairly represented in political life? Demands for justice by socially
marginalized and politically under-represented groups--women, and some racial and cultural minority
groups--frequently focus on the need for more comprehensive and meaningful forms of political repre-
sentation. This course begins with an examination of traditional liberal arguments surrounding representa-
Political Science
­ 284 ­
tion, especially the claim that political representation is fundamentally about articulating and defending the
ideas, principles, and policies of a particular constituency and that the identity of the representative (his or
her sex, race, ethnicity, class, etc.) is irrelevant. Next we turn to an assessment of recent claims about the
importance of political "voice" and political presence, and particularly the assertion that representation of
minority groups is best and perhaps only accomplished by members of that social group. We will also look
at the politics of deliberation in the public sphere: whose voice carries weight, and how social, cultural and
economic inequality and power relationships cut across communicative and deliberative practices in politi-
cal life.
Requirements: class participation and presentations, two 6- to 8-page essays, one 8- to 10-page paper.
Prerequisite: one previous course in political theory, American politics, or comparative politics, or the per-
mission of the instructor.
Political Theory Subfield
M. DEVEAUX
PSCI 335 The Public Sphere (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
The "public sphere," one of the core concepts of modern political thought, has taken on renewed signifi-
cance in intellectual life today. This discussion seminar looks briefly at the evolution of the term, but con-
centrates on its importance to contemporary politics. Our investigations will center on the character and
meanings of public space. We will look at space both as a key metaphor in political theory and as a medium
of everyday practical struggle. That is, we'll examine some of the most influential conceptions of public
life but we'll also explore the political economies of contemporary cities and the ways groups carve out
"turf" through street-level negotiations and conflicts. Specific topics include: the relationship between
ideas of citizenship and models of the public; the racing and gendering of spaces (civic, residential, com-
mercial, etc.); urbanity and suburbanization; the kinds of spaces and politics opened and closed by contem-
porary computing and information technologies; the effects of contemporary processes of globalization on
political identity and democratic practices. Authors read include Appadurai, Arendt, Berman, Castells,
Connolly, Davis, Foucault, Habermas, Hall, Holston, Mouffe, Virilio, Walzer, Young.
Requirements: three 5- to 7-page papers.
Prerequisite: prior work in theory or philosophy or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limited to 25.
Political Theory Subfield
REINHARDT
PSCI 336(S) Sex, Gender, and Political Theory (Same as Women's and Gender Studies 336)
This course focuses on political theorizing about sex and gender. We take up a range of perspectives on the
"gendered" nature of political concepts and categories, and examine the place occupied by women within
mainstream political theory. Some questions we'll address include: Does inequality in the private and so-
cial realms reflect public and political forms of inequality, and vice versa? How should we explain differ-
ences and inequities between men and women: by invoking biological factors, or by pointing to social and
historical explanations? Is there a unified conception of "woman" which can ground these generalizations
and secure a common basis for political solidarity? And can we make general claims about women's and
men's lives and differences without negating important differences in terms of race, ethnicity, class, and
sexuality? In addition to surveying the development of different contemporary feminist perspec-
tives--such as liberal, socialist, radical, and postmodern feminist views--we will examine the application
of these arguments to particular issues in theory and practice: reproductive choice and new reproductive
technologies, pornography, body image, motherhood, and prostitution.
Lecture/discussion format.
Requirements: class participation, presentations, 2 papers (6-8 pages) and a final take-home exam.
Prerequisite: one previous course in political theory or philosophy, or Women's and Gender Studies 101.
Political Theory Subfield
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF M. DEVEAUX
PSCI 337(S) Imagining the Division of Labor
This course is designed to explore the conceptual foundations of modern political and social theory, focus-
ing on the modern imagination of the "division of labor." Our epochal self-understanding of modernity is
predicated on the recognition that ever-increasing complexity defines our political, social, and economic
life. Whether describing this development as a progressive differentiation or a degenerative fragmentation,
most thinkers agree that it has to do with the political, social, and economic division of labor. What is the
moral significance of these changes? What are its psychological effects on modern man? Is the division of
labor inescapable? Can its negative effects be ameliorated, and in what way? How is the economic division
of labor reflected in the way in which power and authority are legitimated? How do modern societies
maintain social integration? What is the appropriate role of politics, as opposed to mere administration,
under modern circumstances? In addressing these broad questions, we will examine the arguments of clas-
sic thinkers, including Rousseau, Smith, Marx, Durkheim, and Weber, paying close attention to such con-
cepts as power, authority, legitimacy, duty, rights, public, private, liberty, equality, democracy, citizenship,
bureaucracy, market, civil society, and revolution.
Discussion format.
Requirements: active seminar participation, presentations, and four short essays (5-6 pages each). Alterna-
Political Science
­ 285 ­
tively, one long research paper (20-25 pages), on a topic chosen in consultation with the instructor, can be
considered under exceptional circumstances.
Prerequisite: Political Science 203 or equivalent; or permission of the instructor.
Political Theory Subfield
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR KIM
PSCI 338 American Legal Philosophy (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
An analysis of the problems, perspectives, and controversies of American legal thought with particular
emphasis on constitutional jurisprudence. The approaches include important statements of the positivist,
sociological, natural law, and realist schools of jurisprudence. Students become acquainted with the con-
tributions of such crucial figures as Marshall, Pound, Holmes, Cardozo, Frankfurter, Ely, and Dworkin.
Case materials illustrate the various perspectives on the law. An important object of the course is to consid-
er and evaluate the application of the contrasting approaches to actual problems of constitutional abjudica-
tion. Among the broader issues discussed in the context of these considerations are the legal enforcement
of morality, the moral grounds for disobedience to law, the nature and limits of judicial lawmaking, and the
rationale for legal punishment.
Requirements: a midterm, a final exam, and a short paper.
Prerequisite: a previous course in U.S. politics or theory.
Political Theory and American Politics Subfields
JACOBSOHN
PSCI 341 The Politics of the Global Economy: Wealth and Power in East Asia (Not offered
2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)*
This class analyzes the general political-economic contours of the world economy since 1945 and consid-
ers how several states in East Asia have worked within this context to secure national wealth and power.
The first half of the course considers global flows of trade, production, direct investment and finance and
how these create both constraints and opportunities for national development. The second half of the se-
mester is devoted to a more detailed study of how Taiwan, South Korea and other East-Asian states have
responded to globalization: How "developmental states" have fostered economic transformation; how that
economic change has, in turn, promoted democratization; and how democracy and globalization have ulti-
mately undermined the foundations of the developmental state.
Requirements: three 5- to 10-page papers.
Prerequisite: prior work in international relations, comparative politics, Asian Studies or economics.
Comparative Politics and International Relations Subfields
CRANE
PSCI 342 Intolerance and Political Tolerance (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered
2001-2002)
At the beginning of our century, most people and analysts expected steady progress and prosperity. De-
mocracy would spread, new nations would develop, and the lives of the many would improve. We now
know better. The twentieth century, for all its economic and technological improvements, has also wit-
nessed terrible intolerance, from attacks on civilians in war to ethnic purging to the holocaust. Intolerance
has led to wars between states, to violence within states (such as Bosnia), and has shaped interactions be-
tween individuals and groups even in otherwise settled communities and nations. Hence the three ques-
tions posed by this course: (1) what are the most important factors in producing and increasing intolerance;
(2) what are the factors that produce and strengthen tolerance; and (3) what can be done to increase a soci-
ety's tolerance, both in the United States and abroad? This course makes use of historical, political, and
literary sources.
Requirements: midterm exam, a medium-length research paper and a final exam.
No prerequisites.
American Politics and Comparative Politics Subfields
MARCUS
PSCI 343T Multiculturalism in Comparative Context (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered
2001-2002)+
What does "multiculturalism" mean? Does it mean that cuisines change, that we should show cultural sen-
sitivity, or that one "culture," has no right to judge and rule on the practices of another culture? If it means
spicing up diets or respecting "legitimate" differences, what is the controversy about? If it means radical
cultural relativism, what are the grounds for excluding human sacrifice? And what do multiculturalists
mean by "culture" and what relationship between culture and politics do they insinuate? Does multicultur-
alism mean the same things in the United States and other countries? And what makes it "good" in the
United States, worrisome in Canada, corrosive in Communist Yugoslavia, and evil in apartheid South Afri-
ca?
This tutorial will address these questions for the United States and other societies, especially Canada, South
Africa, and Yugoslavia. It considers the implications of multiculturalism for states, for democratic institu-
tions, and for our understanding of what makes political communities (especially nations). These are hotly-
contested questions, and important ones too, raising fundamental issues about what constitutes political
membership, obligation, and community. In particular, the tutorial focuses on the reasons for and conse-
quences of assigning political rights to a group on the basis of cultural sensitivity. By addressing multicul-
Political Science
­ 286 ­
turalism comparatively, by taking account of the experience of other societies, the tutorial aims to assess
the meaning, implications, and justice of multiculturalism as a political force.
Requirements: one paper every other week.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 10.
Comparative Politics Subfield
MACDONALD
PSCI 344 Rebels and Revolution in Latin America (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered
2001-2002)*
Most North Americans (and many Latin Americans) have a cliché image of the exotic and romantic Latin
revolutionary. This course attempts to complicate the image by situating the rebels historically, analyzing
the political and economic problems they have tried to solve, and considering what they have done once in
power. Most of the readings are works by or about important protagonists, including Emiliano Zapata,
Fidel Castro, Ché Guevara, Omar Cabezas, Rigoberta Menchú, as well as the leadership of Sendero Lumi-
noso in Peru and the Zapatista rebels of Chiapas. The course also explores the roots of rebellion in the
Conquest and in the social dislocations of agricultural export economies. After a glimpse at general theo-
ries of revolution, we discuss the achievements and failures of revolutionary government in Cuba and Nic-
aragua, and the general problem of deliberate state-organized social change.
Requirements: active participation, two short essays, and either a longer 15- to 18-page research paper and
a short final exam, or a short 5- to 7-page paper and a regular final.
Prerequisite: one course on Latin America or permission of the instructor.
Comparative Politics Subfield
MAHON
PSCI 349T Cuba and the United States (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)*+
Between Cuba and the U.S. there is a long and controversial history of dependence and conflict. As Cuba
struggles to survive the disintegration of the U.S.S.R., its former economic patron, several questions arise.
Is Cuba the next Communist "domino"? If not, why not? Can the U.S. do anything constructive at this
juncture? To answer, we need to re-examine the major controversies in Cuba's relationship with its often
troublesome and demanding neighbor to the north.
This course considers twelve themes, from Cuban independence and the legacy of Jose Martí to current
problems of economic organization and democracy, as they are treated in official pronouncements of the
Cuban revolutionary regime, travel accounts, polemics by Cuban émigrés, policy statements of the U.S.
government, and a wide range of academic materials.
In the first week the entire class will meet once for lecture and discussion on Cuba's colonial heritage and
the political economy of sugar. In the next ten weeks we will consider ten themes under a tutorial format. In
the final week, we will discuss the twelfth theme, the future of Cuba, in another meeting of the entire group.
Requirements: students will write 5-page papers for alternate sessions (five papers will be submitted by
each student during the semester). Each paper assesses the contending positions within the week's reading
and presents its author's own position. Those who are not writing papers are responsible for the reading
and for evaluating the work of their tutorial partner of that week. In the tutorial session, essays will be read
aloud or presented in outline form, then critiqued by the discussant, and then defended. Papers should be
completed and submitted to both the instructor and the discussant at least a day before the session. A short
meeting between the presenter and discussant immediately before the session is also recommended. At the
end of the course, students will submit a revised version of one of their five papers from the semester.
Prerequisite: any course on Latin America or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limited to 10.
Comparative Politics Subfield
MAHON
PSCI 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
Open to upperclasspersons with permission of the department.
SENIOR COURSES
PSCI 410(S) Senior Seminar in American Politics
The focal point of this research seminar will be on the state of American democracy early in its third centu-
ry. Two elements provide a basis for judging the state of American politics: first, we begin with a compari-
son of politics at the founding of the Republic with the state of politics in our own time; second, each semi-
nar participant will engage in research on a particular aspect of American politics. Among the topics that
will be considered are: the competing conceptions of democracy; the appropriate roles of the various insti-
tutions of politics (the press, political parties, local, state, and national politics); and, the social and econom-
ic systems and their diverse effects. Combined, these two elements will enable the seminar to consider how
the American political system has changed and whether it has changed for the better and/or worse. Has the
increasing diversity of the American population, the growth of imperial responsibility, the impact of the
world economy on America (and of the American economy on the world), the pace of technological
Political Science
­ 287 ­
change, among other modern features, made democratic politics more or less possible?
Discussion format.
Requirements: a research paper and oral presentations in the seminar.
No prerequisites
Enrollment limited to 15. Senior majors have precedence.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 T MARCUS
PSCI 420(F) Senior Seminar in International Relations: Globalization, Agency and
Authority
International relations theory takes multiple sovereignty to be the defining, indeed determining, feature of
world politics. In this capstone seminar, we will examine whether the two main assumptions underlying
this contention hold true: whether international boundaries decisively affect the way that global issues are
conceived and solved, and whether such boundaries are an inescapable fact of political life. We will start by
covering the origins and history of sovereignty and will then look at developments which have transferred
power or decision-making authority away from the state: nuclear weapons, telecommunications, environ-
mental interdependence, transnational religious movements, international organizations, the service/infor-
mation economy, multinational corporations, transnational grassroots movements, exported American cul-
ture (e.g., Hollywood) or Western values (e.g., democracy). We will also consider foreign policies intended
to counter this trend and to shore up state boundaries.
Seminar format.
Students are required to submit a weekly 2-page critique of the readings, to co-lead two weeks of class
discussion, to submit two 5- to 7-page papers on common topics, and to produce a 10- to 15-page research
paper on a unique topic.
Prerequisites: junior or senior standing and two classes in international relations.
(International Relations concentrators can also take Political Science 440 as a capstone course)
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF, 2:35-3:50 TF SHANKS
PSCI 430(F) Senior Seminar in Political Theory--Justice in Plural Societies: Individual vs.
Community
The burning issue of political theory today is how liberal democracies can deliver justice to cultural, ethnic,
and religious minorities within their borders. Within liberal and democratic theory, the traditional emphasis
on individual rights and freedoms has made it difficult to recognize and accommodate community goods,
notably the goods of cultural identity and cultural membership. Many proponents of multiculturalism and
cultural pluralism argue that any adequate political theory needs to embrace a theory of the good that
moves collective goods like identity and membership from the periphery to the center of political concern.
This course explores the structure and substance of arguments for and against special forms of accom-
modation for cultural minorities in political theory and political philosophy. Special attention will be paid to
areas of tension between the demands made by cultural minorities and liberal-democratic values and insti-
tutions--notably the tension between collective, cultural group rights on the one hand and individual rights
on the other. We will also explore the "backlash" to proposals supporting multiculturalism and special
group cultural rights, including appeals to "cosmopolitanism" and a "post-ethnic" liberal sensibility.
Seminar format.
Requirements: active class participation, weekly critical response papers (2 pages), one mid-term essay
and one final research paper (12-15 pages).
Prerequisites: two previous courses in political theory. Enrollment limited to 15.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 T M. DEVEAUX
PSCI 440(F) Senior Seminar in Comparative Politics: Major Theories of Political Change and
Difference
Influential works in comparative politics from Aristotle and Ibn Khaldun to contemporary writings. The
list also includes writings by Smith, Marx and Engels, Weber, Mancur Olson, Theda Skocpol, Robert Put-
nam, Bruce Porter, and James Scott. Although the fundamental preoccupation of most of this literature is
"the rise of the West," along the way we also consider theories about "national character," imperialism,
why revolutions happen, the social and institutional bases of markets and democracy, and the problematic
global march of political "modernity."
Discussion format with some lectures.
Requirements: weekly 2-page papers and a 10- to 12-page final essay. Political Science honors students
may elect to write a final paper that ties course readings to their thesis topic.
Prerequisite: junior or senior standing. Enrollment limited to 15. Intended mainly for advanced Political
Science majors with a concentration in comparative politics. Other advanced Division II majors are wel-
come, space permitting.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF MAHON
PSCI 481(F)-W033-482(S) Advanced Study in American Politics
A year of independent study under the direction of a member or members of the Political Science faculty,
to be awarded to the most distinguished candidate based upon competitive admissions. Candidates submit
a research proposal to the department prior to May of their junior year. The successful candidate, desig-
nated the Sentinels of the Republic Scholar, receives a substantial research stipend to cover costs associated
with the proposed project. The Sentinels Scholar may submit her/his essay for consideration for honors in
Political Science, Psychology
­ 288 ­
Political Science.
Admission is awarded on the basis of demonstrated capacity for distinguished work and on the proposal's
promise for creative contributions to the understanding of topics on: the federal system of government; the
American political economy; civil liberties; state, local, and federal relationships; or the philosophical
foundations or problems of American constitutional democracy. Proposals that deal with these topics from
a variety of perspectives (such as domestic, comparative, international, or philosophical) are welcome.
Anyone with a prospective proposal should contact the department chair for further guidance.
PSCI 491(F)-W030, W030-492(S) Senior Essay (Honors Route One)
The senior major, having applied for and been accepted into the honors program during the second semes-
ter of the junior year, devotes a semester and the winter study period to an inquiry in the student's special-
ization and submits the results of the inquiry in the form of an extended essay to the departmental honors
committee for evaluation.
Prerequisites: two elective courses in the major's specialization (one may be taken simultaneously with the
individual project).
PSCI 493-W031-494 Senior Thesis (Honors Route Two)
The same as Political Science 491-W30 or W30-492, only extended over both semesters and the winter
study period and requiring as a final product a more comprehensive and substantial essay.
PSCI 495-W032, W032-496 Individual Project
With the permission of the department, open to those senior majors who are not candidates for honors, yet
who wish to complete their degree requirements by doing research--rather than taking the Senior Semi-
nar--in their subfield of specialization. The course extends over one semester and the winter study period.
The research results must be presented to the faculty supervisor for evaluation in the form of an extended
essay.
Prerequisites: two elective courses in the major's subfield specialization (one may be taken simultaneously
with the individual project).
PSCI 497, 498 Independent Study
Open only to senior majors with permission of the department.
PSYCHOLOGY (Div. II & III)
Chair, Professor GEORGE R. GOETHALS II
Professors: CRAMER, G. GOETHALS, HEATHERINGTON, KASSIN*, KAVANAUGH, P.
SOLOMON***, ZIMMERBERG*. Associate Professors: FEIN, KIRBY***. Assistant Professors:
BEN-ZEEV, FRIEDMAN, M. SANDSTROM, SAVITSKY*, A. SOLOMON. Visiting Associate
Professors: MARTONE, VON HIPPEL§. Visiting Assistant Professor: BONNER. Lecturers:
ENGEL, N. SANDSTROM.
MAJOR
1) Psychology 101 Introductory Psychology
2) Psychology 201 Experimentation and Statistics
3) Three 200-level courses, with at least one from each of the following groups.
Group A Psychology 212 Introduction to Neuroscience
Psychology 221 Cognitive Psychology
Psychology 262 Health Psychology
Group B Psychology 232 Developmental Psychology
Psychology 242 Social Psychology
Psychology 252 Psychological Disorders
4) Three 300-level courses from at least two of the areas listed below:
Area 1: Behavioral Neuroscience (courses with middle digit 1)
Area 2: Cognitive Psychology (courses with middle digit 2)
Area 3: Developmental Psychology (courses with middle digit 3)
Area 4: Social Psychology (courses with middle digit 4)
Area 5: Clinical Psychology (courses with middle digit 5)
Area 6: Health Psychology (courses with middle digit 6)
At least one of these courses must be from among those carrying the designation Empirical Proj-
ect.
5) Psychology 401 Perspectives on Psychological Issues
With the approval of the department, students may substitute two courses in associated fields for one of
the required 300-level courses. Students must apply in writing for this approval.
The department recommends that students take Psychology 201 in their sophomore year. The depart-
ment requires that 201 be completed by the end of the junior year.
Psychology
­ 289 ­
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN PSYCHOLOGY
Students who are candidates for honors need take only two 300-level courses from two different areas,
but they must enroll in Psychology 493-W031-494 and write a thesis based on original empirical or
theoretical work. Presentation of a thesis, however, should not be interpreted as a guarantee of a degree
with honors. Guidelines for pursuing the degree with honors are available from the department.
COURSE NUMBERING RATIONALE
As is the case in all departments, the first digit of a Psychology course number indicates the relative level
of the course. Where appropriate, the second digit corresponds to the Areas listed above.
PSYC 101(F,S) Introductory Psychology
An introduction to the major subfields of psychology: behavioral neuroscience, cognitive, developmental,
social, personality, psychopathology, and health. The course aims to acquaint students with the major
methods, theoretical points of view, and findings of each subfield. Important concepts are exemplified by a
study of selected topics and issues within each of the six areas.
Requirements: two lab reports, unit quizzes, and a final exam.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Members of the Department
PSYC 201(F,S) Experimentation and Statistics
An introduction to the basic principles of research in psychology. We focus on how to design and execute
experiments, analyze and interpret the results, and write research reports. Students conduct a series of ex-
periments in different areas of psychology (e.g., social, personality, cognitive) which illustrate basic de-
signs and methods of analysis.
Requirements: three papers, midterm exam, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Psychology 101. Two sections each semester. Enrollment limited to 22 per section. Not open
to first-year students.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR, 1:10-2:25 MR Lab: 1:10-3:50 T, W First Semester: M. SANDSTROM, BONNER
11:20-12:35 TR, 1:10-2:25 MR Lab: 1:10-3:50 T, W Second Semester: BEN-ZEEV, N. SANDSTROM
PSYC 212(F) Introduction to Neuroscience (Same as Biology 212 and Neuroscience 201)
A study of the relationship between brain, mind, and behavior. Topics include a survey of the structure and
function of the nervous system, neuroethology, development, learning and memory, sensory and motor
systems, language, consciousness, assessment of human brain damage, and clinical disorders such as
schizophrenia, Parkinson's Disease, and Alzheimer's Disease. The laboratory portion of the course focuses
on current topics in neuroscience.
Requirements: two hour exams, a final exam, and laboratory demonstrations.
Prerequisite: Psychology 101 or Biology 101. Open to first-year students.
Satisfies one semester of the Division III requirement.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR Lab: 1-4 M, T, W ADLER and P. SOLOMON
PSYC 221(F) Cognitive Psychology
A survey of the experimental analysis of the mental processes. Topics include memory, visual perception,
attention, problem-solving, reasoning, language, and unconscious processes. Special emphasis is on the
interdisciplinary nature of cognitive psychology, including contributions from computer science, neurosci-
ence, and philosophy.
Requirements: a midterm, a final exam, and a short paper.
Prerequisite: Psychology 101. Open to first-year students.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF BEN-ZEEV
PSYC 232(F) Developmental Psychology
An introduction to the study of human growth and development from infancy through adulthood. Topics
for discussion include perceptual and motor development, language acquisition, memory and intellectual
development, and social and emotional development. These topics form the basis for a discussion of the
major theories of human development, including social learning, psychoanalytic and cognitive-develop-
mental models.
Requirements: two hour exams and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Psychology 101. Open to first-year students.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR KAVANAUGH
PSYC 242(F,S) Social Psychology
A survey of theory and research in social psychology. Topics include the self, social perception, conformi-
ty, attitudes and attitude change, prejudice, aggression, altruism, interpersonal attraction, and intergroup
conflict. Special attention is given to applications to political campaigning, advertising, law, business, and
health.
Requirements: two hour exams and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Psychology 101. Open to first-year students.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR First Semester: VON HIPPEL
11:20-12:35 TR Second Semester: BONNER
PSYC 252(F,S) Psychological Disorders
A study of the phenomenology, etiology, and treatment of the major forms of psychological disorders: the
schizophrenias, dissociative disorders, affective disorders, anxiety disorders, personality disorders, alco-
Psychology
­ 290 ­
holism, and others. The course emphasizes an integrative approach which incorporates and analyzes theo-
ries and research from family, biological, genetic, and sociocultural perspectives.
Requirements: two hour exams and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Psychology 101. Open to first-year students.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR First Semester: A. SOLOMON
9:55-11:10 TR Second Semester: HEATHERINGTON
PSYC 262(S) Health Psychology
An integrated analysis of the mental processes and behavioral characteristics that enhance or impair physi-
cal well-being. Topics include stress and coping; the influence of psychobiological, behavioral, and social
factors on medical disorders such as cardiovascular disease, cancer, and AIDS; and the psychological con-
sequences of acute and chronic illness, placebo effects, and the patient-physician relationship. Students will
have the opportunity to pursue topics of special interest, work that will culminate in the creation of a class
web site.
Requirements: hour exams, several short thought papers, class presentations, and web site design.
Prerequisite: Psychology 101. Open to first-year students.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR FRIEDMAN
PSYC 312 Drugs and Behavior (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
This course studies the relationship between behavior and neurochemical changes in the brain. It begins
with a detailed study of neurotransmitter systems, drug-receptor interactions, and sources of individual dif-
ferences in drug response, such as gender and genetics. Special topics include the behavioral consequences
of prenatal drug exposure, the role of classical and operant conditioning in the development and mainte-
nance of alcohol and drug abuse, the neural basis of reward, and the interaction between cerebral lateraliza-
tion and behavioral effects of drugs.
Requirements: an hour exam, an oral presentation, and a written report of research.
Prerequisite: Psychology 212 or Neuroscience 201 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limited to 16.
Satisfies one semester of the Division III requirement.
Empirical Project
ZIMMERBERG
PSYC 313 Human Neuropsychology (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
This course surveys the behavioral, cognitive, and emotional effects of brain dysfunction. We consider the
effects of brain damage in humans from both an experimental and clinical point of view. Topics covered
include: general principles of brain function; organization of higher brain functions including memory, lan-
guage, perceptual processes, and emotional processes; disorders of the human brain including Alzheimer's
Disease, the effects of stroke, and the impact of head injuries such as those sustained in automobile acci-
dents; development and recovery of brain function; and applications of neuropsychology such as neurop-
sychological testing.
The course is taught in the discussion/seminar format. Students conduct a research project related to one of
the topics in the course.
Requirements: seminar presentation and paper, participation in seminar discussions, and a written report of
an empirical project.
Prerequisite: Psychology 212 or 221 or permission of instructor.
Satisfies one semester of the Division III requirement.
Empirical Project
P. SOLOMON
PSYC 315(F) Hormones and Behavior
This course studies the relationship between hormones and behavior. We review the mechanisms by which
hormones act in the nervous system. We also investigate how hormones influence behavior as well as how
behavior and experiences alter hormonal function. Specific topics to be examined include: sexual differ-
entiation; courtship, reproduction and parental behavior; aggression; and learning and memory. Students
critically review data from both human and animal studies.
Requirements: midterm and final exams, seminar presentations and participation in discussions, written
and oral presentation of empirical project.
Prerequisite: Psychology 212. Priority given to psychology majors. Enrollment limited to 16.
Empirical Project
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF N. SANDSTROM
PSYC 316(F) Clinical Neuroscience+
Diagnosing and treating neurological diseases is the final frontier of medicine. Recent advances in neuro-
science have had a profound impact on the understanding of diseases that affect cognition, behavior, and
emotion. This course provides an in-depth analysis of the relationship between brain dysfunction and dis-
ease state. We will focus on neurodegenerative disorders including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's dis-
ease, and Huntington's disease. We will consider diagnosis of disease, treatment strategies, as well as social
and ethical issues. The course is taught in the tutorial format and provides students with the opportunity to
present material based upon: (1) review of published literature, (2) analysis of case histories, and (3) ob-
servations of diagnosis and treatment of patients both live and on videotape. Students design and conduct
an empirical project.
Psychology
­ 291 ­
Evaluation based on positions papers, class participation, and research project report.
Prerequisites: Psychology 212 (same as Biology 212 or Neuroscience 201).
Empirical Project
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR P. SOLOMON
PSYC 318(S) Neural Systems and Behavior
This course will examine the organization of neural systems underlying behavior in humans and animals.
We will cover the anatomical, physiological and cellular organization of major brain systems involved in
selected behaviors such as motor learning, sensory discrimination, social interactions, language, attention
and states of consciousness. Emphasis will be on the synaptic and neurochemical organization of the major
brain regions involved in production of these behaviors including the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, cere-
bellum, basal ganglia and thalamus. For each behavior, we will define the anatomical circuits and neuro-
transmitters involved and examine models that have been constructed to investigate how activity in these
circuits may function to produce a given behavior. Lectures will be supplemented with laboratory work
demonstrating techniques of investigating the synaptic organization and neurochemical anatomy of the
mammalian brain.
Requirements: two hour exams, and a written and oral presentation of research project.
Prerequisites: Psychology 212 (Neuroscience 201) or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limited to
16.
Satisfies one semester of the Division III requirement.
Empirical Project
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR MARTONE
PSYC 322(F) Thinking and Problem-Solving
Every day we confront a multitude of different problems. What makes a problem difficult or easy to solve?
What makes it interesting or boring? What fallacies do we tend to commit and how can they be avoided?
This course presents you with an opportunity to engage in a theoretical and empirical study of deductive
thinking, inductive thinking, and problem-solving, and their application to educational practice. This
course also teaches you how to develop evaluative strategies in order to reflect on your own thinking. You
are expected to "find" problems instead of learning only how to "solve" them.
Requirements: class participation, short reflection papers, and a final research paper.
Prerequisite: Psychology 221 or permission of instructor. Priority given to psychology majors. Enrollment
limited to 25.
Empirical Project
Hour: 7:00-9:30 p.m. T BEN-ZEEV
PSYC 326 Decision-Making (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
Why does our ability to reason sometimes fail us? Why do we occasionally make choices that are bad for
us? We address these questions by surveying experimental approaches to understanding reasoning and
decision-making processes in human behavior, and by solving and analyzing problems that psychologists
have used to investigate these processes. Class discussion focuses on cognitive theories of rational and
irrational thinking as well as behavioral theories of suboptimal choices. Topics include impulsiveness and
self-control, the subjective values of short-term versus long-term rewards, addictions and bad habits, prob-
ability judgments, gambling, and moral reasoning. Students may conduct original research in one of these
areas.
Requirements: short papers, a written report of research project, and class participation.
Prerequisites: Psychology 221 or permission of instructor.
Empirical Project
KIRBY
PSYC 332 Cognitive Development (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
How do infants make sense of their world? When do children understand the distinction between fantasy
and reality? What events do children remember, and how accurate are early memories? How do cultural
experiences affect the way that children think and problem-solve? These questions form the basis of a
course that examines both the biological and social factors that influence the development of intellectual
skills during the childhood years. We consider both theoretical (e.g., what is the relationship between
thought and language) and applied questions (e.g., do children misunderstand media messages), and we
explore the similarities and differences in cognitive development of normally-developing children and
children with developmental disabilities (e.g., autism). The work of both classical (e.g., Piaget, Luria) and
contemporary theorists (e.g., Case, Fischer) is compared and contrasted.
Requirements: two short papers, and a written/oral report of research project
Prerequisite: Psychology 232.
Empirical Project
KAVANAUGH
PSYC 333(F) Child Study
This course offers first-hand experience in the observation and study of children. Students learn observa-
tional skills in a preschool setting, as well as having an opportunity to conduct an original empirical study
with the children. Through the observation of children's play, we discover how they develop social skills,
sex roles, gender identity, a sense of self and self-control.
Psychology
­ 292 ­
Two discussions and one laboratory meeting per week.
Requirements: two hour tests and a report of research project.
Prerequisites: Psychology 232 and Psychology 201. Priority given to psychology majors. Enrollment lim-
ited to 25.
Empirical Project
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR CRAMER
PSYC 334(F) The Psychology of Education
This course draws on research and theories from the fields of developmental, social, and educational
psychology to examine the interrelated processes of teaching and learning. We consider how children learn
in several different contexts (at home with parents, in classrooms, with peers). We examine a variety of
educational practices as well as exploring the child's experience of being in school. We identify factors that
influence educational outcome, such as economic status and educational practices, look at differences
among children and between cultures, and discuss seminal philosophies of education such as those of
Rousseau, Dewy, and Bruner.
Requirements: regular reading assignments, participation in class discussions, two short papers, and a final
paper to be presented in class.
Prerequisite: Psychology 232 or permission of the instructor. Priority given to psychology majors and stu-
dents in the Program in Teaching. Enrollment limited to 25.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF ENGEL
PSYC 336(S) Adolescence
Why do we define adolescence as a distinct stage of development? What are its perils and accomplish-
ments? What internal and external forces make adolescence such a volatile and formative stage of life? The
course considers a range of empirical and theoretical material, as well as fiction and film, in order to identi-
fy and understand the behavior and experience of adolescents. Topics include: identity, sexuality, romantic
love, intellectual growth, family relationships, psychological problems, education, and variation between
cultures.
Requirements: two exams and a final paper.
Prerequisite: Psychology 232 or permission of instructor. Priority given to psychology majors and students
in the Program in Teaching. Enrollment limited to 25.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF ENGEL
PSYC 337(S) Childhood Disorders and Therapy
This course is a study of clinical child psychology. Disorders typically found in childhood and adolescence,
including anorexia, phobias, learning disabilities, infantile autism, and schizophrenia are examined; and
several different treatment approaches, including non-directive play therapy, behavior modification, and
contemporary psychoanalysis are discussed.
Requirements: an hour exam, a final exam, and a term paper.
Prerequisites: Psychology 232 and 251 or 252. Priority given to psychology majors. Enrollment limited to
25.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR CRAMER
PSYC 341(F) Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination*
This course is an examination of stereotypes and prejudice from a variety of social psychological perspec-
tives. The course examines the impact that stereotypes and prejudice have on people's perceptions of and
behaviors toward particular groups and group members and explores a variety of factors that tend to exac-
erbate or weaken this impact. The course also considers some of the sources of stereotypes, prejudice, and
discrimination and some of the processes through which stereotypes are either maintained or revised in the
face of stereotype-inconsistent information.
Requirements: a final exam, a series of brief papers, and a written and oral report of research project.
Prerequisites: Psychology 201 and 242, or permission of instructor.
Empirical Project
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W VON HIPPEL
PSYC 342(S) Psychology of Leadership
How do leaders emerge? Who are they? When do they succeed or fail? This course studies questions of
leadership and the relevant theory and research on social influence, persuasion, decision-making and group
dynamics. Topics include the behavior of leaders, the perception of leaders, and the interaction of personal
and situational factors in the emergence and effectiveness of leadership. Examples of leadership in orga-
nizations, politics, government, sports, the military, and higher education are considered.
Requirements: two hour exams, and report of research project.
Prerequisite: Psychology 242.
Empirical Project
(This course is part of the Leadership Studies cluster.)
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF G. GOETHALS
PSYC 343 The Self (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
This course considers "the self" from a social-psychological perspective. We read and evaluate current and
classic research to better understand how beliefs and concerns about the self influence emotion, judgment,
Psychology
­ 293 ­
and behavior. Among the many questions we consider are: Why do we both overestimate the extent to
which others are like us and exaggerate our personal uniqueness? Why do we overestimate the extent to
which others notice us and pay attention to us? Why is it so difficult to accurately recall what we used to
think, and predict what we will think and do in the future? When we have a choice of receiving information
about ourselves that is accurate versus information that is flattering, which do we choose--and why? Fi-
nally, the class considers ways in which the self is conceived differently in non-Western cultures. As part of
this course, students may conduct original research in the area.
Requirements: short daily thought papers, formal paper proposal, and a written/oral report of research.
Prerequisite: Psychology 242.
Empirical Project
SAVITSKY
PSYC 344(F) Advanced Research in Social Psychology
This course will focus on the process of doing original, empirical social psychological research on specific
topics in the field. We will concentrate on two content areas of research: (1) stereotypes and prejudice,
particularly as they touch on issues concerning the academic achievement of women and people of color,
and on the role of self-esteem in stereotyping and prejudice, and (2) interpersonal suspicion, including an
examination of factors that might reduce suspicion in interracial or cross-cultural dyads or groups. Students
will research and critically analyze and integrate the relevant literatures concerning these topics, and will
design and conduct original research to test empirically several hypotheses that emerge from these litera-
tures. We will examine a variety of types of research design and statistical techniques.
Requirements: a series of papers, written and oral reports of research.
Prerequisites: Psychology 201 and Psychology 242. Enrollment limited to 16. Priority given to Psychology
majors.
Empirical Project
(This course is part of the Critical Reasoning and Analytical Skills initiative.)
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF FEIN
PSYC 345(F) Political Psychology (Same as Political Science 310)
(See under Political Science for full description.)
PSYC 347 Psychology and the Law (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
This course deals with applications of psychology to the legal system. Relevant psychological theory and
research address the following controversies: scientific jury selection, jury decision-making, eyewitness
testimony, child witnesses in abuse cases, hypnosis, lie-detector tests, interrogations and confessions, the
insanity defense, and the role of psychologists as trial consultants and expert witnesses. Observations are
made of videotaped trials, demonstrations, and mock jury deliberations. Students conduct original research
in the area. No knowledge of the law is necessary.
Requirements: two hour exams and a written/oral report of research.
Prerequisite: Psychology 242.
Empirical Project
KASSIN
PSYC 348(S) Group Dynamics
What are the driving forces behind group behavior? This topic is covered on both theoretical and applied
levels with an emphasis on putting theory into practice. The types of groups discussed range from the small
(two members) to the extremely large (thousands of members). Topics such as group performance, cooper-
ative problem-solving, competitive problem-solving, social dilemmas, cultural in-group bias, group think,
and loss of self will be covered in detail. These areas of research will be related to relevant "real world"
topics such as the performance of sports teams, committee decision-making, team negotiation, and mob
mentality. Both classic and recent research on dynamic group processes will be outlined and discussed in
class.
Requirements: class participation, two hour exams, and a final paper or empirical project.
Prerequisites: Psychology 242.
Empirical Project
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR BONNER
PSYC 351(S) Childhood Peer Relations and Clinical Issues
An exploration of the important ways peer relationships influence children's emotional, cognitive, and so-
cial development. We consider various aspects of childhood peer rejection, including emergence and
maintenance of peer difficulties, short- and long-term consequences, and intervention and prevention pro-
grams. A variety of research methodologies and assessment strategies will be considered. Students have
the opportunity to design and implement an original empirical research project based on the concepts dis-
cussed, to be critiqued throughout the semester.
Prerequisite: Psychology 232 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limited to 25. Priority given to
Psychology majors.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR M. SANDSTROM
Psychology
­ 294 ­
PSYC 352(S) Clinical and Community Psychology
A study of the theory, methods, and professional issues in clinical and community psychology. In addition
to presenting fundamental material in this area, the course aims to enable students to apply their experience
in academic psychology to field settings and to explore their own educational and occupational goals.
The course includes a supervised field-work placement arranged by the instructor in a local social service
or mental health agency, and is conducted in a seminar format.
Requirements: field work (six hours per week), midterm essays and a final paper.
Prerequisite: Psychology 252. Priority given to psychology majors; permission of instructor required. En-
rollment limited to 15.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR HEATHERINGTON
PSYC 354T(F) Social Interaction and Psychopathology+
Each of us lives his or her life in a social matrix, interacting with others in ways that determine satisfaction
or dissatisfaction, mental health or mental disorder. This tutorial will look beneath the surface of such inter-
actions, examining the nature of verbal and nonverbal communication and the interaction of people in
close relationships (e.g., friends, families). We will examine relationships gone awry (e.g., gender-related
misunderstandings, disturbed family relationships) and will focus in depth on the study of psychotherapy
as social interaction. Reading and critical analysis of published research, and laboratory exercises in which
students themselves analyze a variety of videotapes will be utilized and will be the basis of the position
paper presented weekly by one student in the tutorial pair. Infused throughout the course is a focus on (and
critique of) the various methods by which our questions about social interaction can be answered empiri-
cally, culminating in an empirical project of the students' own design.
Evaluation will be based on position papers, class participation, and the empirical project presentation and
final report.
Prerequisites: Psychology 101, 201, and any one of 232, 242, or 252.
Empirical Project
Hour: TBA HEATHERINGTON
PSYC 356(S) Depression
This course explores the etiology, assessment and treatment of clinical depression. An emphasis will be
placed both on understanding the scientific literature and on close familiarity with assessment issues. Stu-
dents will read from theoretical, empirical, and autobiographical writings on depression, and will explore
the strengths and weaknesses of different assessment strategies in simulated clinical interviews. Topics in-
clude subtypes of depression; how depression overlaps with normal mood; leading cognitive, biological,
evolutionary and integrative theories; and why certain treatments are effective. Epidemiological issues,
such as the role of gender and culture in the syndrome, will also be considered.
Requirements: class participation, a 5- to 7-page research critique, a midterm exam, and a written research
proposal and/or final research report.
Prerequisites: Psychology 252. Priority given to psychology majors. Enrollment limited to 25.
Empirical Project
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF A. SOLOMON
PSYC 362(S) Psychoneuroimmunology
This course combines an in-depth study of brain-immune system interactions with laboratory-based re-
search in psychoneuroimmunology. Class discussions will focus on the impact of psychological experi-
ence on susceptibility to illness, the impact of sickness on emotions, cognitions, and behavior, and the bio-
logical mechanisms that underlie both types of influence. Emphasis is placed on the process of conducting
research in this area: developing and testing hypotheses, interpreting data, and presenting results in a clear
and cogent manner. No knowledge of immunology is necessary.
Requirements: hour exam, seminar presentations, and oral and written presentations of research project.
Prerequisites: Psychology 201 and either 212 or 262, or permission of instructor. Enrollment limited to 20.
Priority given to Psychology majors.
Satisfies one semester of the Division III requirement.
Empirical Project
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR FRIEDMAN
PSYC 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
Open to upperclass students with permission of the department.
PSYC 401(F) Perspectives on Psychological Issues
This course considers controversial psychological topics of both historical and current import from diverse
psychological perspectives. The course is centered around student-led discussions within sections and in
debates between sections. The topics considered for 2000 are self-deception, the nature of intelligence, and
intimate relationships.
Requirements: participation in class discussions and debates, two short papers, and one long position pa-
per.
This course is required of all senior majors.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR Members of the Department
Psychology, Religion
­ 295 ­
PSYC 493(F)-W031-494(S) Senior Thesis
Independent study and research for two semesters and a winter study period under the guidance of one or
more members of the department. After exploring the literature of a relatively specialized field of psychol-
ogy, the student will design and execute an original empirical or theoretical research project, the results of
which will be reported in a thesis. Detailed guidelines for pursuing a thesis are available from the depart-
ment.
Prerequisite: permission of the department.
RELIGION (Div. II)
Chair, Professor WILLIAM R. DARROW
Professors: DARROW, TAYLOR. Associate Professor: DREYFUS*. Assistant Professors: BUELL*,
LEVENE. Visiting Professors: CASEY, KRAEMER. Visiting Assistant Professors: HEIM, VERTER.
MAJOR
The major in Religion is designed to perform two related functions: to expose the student to the methods
and issues involved in the study of religion as a universal phenomenon of psychological, sociological, and
cultural/historical dimensions; and to confront students with the beliefs, practices, and values of specific
religions through a study of particular religious traditions. It is a program that affords each student an op-
portunity to fashion his/her own sequence of study within a prescribed basic pattern constructed to ensure
both coherence and variety. It consists of at least nine semester courses as follows:
Required sequence courses
Religion 101 Introduction to Religion
Two seminars (courses numbered 301-309)
Religion 401 Issues in the Study of Religion
Elective courses
Five additional courses in Religion are to be selected in such a way that at least one course is taken in
both the Western and non-Western traditions. Students will construct their sequence in consultation with
departmental advisors and subject to their approval. In order to achieve a deep coverage of a particular
religious tradition or set of related problems in the study of religion, students are urged to select three elec-
tives that together have some kind of coherence, be it cultural, historical, or topical. Related courses from
other departments or programs may be included among the three courses, and the point of coherence can
be the subject of research papers in 401.
Students are advised to elect additional courses in related fields (e.g., psychology, sociology, anthropolo-
gy, art, history, philosophy) in order to gain a clearer understanding of the social and cultural contexts in
which religions appear.
For those who wish to go beyond the formally-listed courses into a more intensive study of a particular
religious tradition, methodological trend, or religious phenomenon (e.g., ritual, symbol-formation, mysti-
cism, theology, etc.), there is the opportunity to undertake independent study or, with the approval of the
department, to pursue a thesis project.
The value of the major in Religion derives from its fostering of a critical appreciation of the complex
role religion plays in every society, even those that consider themselves non-religious. The major makes
one sensitive to the role religion plays in shaping the terms of cultural discourse, of social attitudes and
behavior, and of moral reflection. But it also discloses the ways in which religion and its social effects
represent the experience of individual persons and communities. In doing these things, the major further
provides one with interdisciplinary analytical tools and cross-cultural experience and opens up new ave-
nues for dealing with both the history of a society and culture and the relationships between different soci-
eties and cultures. What one learns as a Religion major is therefore remarkably applicable to a wide range
of other fields of study or professions.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN RELIGION
The degree with honors in Religion requires the above-mentioned nine courses and the preparation of a
thesis of 75+ pages with a grade of B+ or better. A thesis may combine revised work done in other courses
with new material prepared while enrolled either in Religion 493-W031 or Religion W031-494. Up to
two-thirds of the work in the thesis may be such revised work, but at least one-third must represent new
work. The thesis must constitute a coherent whole either by its organizing theme or by a focus on a particu-
lar religious tradition. Candidates will also be expected to present the results of their thesis orally in a public
presentation. Students who wish to be candidates for honors in Religion will submit proposals and at least
one paper that will be included in the thesis to the department in the spring of their junior year. Students
must have at least a 3.3 GPA in Religion to be considered for the honors program.
The chair will serve as advisor to non-majors.
Religion
­ 296 ­
REL 101(F,S) Introduction to Religion
As an examination of the structure and dynamics of certain aspects of religious thought, action, and sensi-
bility--employing psychological, sociological, anthropological, and philosophical modes of inquiry--the
course offers a general exposure to basic methodological issues in the study of religion, and includes con-
sideration of several cross-cultural types of religious expression in non-literate and literate societies.
Lecture and discussion.
Requirements: a midterm paper and a final exam.
Enrollment limited to 30.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF, 11:00-12:15 MWF First Semester: DARROW, VERTER
8:30-9:45 MWF, 8:30-9:45 TR Second Semester: DARROW, LEVENE
THE JEWISH TRADITION
REL 201(F) Reading the Hebrew Bible (Same as Classics 201 and Literary Studies 219)
(See under Classics for full description.)
REL 203(F) Introduction to Judaism (Same as Classics 203)
There are many different avenues into the complexity of a religious tradition: its major languages and texts,
its histories, its movements, schisms, and debates with other traditions, its theologies and philosophies, its
practices, laws, rituals. This course is an introduction to Judaism through its complex of practices, laws,
rituals--its liturgy. By exploring the festivals and observances that comprise a single Jewish year, we will,
on the one hand, be delving into the more experiential dimensions of the tradition, pursuing its conceptions
of time, the body, food, suffering, love. On the other hand, we will also be attentive to the other avenues of
analysis since each festival and observance is conditioned by its textual sources and commentaries, its
changes throughout history, its contesting voices, and the theologies and philosophies to which it has given
rise. Emphasis will be placed on gaining a sense of Judaism as it is and has been lived. At the same time,
we will also critically assess the utility and the limits of the two major rubrics in the course, namely Juda-
ism (understood as a coherent tradition) and ritual (understood as an organizing concept that all traditions
share).
Lecture and discussion.
Requirements: attendance and active participation, one class presentation; four short (2-3 page) papers,
take-home final exam.
Open to all classes without prerequisite. Enrollment limited to 30.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR LEVENE
REL 206(S) Judaism and the Critique of Modernity
As a minority religion in the West, Judaism has always confronted intellectual, cultural, and social trends in
the many contexts in which it has flourished. This confrontation became especially pronounced in the
modern period when the upheavals of political emancipation and acculturation radically changed what Ju-
daism could look like, even the streams that remained resolutely traditional. Modern Jewish thought can be
characterized by the struggle to make Jewish ideas and modern philosophical ideas cohere, a struggle that
many now consider unsuccessful. This course looks beyond the political and intellectual challenges of
Jewish modernity and towards those of postmodernity. In the larger culture, postmodernity has been vari-
ously regarded as an historical era, a political movement, a set of literary and cultural practices, and/or a
philosophical standpoint. The Jewish response to postmodernity still taking shape presents a fascinating
vantage point from which to assess some of these strands. For many Jewish thinkers have claimed not only
that postmodernity can provide a congenial atmosphere for the flourishing of Judaism and Jewish identi-
ties, but that there are many rich and suggestive ways in which traditional Jewish thought (understood to be
grounded in rabbinic sources) and postmodern thought (understood in terms of notions of multivocality,
indeterminacy, non-foundationalism) overlap or even mirror one another. Emphasis will be placed on the
hermeneutical dimensions of this claim, but political and cultural questions will also be in play throughout.
Reading list: Adler, Boyarin, Butler, Derrida, Greenstein, Irigaray, Jabès, Kepnes, Ochs, Ouaknin, Ricoeur,
Stern, Wolfson, Wyschogrod.
Discussion.
Requirements: attendance and active participation, brief weekly writing on the reading, and a final paper
(15 pages).
Open to all students without prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 30.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR LEVENE
REL 207(S) Biblical Interpretation in Classical Antiquity (Same as Classics 207)
(See under Classics for full description.)
REL 208 The Hellenistic World and the Emergence of Rabbinic Judaism (Same as Classics
208) (Not offered 2000-2001)
(See under Classics for full description.)
REL 209(F) The Religious Landscape of the Roman Mediterranean (Same as Classics 209)
The religious landscape of the Roman Mediterranean in the first four centuries of the common era appears
diverse and complex. The inhabitants of the Roman Empire not only worshipped different and sometimes
competing deities: they also subscribed to multiple and competing visions of the cosmos and the place of
Religion
­ 297 ­
humans within it. Through a selection of the surviving literature, composed by Jews, Christians and devo-
tees of the numerous religious traditions of the ancient Mediterranean, we will consider these diverse
"cosmologies" and their relationship to various aspects of ancient culture, particularly constructions of
identity. How, for instance, is it possible that people whose lives have a great deal in common nevertheless
have vastly different views of the universe and their location within it? Although our focus is primarily on
antiquity, our inquiry has implications for our own culturally diverse society. Among the ancient works we
are likely to read are: Apuleius, Metamorphoses (selections); Paul's First Letter to the Corinthians, the
Gospel according to John, 4 Maccabees; Philostratus, Life of Apollonios of Tyana; the Acts of (Paul and)
Thecla; Anthia and Habrocomes (or, Xenophon, An Ephesian Tale); Pirke Avot (The Sayings of the Fa-
thers); the Martyrdom of Saints Perpetua and Felicitas; Sefer ha-Razim (the Book of the Mysteries); the
Hypostasis of the Archons; the Book of Aseneth. We will also read brief selections from the extensive schol-
arly literature on these works, and on the world of late antiquity.
Requirements: weekly reading; regular and informed class participation; preparation of discussion materi-
als for one class meeting; two to three short papers (3-5 pages); and one final research paper (10-12 pages).
Open to all classes without prerequisite. Enrollment limited to 30.
Hour: 7:00-9:30 p.m. T KRAEMER
THE CHRISTIAN TRADITION
REL 210 Reading Jesus, Writing Gospels: Christian Origins in Context (Not offered
2000-2001)
What were the religious and cultural landscapes within which Christianity emerged? How did inhabitants
of the ancient Mediterranean world speak about the concept and significance of the concept of religion?
How was Jesus understood? In the first half of this course, we shall address these questions by examining
the formation of Christianity from its origins as a Jewish movement until its legalization, using a compara-
tive sociohistorical approach. In the second half of the course, we shall examine the earliest literature pro-
duced by the Jesus movement and consider it within the comparative framework developed in the first half
of the course. Readings will include: Jonathan Z. Smith, Drudgery Divine; Greg Riley, One Jesus, Many
Christs; John Crossan, Jesus: A Revolutionary Biography; Morton Smith, Jesus the Magician; Michel
Foucault, The Care of the Self; as well as primary sources from Mediterranean antiquity.
Class format: lecture, discussions, workshops.
Requirements: one class presentation; 4 brief papers (2-3 pages); one historiographical essay (5 pages), and
one historical research paper (15 pages).
Open to all classes without prerequisite. Enrollment limited to 30.
BUELL
REL 211 Paul and the Beginnings of Christianity (Not offered 2000-2001)
Saul, later Paul, of Tarsus wrote the earliest surviving literature produced by the Jewish movement that
became Christianity. This class offers an introduction to the first century of Christian history and literature
(50-150 C.E.), with an emphasis on the impact of this influential figure. Central questions for the course
will include: How can we understand Paul's place in the broader picture of emerging Christianity? What
were the central issues in formative Christianity as they appear in Paul's writings? How were Paul's ideas
received and interpreted?
We shall examine writings by Paul, writings attributed to him, and early-Christian interpretations of Paul's
writings. You will learn how to interpret early-Christian texts from a historical-critical perspective. As a
class, we will also consider the strengths and limitations of this perspective for the reconstruction of early
Christian history.
Course format will consist of lectures, discussion, and workshops.
Requirements: active and informed participation, 3 response papers (1-2 pages), two exegesis papers (#1:
3-5 pages, #2: 5-7 pages), and a self-scheduled final exam.
Open to all classes without prerequisite. Enrollment limited to 30.
BUELL
REL 212 The Development of Christianity: 30-600 C.E. (Same as History 324) (Not offered
2000-2001)
How did Christianity develop in the first few hundred years? What factors in its historical and cultural
contexts influenced the ways in which it developed? The class is designed to introduce you to the history of
early Christianity between 30-600 C.E. While this class addresses the basic flow of events and major fig-
ures in early-Christian history, it will also require you to develop a critical framework for the study of histo-
ry in general. In addition, you will gain significant experience in the critical analysis of primary source
materials. Special attention will be paid to the incredible diversity of early-Christian thought and practice.
The course is organized chronologically, geographically, and thematically. We shall consider how these
categories make a difference for the study of early Christianity.
Lecture and discussion format, with in-class group work.
Requirements: active and informed participation, 2 short papers (3-4 pages), midterm essay (5-7 pages),
statement of historical method (3-4 pages), and a take-home final exam.
Open to all classes without prerequisite. Enrollment limited to 30.
BUELL
Religion
­ 298 ­
REL 213(F) The Birth of Medieval Christendom: Europe and the Mediterranean World,
AD 300-1000 (Same as History 224)
(See under History for full description.)
REL 214(S) Expansion, Crisis, and Rebirth: Medieval Europe and the Wider World, AD
1000-1500 (Same as History 225)
(See under History for full description.)
REL 215(S) East Meets West in the Middle Ages: The First Crusade (Same as History 425)
(See under History for full description.)
REL 219(S) Reformation, Renewal, Reaction: The Reshaping of Christianity in Early Modern
Europe (Same as History 329)
(See under History for full description.)
REL 221(S) American Religious History (Same as History 373)
This course surveys the history of religion in America over the past five hundred years or so. Though we
will have occasion to look at some theological shifts, particularly within American Protestantism, our main
concern will be with religion in its social, cultural, and political aspects. Pluralism is the inescapable focal
point of any course in American religion. But rather than examining a different heritage each week--a
traditional way of structuring this course--we will look at the contact of different spiritual cultures on
American soil, paying special attention to religious conflict and exchange; issues of class, gender, and eth-
nicity; and competing notions of America's sacred destiny. The title of this class incorporates three terms
that have been at the center of debate over the past five centuries: What is America? What phenomena are
religious? What is the central narrative of history? During the course of the semester we will examine some
of the very different ways people have answered these questions. One of the major goals of the course is to
help you develop the critical skills that will enable you to evaluate religious themes in popular culture. To
this end, we will concentrate on primary sources, including sermons, devotional works, autobiographical
narratives, missionary tracts, newspapers, novels, stories, poems, and comics. Lecture and discussion. We
will also watch a few movies.
Requirements: full attendance and participation; brief weekly response papers, an in-class midterm, a self-
scheduled final exam, and one 10- to 12-page family history.
Open to all classes without prerequisite. Enrollment limited to 30.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF VERTER
REL 222 "The God of History": Slavery and Race in Christian thought (Same as History 180)
(Not offered 2000-2001)
(See under History for full description.)
REL 224 North-American Catholic History (Same as History 374) (Not offered 2000-2001)
A survey of Catholicism in North America since May 4, 1493, when Pope Alexander VI issued the bull
Inter Caetera identifying the New World as a field for missionary endeavor. We'll look at religion in the
Spanish and French colonies, the founding of Maryland in 1634; the early battles for toleration; the Irish
migration of the 1820s and 1840s; antebellum anti-Catholicism; the establishment of American religious
orders; African-American Catholicism; Isaac Hecker and the Americanist controversy; the new immigra-
tion of 1880-1924; the development of parochial education; the Catholic worker movement; the struggles
to elect John F. Kennedy and other Catholic officials; the impact of Vatican II; and the increasing growth of
the Hispanic-American church. Topics for review include ethnicity and conflict, gender roles, domestic
spirituality, generational conflict, and popular Catholicism in Andy Warhol's art, Martin Scorsese's films,
and Madonna's music. Readings will include selected primary sources, fiction, and modern historical stud-
ies.
Lecture and discussion.
Requirements: full attendance and participation; brief weekly response papers, an in-class midterm, a take-
home final exam, and a short paper.
Open to all classes without prerequisite. Enrollment limited to 30.
VERTER
REL 225(F) Religion and Popular Culture in America (Same as Sociology 225)
For almost a hundred years, commentators have described the progress of religion in the United States in
terms of progressive secularization. The thesis of this class is that the opposite is true: far from becoming a
culture void of enchantment, America is growing more religious every day. You just have to know
where--and how--to look. In this class we will uncover the theological dimensions of American mass
media products (theodicy in The X-Files, soteriology in Hair, eschatology in Marilyn Manson). We will
explore the use of such material objects as Last Supper crossword puzzles, fish car decals, and Kosher
Chinese cookbooks. We will examine the appropriation of popular genres by religious subcultures (gothic
fictional tropes in sensational religious tracts of the early-nineteenth century, sports celebrity endorsements
of particular creeds, denominational websites, evangelical comics, and Christian rap music).
Religion
­ 299 ­
Requirements: full attendance and class participation, three short papers (3-5 pages), oral presentations,
and a final research paper (15-18 pages).
No prerequisites. Enrollment is limited to 20.
(This course is part of the Critical Reasoning and Analytical Skills initiative.)
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR VERTER
REL 226(S) African-American Religious History (Same as History 381)
This course will survey the religious beliefs and practices of Americans of African descent over the past
five centuries, from the mission to sub-Saharan Africa in the fifteenth century, through the periods of slav-
ery, emancipation, Reconstruction, legal segregation, and urbanization, up to the civil rights movement, the
Million Man March, and the womanist spirituality movement in more recent years. Along the way we will
explore a number of topics, including the role of religion in the formation of personal and national identity;
the political ramifications of Christian faith; gendered dimensions of black religious life; expressive aspects
of black religious culture; and the tensions between denominational and extra-ecclesial piety. In addition to
imparting some facts about African-American religious history, this course seeks to foster the critical skills
that you as historians will use to analyze ideological expressions in the popular culture of the past as well as
the present. To this end, we will concentrate our reading on a wide range of primary sources, including
sermons, devotional works, autobiographical narratives, missionary tracts, newspapers, novels, music, and
films.
Requirements: full attendance and participation; brief weekly response papers, three short (3-5 pages) es-
says, and a take-home final exam.
No prerequisites. Open to all classes. Enrollment limited to 30.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR VERTER
THE ISLAMIC TRADITION
REL 231(F) The Origins of Islam: God, Empire and Apocalypse (Same as History 209)*
The rise of Islam in the seventh-century C.E. is usually seen, by both Muslim and non-Muslim historians,
as a total break with the past. This course will challenge that assumption by placing the rise of Islam in the
context of the history of late antiquity (c. 300-700 C.E.). The first half of the course will examine the im-
pact of Judeo-Christian monotheism in the ancient world, the rise of confessional empires, articulation of
new ideas about holiness and its relation to sexuality and the transformations undergone by Judaism,
Christianity, Zoroastrianism and Manichaeism. We shall examine the conversation of these traditions with
classical paganism and philosophy, the internal struggle within traditions to define rules of interpretation,
the impact of ascetic, iconoclastic and apocalyptic ideas and, finally, polemics among the traditions. Spe-
cial attention will be given to borderlands (Armenia, Syria, and Arabia), where the problems of regional-
ism and religious diversity were prominent. We will then examine the career of Muhammad (PBUH) in the
context of Arabia, the spread of the Islamic empire into Christian and Iranian worlds, the impact of apoca-
lyptic expectations, the fixation of religious decision-making within the tradition and the question of con-
version and religious diversity within the commonwealth of Islam. The course will end with the flourishing
of the Abbasid empire in the ninth century. This course will make use of the Antioch 2000 exhibit at the
Worcester Art Museum.
Requirements: one 5-page paper, self-scheduled final, and a final research project. Each class will use a
case study approach focusing on one textual, artistic, or architectural artifact.
Open to all classes without prerequisite. Enrollment limited to 30.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF DARROW
REL 232(S) Women and Islam (Same as History 309)*
This course will be an introduction to Islamic religion and culture that takes issues of gender as its organiz-
ing focus. We begin with a consideration of notions of honor, purity, and the dangerous feminine in the
Mediterranean machismo world. We will then give attention to the career and teaching of the Prophet Mu-
hammad (PBUH) and the role played by women in the establishment of Islam, as well as to the Quranic
understanding of the relation of the sexes. We then examine the relation of the sexes as reflected in legal,
mystical, literary, and folkloristic texts with special attention to the relation of sexual and sacral desire. This
will allow us to consider the cultural ecological foundations of the creation of male and female identity in
Islam as well as the importance of class difference (e.g., village versus city, rich versus poor) that must be
recognized in a careful examination of this issue. We conclude with a consideration based both on literature
and the social analysis of contemporary debate about the role of women in Islam and why this issue is in
many ways the centerpiece of the problem of Muslim identity in the modern world.
Lecture and discussion.
Requirements: two 4- to 6-page papers and a final exam.
Open to all classes without prerequisite. Enrollment limited to 30.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF DARROW
REL 233 Islamic Mysticism: The Sufis (Not offered 2000-2001)*
Studying Sufism, the mystical tradition of Islam, is an excellent introduction to the Muslim world. The
Sufis represent a delightful and many-faceted spiritual tradition that both enriches and criticizes orthodox
Islam. This course will explore the origins of Sufism in the ascetic and revolutionary piety of the early
Islamic community; the systematization of the Sufi path to God; Sufi themes in art and poetry; the develop-
Religion
­ 300 ­
ment of the Sufi orders and techniques of ecstasy, both at high and popular levels. We will read in the
classics of Sufi poetry and thought, including Rumi, Attar, Suhrawardi, and Ghazali; we will also explore
the Sufi theosophy of Ibn Arabi.
Requirements: two 5- to 7-page papers based on the readings in class and a final exam. Lecture and discus-
sion.
Open to all classes without prerequisite. Enrollment limited to 30.
DARROW
REL 234 Religion and Revolution in Iran (Same as History 409) (Not offered 2000-2001)*
This course explores the Iranian revolution as a case study in revolutionary change in the third world. The
economic and social history of Iran in the twentieth century will be surveyed, but the religious and cultural
elements that are so crucial for understanding the revolution will also be explored through literature. The
immediate revolutionary period, 1978 until the present, will be examined in depth. Special attention will be
focused on the articulation of a radical religious ideology, including its stance toward Marxism and imperi-
alism and its vision of the place of woman. Since the Iranian revolution is one that confounds revolution
theory, some attention will be directed to the implications of the Iranian case for theories of revolution.
Requirements: two 3- to 5-page interpretative essays based on class readings and a research paper.
Open to all classes without prerequisite. Enrollment limited to 30.
DARROW
THE SOUTH-ASIAN TRADITIONS
REL 241 Hinduism: Construction of a Tradition (Not offered 2000-2001)*
This introductory course examines Hindu tradition from religious, philosophical and social perspectives.
Following a chronological order, it considers the stages of developments of Hinduism, starting from the
sacrificial early Vedic religion up to the Puranic theism that has largely constituted Hinduism since the
Middle Ages. We examine the philosophical and metaphysical content of the religious expressions we en-
counter and relate them to their social and historical contexts. We study the major texts of the tradition but
also emphasize the link between the religious ideas and practices and their social and cultural contexts.
Besides providing an introduction to one of the major world civilizations, this course also offers important
theoretical insights on the nature of religion. It emphasizes the fact that the view of religion as a set of
private beliefs exemplified by public rituals is too narrow for a pluricultural understanding of religious phe-
nomena. Hinduism is exemplary in this respect. Because of its richness and diversity, Hinduism obliges us
to broaden our concept of religion, as involving a plurality of elements: a rich diversity of ritual or transfor-
mative practices, the extensive use of narratives, the development of intricate metaphysical systems, the
development of ways to conceptualize social exchanges, etc.
Reading List: Radakrishna and Moore, Sourcebook in Indian Philosophy; W. O'Flaherty, Hindu Myths;
Fuller, Camphor Flame; K. Erndl, Victory to the Mother, Kinsley, Hindu Goddesses; J. Varenne, Yoga; T.
Hopkins: The Hindu Religious Tradition; Narayan, Ramayana; K. K. Klostermaier, A Survey of Hinduism;
Babb, Divine Hierarchy.
Requirements: full attendance and participation, one brief paper and one term essay (10-15 pages).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 30.
DREYFUS
REL 242 Buddhism: Concepts and Practices (Not offered 2000-2001)*
This introductory course examines Buddhism from a double perspective. On the one hand, it studies the
tradition descriptively, examining some of its religious, philosophical, historical and sociological aspects.
On the other hand, this course also seeks to bring out the personal relevance of Buddhist ideas, ensuring
that they are not just considered as objects but also as partners in an ongoing conversation. We start by
examining the Theravada tradition of South and South-East Asia through which we seek to understand
some of the basic Buddhist ideas such as no-self, suffering and its origin, and the possibilities for freedom.
We then move to the Indian and Tibetan Mahayana traditions, which are characterized by an increase in the
importance of compassion on the basis of the bodhisattva ideal. In dealing with Buddhism in Tibet, we
focus more particularly on the tantric aspects of its tradition. Throughout the course, we are careful to con-
sider Buddhism not just as a set of thought provoking ideas that can be studied in abstraction from their
implementation, but as being based on socially inscribed practices. We examine a broad range of practices,
ranging from so-called popular rituals to the practices of virtuosi. In particular, we examine meditation in
the Theravada and Tibetan Tantric traditions. In this way, we gain a realistic appreciation of the nature, role
and difficulties of such a practice, and dispel some of its misunderstandings.
Lecture and discussion.
Requirements: full attendance and participation; two 4-to 6-page essays.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 30.
DREYFUS
REL 243 Buddhist Philosophy (Same as Philosophy 243) (Not offered 2000-2001)*
This course examines some of the central questions of Buddhist philosophy and presents them not as curi-
osities but as resources to think through some of the central ideas that have challenged philosophers in the
"Western" as well as the Buddhist traditions. We focus on Buddhist views concerning the nature of persons
and the ethical implications of these views. We first examine the Indian religious and philosophical con-
Religion
­ 301 ­
texts, and the basic Buddhist ideas, in particular the doctrine of No-self and its ethical implications. We then
move to more radical views, particularly those of the Madhyamaka Buddhist tradition, which presents a
thorough critique of philosophical thinking. We consider carefully this tradition, which offers not only one
of the earliest examples of radical deconstructive critique of metaphysics, but also a thorough examination
of some of the ethical implications of deconstructive thinking. We then move to some of the Buddhist
answers to Madhyamaka, particularly those of the Yogacara tradition, which offers a process view of real-
ity, which claims to accommodate the anti-essentialism of the Madhyamaka to a more soteriologically ori-
ented approach. We conclude by examining some of the philosophical implications of other aspects of
Buddhist tradition, particularly those of the tantric tradition. This gives us the occasion to revisit the ques-
tion of the nature of subjectivity, one of the central questions raised by the Buddhist views of person.
Lecture and discussion.
Requirements: full attendance and participation, three short essays (4-6 pages).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 30.
DREYFUS
REL 244 Knowledge and Reality in Indian Thought (Same as Philosophy 238) (Not offered
2000-2001)*
This course examines some of the central questions discussed by Indian philosophers and discovers that
they are often quite similar to those raised by so-called Western thinkers. Thus, far from being the irrational
foil of "the West," Indian tradition is a rich resource for thinking through some of the central ideas that have
challenged philosophers in both traditions. In this course, we focus on the more technical or even analytic
side of Indian philosophy. We first examine the epistemological tradition, focusing more particularly on the
analysis of language. This may come as a surprise to those who think that Indian philosophy is "mystical,"
but it reflects one of the strongest points of the Indian tradition--its emphasis on questions such as the
analysis of the nature and role of language in human cognition, the nature of meaning, and the relation
between language and the world. In dealing with these questions, we examine the rich dialogue created by
the conflicting views of Hindu realists and Buddhist nominalists. We then question the views of Indian
epistemology by examining the Madhyamaka tradition, which presents a radical critique of Indian philoso-
phy. We consider carefully this tradition, which offers a deconstructive critique of metaphysical thinking,
and conclude by examining some of the ethical implications of this tradition.
Lecture and discussion.
Requirements: full attendance and participation; three short essays (4-6 pages).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 30.
DREYFUS
REL 245 Tibetan Civilization (Not offered 2000-2001)*
Often depicted in novels and movies as Shangrila, a mythical and ideal country, Tibet has had the dubious
privilege of being a focus of Western orientalism. In recent years, this fascination has given rise to a verita-
ble craze, which has affected particularly the entertainment culture. One cannot but wonder about the mo-
tives and sources of this mythology. But, rather than focus narcissistically on "our" representations, this
course mostly looks at "them," examining more particularly the cultural and historical aspects of Tibetan
civilization. We first consider the early history of Tibet, the introduction of Buddhism in this country, the
relations between Buddhism and the indigenous religion, and some of the stages in the development of
Tibetan Buddhism. In this way we see how Buddhism in Tibet, like in other Buddhist countries, is inte-
grated in an overall religious system that comprises much more than the doctrines and practices often es-
sentialized as "Buddhism." We also examine the historical developments that led to the development of the
institutions (such as the Dalai-Lama) unique to Tibet and consider the more recent tragic events and what
they augur for the future of the Tibet. Throughout the course we examine the unusually central role that the
complex interreaction that religion and politics has had in Tibetan history. In this way, we get a footing in
the Tibetan world and the final part of the course, the assessment of Western representations of Tibet, be-
comes not just an exercise in self-reflection but also a gate to a better understanding of a remarkable civili-
zation.
Lecture and discussion.
Requirements: full attendance and participation; two 4- to 6-page essays.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 30.
DREYFUS
REL 246(S) Religions of Contemporary South Asia (Same as Anthropology 246)*
This course is an introduction to the anthropology of South Asian religions. It focuses on definitions of self,
from individuality to self-renunciation, in modern day Indian religion and society. Our primary texts are
detailed and provocative ethnographies and histories of life in India that define the self in radically different
ways. We will meet a person who has no individual essence, the "dividual" person, enmeshed in religion,
ritual purity and pollution, and caste, who ultimately transforms into the religious virtuoso, free from social
and spiritual bondage. We will also become acquainted with definitions of self in two of the "great tradi-
tions" of South Asia, the image-worshiping Jains in North India and Hindu Tamils in the South. And final-
ly we will encounter people who resist the definitions of others, with subaltern, feminist, and nationalist
critiques of the dominant descriptions self and South Asian people, religion, and culture.
The course charts three contemporary `schools' of anthropology on religion in India. The first is an "ideal-
Religion
­ 302 ­
ist" approach, where social life is based on ideology and philosophy, and interpreted from the high-cul-
ture's religious texts. Dumont is emblematic of this approach. In his Homo Hierarchicus, he describes a
person in traditional caste society as devoid of individuality, the ideological opposite of `western' concepts
of the person. The second "phenomenologist" approach is represented by anthropologists that temper the
ideological method by studying "religion on the ground," in practices that vary across South Asia in local
negotiations of self, communal identity, and tradition. For a Hindu example we will read Daniels' Fluid
Signs: Being a Person the Tamil Way. For Jainism we will read Cort's studies of Jain lay and mendicant
identities and Laidlaw's Riches and Renunciation: Religion, Economy and Society among the Jains. The
third approach is broadly "revisionist," critical of Orientalist, colonialist, and elitist constructions of the self.
Our readings include Stephens' Feminist Fictions: A Critique of the Category `Non-Western Woman' in
Feminist Writings on India, Spivak's Can the Subaltern Speak? and Nandy's The Intimate Enemy: Loss
and Recovery of the Self Under Colonialism.
Lecture and Discussion.
Requirements: full attendance and participation, and three 4- to 6-page essays.
Enrollment limited to 20.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W HEIM
REL 248(S) Traditional Religions of India: Narrating the Self/Noself*
This course is an introduction to Indian religious literature, particularly life-writing, in classical and medi-
eval Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism. It explores life-writing in several literary forms, including biogra-
phy, scripture, hagiography, universal history, praise-poetry, folk-tale, and the tell-all confession, as well as
in the arts of sculpture, architecture, and painting. Our reading will focus on the contents of these texts' and
traditions' definitions of life, from its ultimate goals (thought of across traditions as sensual pleasure, mate-
rial wealth, morality, and freedom from the bondage of karma and ignorance), to the challenges of every-
day personal interactions. We will also explore the multiple uses of life-writings, as chants, prayers, and
meditations that transform a life, as documents of institutional history, and as, simply, great entertainment.
From Hinduism we will study the lives of Vishnu in his avatars as Rama and Krishna, first in the great epic,
the Ramayana, then in the Bhagavad-Gita: Krishna's Counsel in Time of War, and finally in the Jayadeva's
poem Gita Govinda: Love Song of the Dark Lord. We will also read a foundational text on Hindu God-
desses, the Devi-Mahatmya. From Buddhism we will read The Life Stories of the Buddha, The Verses of
Nuns, The Legend of King Asoka, and The Perfect Generosity of Prince Vessantara. All the above narra-
tives have inspired great works of sculpture and painting, which we shall view in class to support our work
in interpreting the texts and the role of life stories in Indian culture. The course concludes with a collection
of folk tales, The Ocean Fed by Streams of Stories, and the autobiography of the Jain merchant Banarsi-
dass, Half a Tale.
Lecture and Discussion.
Requirements: full attendance and participation, and three 4- to 6-page essays.
Enrollment limited to 30.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR HEIM
THE EAST-ASIAN TRADITIONS
COMPARATIVE INQUIRY
REL 270T(S) Father Abraham: The First Patriarch+
The figure of Abraham in the Hebrew scriptures is interesting for at least two reasons: he comes first and
seems more universal rather than particular. He first received the covenant and the promise of the land of
Israel, but before the full revelation of the Torah to Moses. He fathers both the Jewish people and the Arabs
and the significance of that wider identity was later captured both by Christianity in the work of Paul and in
the Qur'an where Muhammad identified with Abraham as the prototypical and nonsectarian monotheist
prophet. This course will trace the figure of Abraham by a close and multidisciplinary reading of the Jew-
ish, Pagan, Christian and Muslim sources on Abraham. Our task is not to decide on the historicity of Abra-
ham, but rather to explore the history of the figure and his continuing relevance for today in understanding
Jewish/Christian/Muslim conflict and cooperation. We will begin with an intensive reading of the Genesis
material on Abraham (12-25), where the issues of idolatry and monotheism, the covenant and circumci-
sion, relations of the patriarch to his women and sons, and primal model of faith all are articulated. We will
then turn to later Jewish developments in the figure of Abraham in midrash and apocalypse. We will then
explore the view of Abraham in the classical world, the uses made of Abraham by Christianity as it broke
from an emerging Rabbinic Judaism and the development of Abraham's specific connection with the view
of the afterlife. We will then treat the figure of Abraham in the Qur'an and later Islamic traditions. We will
conclude with an examination of the cult surrounding Abraham in the city of Hebron, a currently-contested
site on the West Bank where we will consider the current religious practice regarding Abraham by both
Jews and Muslims. The purpose of this tutorial is to read closely a variety of primary religious texts and to
explore the variety of tools available for the reading of those texts.
Each student in the tutorial will write and present orally five 5- to 7-page essays every other week on the
readings for the week and a final 7- to 10-page essay. Students not presenting an essay will be responsible
Religion
­ 303 ­
for offering an oral critique of the work of their colleague. Students will be evaluated on their written work
and their critiques.
Open to all classes without prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 10.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF DARROW
REL 273(S) Sacred Geographies (Same as Anthropology 273 and EXPR 273)*
Bringing together insights from anthropology, art history, and religious studies, this course will explore the
geography of sacred space: the spatial organization of meaning across time and the world as humans have
again and again made a division between sacred and profane. We will attend to this process as expressed in
the geography, social dynamics, and architecture of sacred space, noting patterns of similarity and differ-
ence among and between the "little traditions" of folk and traditional societies as well as the "great tradi-
tions" of universalist and modern societies. Having developed an analytical vocabulary for understanding
sacred space, we will put our model in motion by examining the dynamics of change, redefinition, and
contestation that have so often surrounded the history of sacred spaces.
The course begins by introducing students to theoretical models derived from our several disciplines, enab-
ling them to understand the form and character of sacred spaces. Authors to be read may include Eliade,
Bachelard, van Gennep, Otto, Tuan, Durkheim, Casey, and Harvey. We will develop analytical tools for
interpreting the meaning and aesthetics of sacred space as it is constituted in the natural landscape (e.g.,
sacred mountains, rivers, trees, etc.) artificially-constructed places (e.g., temples, monuments, shrines, etc.)
and the intersection of the two. We will pay particular attention to the ways boundaries around sacred
spaces are created, maintained, and violated, as well as passages to and from sacred places (e.g., pilgrim-
age).
Once these interpretive tools have been developed, we will turn our attention to the ways in which religious
and political conflict are both aggravated and mediated through sacred space. Specific processes to be ex-
amined include: exile and diaspora--what happens when a people are cut off from their sacred space; con-
testation over sacred space in places like Jerusalem and the Babri Mosque in India; supercession in which a
late-coming tradition marks its relation to earlier traditions, as in the construction of the Mexican national
cathedral on the ruins of an Aztec temple in the heart of Mexico City; colonization, as in the creation of
new mosques in British and American cities; and cooperation, in which a sacred space allows for the estab-
lishment of links between competing groups and divided ideologies, as in Mecca or monuments such as
the Vietnam Veterans Memorial. We will conclude with attention to the role of these four processes in
contemporary society, where diaspora, contestation, supercession and cooperation continue to have wide
relevance for articulating the character of social conflict, reconciliation, and change.
Lecture and discussion.
Requirements: full attendance and participation and three 4- to 6-page essays.
Open to all classes without prerequisite. Enrollment limited to 30.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR DARROW and JUST
REL 274 Women's Religious Experiences in the Ancient Mediterranean World (Same as
Classics 274) (Not offered 2000-2001)
How can we find out what women's lives were like in the ancient Mediterranean world? What did women
contribute to ancient religions? How did participation in religious practices affect women's lives? What
role did religion play in ancient Mediterranean culture? How did women relate to each other across
religious differences?
Placing women's lives and experiences at the center, this course will introduce you to a range of religious
traditions--Greek, Roman and Egyptian religions (temple cults, festivals, and domestic worship), Juda-
ism, and Christianity--of the ancient Mediterranean world (roughly between fifth-century B.C.E. and
fourth-century C.E,). You will be expected to think critically about the concept of "religion," the diversity
of ancient women's lives, and the significance of cultural and historical contexts in addressing these issues.
We will work individually as well as in groups to gain familiarity with the ancient primary sources and with
the methodological challenges of using them to reconstruct women's history.
Discussion format and in-class group work, with occasional mini-lectures.
Requirements: active and informed participation, brief weekly assignments (most 1-2 pages), one short
paper (3-5 pages), responsibility for leading discussion once during the term, self-scheduled final exam.
Open to all classes without prerequisite. Enrollment limited to 30.
BUELL
REL 276 Grounding the Sacred: Religion and Ecology in the United States (Same as
Environmental Studies 276) (Not offered 2000-2001)
Adopting a critical but sympathetic perspective, this course assesses the spiritual dimensions of the rela-
tionship between the Earth and its human inhabitants in what is now the United States. On the one hand,
theological assumptions have shaped peoples' treatment of the natural world; on the other hand, changes in
the environment have profoundly influenced human social and cultural patterns. Over the course of the
semester, we will be exploring this dialectic by unpacking stereotypes about Native-American resource
management, debating the Biblical origins of the environmental crisis, examining romantic constructions
of the American wilderness, considering apocalyptic visions of ecological degradation, studying the evolu-
tion of conservation history, and looking at the recent development of movements devoted to deep ecology,
ecofeminism, ecojustice, and monkey-wrenching. Our readings will be drawn from environmental histo-
Religion
­ 304 ­
rians, ecological ethicists, and literary naturalists including H. D. Thoreau, Aldo Leopold, John Muir, Ra-
chel Carson, Gary Snyder, Wendell Berry, Sallie McFague, Rosemary Radford Ruether, and Pope John
Paul II.
Requirements: full attendance and participation, brief weekly response papers, three 5- to 7-page essays.
Open to all classes without prerequisite. Enrollment limited to 30.
VERTER
REL 277 Apocalypses: Varieties of Millennial Discourse (Not offered 2000-2001)
For at least the past 2,000 years people have been patiently waiting for the world to end. What attracts
people to millenarian theology? What is it like to live in anticipation of the imminent end of the world?
What are the political and social consequences of apocalyptic belief? And how do people cope when the
events they expect fail to occur?
After briefly surveying millennial beliefs in other temporal and geographical contexts (the ancient-Near
East, medieval Europe, the south Pacific), we will examine developments in American apocalyptic dis-
course. Starting off with the Spanish missionaries of the sixteenth century, we will tour the eschatological
world of colonial Puritanism; consider apocalyptic interpretations of American conflicts (the Revolution,
the Civil War, the Cold War); observe millenarian movements such as the Millerites, the Mormons, and the
Jehovah's Witnesses; and survey the range of contemporary eschatological belief, from Hal Lindsay to
Heaven's Gate, Y2K and beyond. Readings from historical and sociological studies and prophetic texts.
Lecture and discussion.
Requirements: full attendance and participation; brief weekly response papers, two 3- to 5-page reports,
and one 15- to 20-page research paper.
Open to all classes without prerequisite. Enrollment limited to 30.
VERTER
CONTEMPORARY PHILOSOPHICAL AND CRITICAL INQUIRY
REL 281(F) Atheism, Theism and Existentialism
This course is an introduction to several major thinkers in the modern Christian and Jewish West through
their views on faith and doubt. The modern period in European philosophy and theology is usually consid-
ered to begin with a set of challenges to traditional religious world views, especially the belief in God.
While the nature and meaning of God's existence stimulated countless rich debates in earlier centuries,
these debates take on a new dimension towards the middle of the seventeenth century. In the context of the
close of the religious wars spurred by the Reformation and the emergence of a new experimental attitude
towards nature and the cosmos, many thinkers felt a need to clarify the contents and parameters of religious
belief and knowledge. While virtually all thinkers in this period continued to express theistic beliefs, many
nevertheless struggled openly with what these beliefs entailed, setting the groundwork for arguments
against God's existence altogether and eventually stimulating the creation of alternative ways of securing
human meaning. Throughout the course we will be asking at least two kinds of questions. First, we will
pursue such conceptual questions as how have various thinkers grappled with inherited notions of reason,
revelation, nature, tradition, good and evil? What role have doubt, skepticism, and uncertainty played in
modern world views and how have these experiences been related to faith? Second, we will subject the
historical premises of the course to scrutiny, asking about the very assumption that atheism inaugurates
modernity. What is the validity of this claim? Are there other events, ideas, or experiences we might identi-
fy as uniquely modern? How do terms such as "enlightenment," "science," "freedom," "authority," and the
"self" determine how we characterize, and thus value, this period? Reading list: Pascal, Descartes, Spinoza,
Mendelssohn, Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Freud, Dostoevsky, Buber, Rosenzweig, Rilke, Sartre.
Lecture and discussion.
Requirements: attendance and active participation, five short papers (2 pages) and one final paper (10-15
pages).
Open to all classes without prerequisite. Enrollment limited to 30.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR LEVENE
REL 282 Feminist Approaches to Religion (Same as Women's and Gender Studies 282) (Not
offered 2000-2001)
What does feminist theory have to offer the study of religion? How have participants in various religious
traditions helped to produce and enact feminisms? Feminism and religion have a long but often troubled
history of interconnection. In this course, we shall explore a range of feminist theoretical perspectives that
have either emerged out of particular religious contexts or have been applied to the study of religious tradi-
tions and practices. We shall consider how conflicts within feminism-especially those pertaining to issues
of sexuality, race, class, nationality, ethnicity, and religious affiliation-make a difference for the ways that
religion as a category is interpreted. Authors considered in this class will include: Elizabeth Cady Stanton,
Mary Daly, Elisabeth Schussler Fiorenza, Katie Cannon, bell hooks, Judith Butler, Judith Plaskow, Ada
Maria Isasi-Diaz, Kwok Pui Lan, Rachel Adler, M. Elaine Combs-Schilling, Adrienne Rich, Patricia Wil-
liams, Sallie McFague, Melanie Morrison, and Marijas Gimbutas.
Lecture and discussion.
Religion
­ 305 ­
Requirements: brief weekly writings assignments; one class presentation; one 5-page essay; one 15-page
research paper.
Open to all classes without prerequisite. Enrollment limited to 30.
BUELL
REL 284(S) Imitating God: Wisdom and Virtue in Jewish Thought
Among Jewish and Christian conceptions of the goal of a religious life, two stand out as of paramount
import: wisdom and virtue. The first involves a life of learning, study and contemplation while the second
emphasizes attention to the suffering and needs of others. Both have been seen as valuable human activities
in themselves, but what has made them specifically religious has been the claim that each, in addition to
being a form of devotion, involves imitating God. Imitating God, however, presents a very particular hu-
man challenge, a challenge that arguably originates with the biblical claim that Adam and Eve were created
in God's image. How do we know what it means to imitate God if we don't know who/what God is? To
what should we devote ourselves in this light? What should we value (in ourselves, in others, in the world
around us)? If the image of God is in the world all around us, why is it God (rather than human beings) we
are to imitate? If it is God we are to imitate, how will we know when we have successfully done so? This
course will explore primarily modern Jewish responses to these questions, although we will begin with the
classical and medieval construction of the problem. The early part of the course will consider three types of
claims: first, that the goals of wisdom and virtue are mutually reinforcing; second, that they are related but
hierarchically ranked values, one a stepping stone to the other; and third that they are mutually exclusive
endeavors. We will then turn to the question of whether wisdom and virtue are the only ways to imitate
God, and will conclude with a consideration of what happens to these ideals when God is taken out of the
picture. Reading list: Midrash, Maimonides, selections from Hasidic and Mitnagdic writings, Freud, Marx,
Cohen, Kook, Buber, Soloveitchik, Levinas.
Discussion.
Requirements: attendance and active participation, one class presentation, one short (5 page) paper, and
one longer (10-15 pages) final paper.
Open to all classes without prerequisite. Enrollment limited to 30.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR LEVENE
REL 288 Monasteries, Yeshivas, and other Universities: Religion and the Nature of Education
(Not offered 2000-2001)
This seminar examines traditional religious education across cultures and the role of intellectuals therein.
We start with a brief view of the social nature of education as argued by Durkheim and Weber. We then
raise the following question: Is education about the development of rationality in the intellectual and moral
domains as argued by Piaget, or is it more a matter of internalizing habits in the context of institutional
constraints as argued by Foucault and Bourdieu? To answer, we examine religious education as it is found
in the Christian, Jewish and Islamic traditions and discover that these traditions have been preoccupied
with the same issue. We examine the different answers and models that these traditions propose and raise
further questions concerning the nature of religious education: What is traditional religious education
about: knowledge, indoctrination or the development of a religious character? Is there a special type of
knowledge or rationality in religious traditions? How different is traditional religious education from our
modern liberal arts education? We conclude by considering the role that intellectual technologies play in
education, particularly the implications of literacy, both in the past and in the present. Reading list: Berger,
The Sacred Canopy. Olson, The World on Paper. Ong, Orality and Literacy. Street, Literacy in Theory and
Practice. Halberthal, People of the Book. Fisch, Rational Rabbis. Mottahedeh, The Mantle of the Prophet.
Lecture and discussion.
Requirements: full attendance, a class presentation and a research paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 30.
DREYFUS
REL 289(F) Cyberscapes (Same as ArtH 268, ArtS 212 and EXPR 242)
(See under EXPR 242 for full description)
Enrollment limited to 25.
REL 290(S) The Phenomenology of Vision: Seeing to the Second Power (Same as Philosophy
290)
From the very first, Husserl declared phemenology to be a "vision of essences," and he gave to visual
perception a privileged role in the pursuit of essential truth. He also valorized the mental glancing by which
we see into ourselves as pure consciousness --another mode of vision. Sartre, interpreting such conscious-
ness as consisting in an act of "nihilation," considered the petrifying human "look" (le regard) as the prima-
ry vehicle of our being-for-others. It took the special genius of Merleau-Ponty to emphasize the lived body
rather than consciousness and to describe this body as a synaesthetic agency that draws on all the senses.
Merleau-Ponty also argued for the equiprimordiality of vision and touch as the mainstays of human em-
bodiment. In the wake of phenomenology, Lacan made seeing oneself in the mirror crucial to the forma-
tion of the human ego, while Levinas regarded face-to-face vision as integral to our ethical bond with oth-
ers. Recently, Luce Irigaray revisited the relationship between vision and touch from a radical feminist
perspective. This ever-evolving trajectory of thought about vision will be explored in detail in this course,
which will also serve as an introduction to phenomenology. We shall begin with a brief account of visual
Religion
­ 306 ­
perception in the ancient and early modern world, then proceed to focus on the place of vision in Husserl,
Sartre, and Merleau-Ponty, and end with the reconsideration of vision to be found in Lacan, Levinas, and
Irigaray.
Lecture and discussion.
Requirements: three short papers.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 30.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MW CASEY
REL 291 Religion and the Ethic of Deconstruction: a Cross-cultural Perspective (Not offered
2000-2001)
This course examines a way of doing philosophy, deconstruction, its problems and implications in several
philosophical traditions. We start with Wittgenstein, who is often depicted as being opposed to deconstruc-
tion, but whose works offer an approach that has been described by some of his best commentators as
involving a deconstructive philosophical strategy. We also examine Wittgenstein's work on religion and its
implications for religious pluralism and other issues. We then move to Derrida's reading of post-Wittgens-
teinian tradition, particularly Austin's helpful theory of speech acts. We examine Derrida's deconstructive
approach, focusing more particularly on his debate with Searle. Finally, we examine a similar approach in
Buddhist philosophy with Nagarjuna's Madhyamaka tradition. We consider this philosophy in its context
and raise a number of issues. We focus more particularly on the connection between deconstructive strate-
gy and ethical practice, emphasizing the way in which the Madhyamaka view of emptiness is taken to
entail an ethic of care.
Readings: Wittgenstein, On Certainty. Wittgenstein, Lecture on Religion. Austin, How to Do Things with
Words. Derrida, Limited Inc. Huntington, The Emptiness of Emptiness; Collins, Selfless Persons. Garfield,
The Fundamental Wisdom of the Middle Way.
Lecture and discussion.
Requirements: full attendance and participation; two essays (4-6 pages).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 30.
DREYFUS
REL 292(S) Secular Space/Sacred Place (Same as Philosophy 292)
This seminar will explore in ever-widening ways the differences between space as a medieval and modern
conception and place as something at once ancient and postmodern. Both space and place will be ex-
amined in relation to the now almost complete secularization of the life-world, most conspicuously present
in the globalization of the technology of communication and information transmission. In the face of this
intricate and massive networking--most of it happening in a "virtual space" that is the technological
equivalent of infinite space--it is nothing short of remarkable that place not merely survives as a concept
but is increasingly valorized in such diverse forms as architecture and geography, feminist thought and the
theory of the sacred. Beyond its locatory and orientational virtues, a place is a vehicle of memory and is
ultimately numinous--which is why we live in particular places for so long and return to them so nostalgi-
cally. Yet we rarely reflect on why they possess this extraordinary power and, in particular, what it is about
places that allow them to constitute the local landscape of the sacred. Among several ways of considering
the place/space dyad, special attention will be given to the difference between the oral and the visual as this
plays itself out in various cultural settings, ranging from the high luminosity of Greek and medieval
thought to the illuminated screen of the present moment. Consideration will be given to architectural and
pictorial realizations of place and space, as well as to their ingredience in ethical and political life. Readings
in ancient and contemporary texts, to be selected from the Old Testament, Homer, Plato, Aristotle, Des-
cartes, Derrida, Irigaray, Walter Benjamin, and Mark Taylor.
Seminar format.
Requirements: two short papers and a term paper on a topic of your own choosing.
This course counts as a junior religion seminar.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 20.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 T CASEY
REL 294(F) Philosophy of Religion: Faith and Reason (Same as Philosophy 242)
(See description under Philosophy)
REL 296(S) Hegel: Art, Religion and Philosophy (Same as Philosophy 314)
(See description under Philosophy)
REL 301(F) Psychology of Religion
This course is an exploration of the psychological dimensions of religious awareness and practice. An ef-
fort will be made to establish the relationship between psychological issues such as dream analysis, thera-
py, personality structure and development, and religious belief and conduct. Special attention will be given
to the interplay of death, violence, and sexuality in myth and ritual and to the implications of psychoanaly-
sis for textual interpretation. Authors to be considered: Freud, Lacan, Nietzsche, Bataille, de Certeau, and
Foucault.
Lecture and discussion.
Requirements: a midterm exam and a final paper.
Religion
­ 307 ­
Prerequisites: Religion 101 or Psychology 101 or 251 (formerly 241) or permission of instructor. Enroll-
ment limited to 30.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR TAYLOR
REL 302(S) Religion and Society
A sustained inquiry into the place of religion in society and the place of the social/communal within se-
lected religious traditions. The course will focus on two organizing themes--sacrifice and praxis. In the
first the multifaceted interest in the early part of the twentieth century in the "primitive" and the violence of
"totemic" cults will be explored through the works of Durkheim, Levi-Strauss, Jay and Bloch. In the se-
cond part the character and comparison of the ethoi that religions construct will be explored with attention
to the Christian West, Islam, China, and India through the works of Weber, Bourdieu, and Csordas.
Lecture and discussion.
Requirements: a midterm exam and a final paper.
Prerequisite: Religion 101 or Anthropology 101 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limited to 30.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR DARROW
REL 304 From Hermeneutics to Post-coloniality (Not offered 2000-2001)
This course explores some of the theoretical trajectories available in "our" pluri-cultural and (post)modern
world by focusing on the relation between truth and interpretation, particularly in a pluri-cultural context.
We start with Gadamer's hermeneutics, which stresses the importance of being aware of one's cultural
background and prejudices, an important prerequisite for understanding cultural differences. Hermeneutics
has also, however, several blind spots, which we examine through the critiques of Derrida, Foucault and
Said. With Derrida we learn the critical tools and the rigor necessary to question some of the central notions
such as identity and difference which are often taken forgranted. With Foucault we question the relation
between truth and power in interpretation, and thematize the complexities of power. With Said's Oriental-
ism, a seminal description of the ways in which the West has (mis)represented the "East," we examine the
nature of (mis)interpretation of other cultures and the role that ethnocentrism has played in the formation of
modernity. We also consider some of the more compelling critiques of Said's work such as Bhabha's warn-
ing against the essentialization of difference and Spivak's argument against the often too easy appropri-
ation of cultural differences. We conclude by considering two concrete situations in India and Egypt which
illustrate the relevance of the post-colonial critique and its main proponents, Said, Spivak and Bhabha
(otherwise known as the "Holy Trinity"). Reading list: H.G. Gadamer, Truth and Method. F. Saussure,
Course in General Linguistics. J. Derrida, Of Grammatology. P. Rabinow, Foucault Reader. E. Said,
Orientalism. T. Mitchell, Colonizing Egypt. Hawley, Sati: The Blessing and the Curse.
Lecture and discussion.
Requirements: full attendance and participation; three essays (4-6 pages).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 30.
DREYFUS
REL 313 Appearance/Reality (Same as EXPR 313 and Philosophy 313) (Not offered
2000-2001)
The question of the relationship between appearance and reality is as old as thought itself. Throughout the
course of modernity and more recently in what is often labeled postmodernity, this ancient problem has
taken new forms and assumed greater urgency. In a world in which all so-called reality seems to be increas-
ingly virtual, does the distinction between appearance and reality any longer make sense? How can the
difference between the apparent and the real be maintained? If it cannot be maintained, what consequences
follow? These questions will be probed by a careful reading of three major philosophers: Hegel, Derrida,
and Nietzsche. Far from mere historical interest, these thinkers present compelling perspectives that repre-
sent distinct alternatives for understanding the world in which we dwell.
Requirements: one 20-page paper, participation in online discussion, leading one class session.
Enrollment limited to 30.
TAYLOR
REL 314(S) Complexity (Same as EXPR 314 and Philosophy 354)
In recent years, a new area of inquiry known as complexity studies has emerged in the natural sciences.
While the study of complexity has begun to have an impact on the social sciences (especially economics,
political theory, and anthropology), students of the arts and humanities are only beginning to recognize the
importance of this new approach to natural, social, and cultural phenomena. In this seminar, we will ex-
plore various aspects of the problem of complexity that are particularly relevant for understanding contem-
porary developments in society and culture. In addition to examining emergence of complexities in the
natural sciences, we will consider how the study of complex adaptive systems provides an effective
theoretical perspective from which to interpret important aspects of emerging network culture. The works
to be considered will include: Michel Serres, The Parasite, Douglas Hofstadter, Godel, Escher, Bach,
Gregory Bateson, Steps to an Ecology of Mind, Giles Deleuze and Feliz Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus,
Ilya Prigogine and Isabelle Strengers, Order out of Chaos, John Holland, Emergence: From Chaos to Or-
der, Murray Gell-Mann, The Quark and the Jaguar, Stuart Kauffman, At Home in the Universe, Paul Or-
merod, Butterfly Economics, and J.A. Kelso, Dynamic Patterns: The Self-Organization of Brain and Be-
havior.
Requirements: 20- to 25-page paper.
Religion, Romance Languages
­ 308 ­
Prerequisites: Religion 101, 301; Philosophy 101, 201, 209; English, 230, 373; Biology 101; Chemistry
101; Physics 101; Computer Science, 105, 108; Mathematics 180, or permission of the instructor. Enroll-
ment limited to 30.
Hour: 7:00-9:30 p.m. T TAYLOR
REL 401(F) Issues in the Study of Religion
To be conducted as a working seminar or colloquium. Major issues in the study of religious thought and
behavior will be taken up in a cross-cultural context enabling the student to consolidate and expand per-
spectives gained in the course of the major sequence. Topics will vary from year to year. In keeping with
the seminar framework, opportunity will be afforded the student to pursue independent reading and re-
search. Topic for 2000: Birthing and Dying.
Requirements: class reports, papers, and substantial research projects.
Prerequisite: senior major status or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limited to 30.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W DARROW
REL 493(F)-W031; W031-494(S) Senior Thesis
REL 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
ROMANCE LANGUAGES (Div. I)
Chair, Professor LEYLA ROUHI
Professors: BELL-VILLADA, DUNN, NORTON***, STAMELMAN. Associate Professor: ROUHI.
Assistant Professor: AUSTIN. Visiting Professors: NICASTRO, OVERSTREET. Part-time Lecturer:
DESROSIERS. Visiting Lecturer: ROCHE. Teaching Associates: NGUYEN, RAHBAR (French);
AGUILERA, YÁNEZ (Spanish).
FRENCH
MAJOR--French Language and Literature
The French major consists of nine courses above the 103-104 level with at least one course each from
the following areas:
1) Poetry and Poetics
2) Prose Narrative and Fiction
3) Theatre and Dramatic Literature
4) Thematics, Special Topics, Survey Courses
Students must also take a 400-level capstone seminar which may count toward any of the four re-
quired areas.
Working with the major advisor, the student will formulate a curricular plan that will ensure balance and
coherence in courses taken. Such balance and coherence will be based on the above areas of literary and
cultural investigation. Prospective majors should discuss their program with the major advisor by the end
of their sophomore year. This is especially imperative for students who are planning to spend a part or all of
their junior year in France.
The major seeks to provide training in literary and cultural analysis and linguistic expression through the
study of selected texts. Emphasis is placed on the changes in form and subject matter from the Renaissance
to the modern era.
Inasmuch as all courses in French assume the active participation of each student in discussions con-
ducted in the foreign language, regular attendance at class meetings is expected.
MAJOR--French Studies
The major in French Studies is an interdisciplinary program that provides students with the opportunity
to acquire skills and knowledge embracing the cultural, historical, social, and political heritage of France.
The program allows for an individualized course of study involving work in several departments and the
opportunity to study abroad.
Students electing the French Studies major should register with the French Studies faculty advisor dur-
ing their sophomore year. At that time they should submit a feasibility plan that articulates their projected
program.
The French Studies major consists of ten courses satisfying the following requirements:
1) at least two courses in French language and/or literature above the French 103 level;
2) a senior seminar;
3) Electives: The remaining courses needed to complete the major must be drawn from at least three
different departments and relate primarily to an aspect of the culture, history, society, and politics of France.
These courses will be selected in consultation with members of the Department of Romance Languages.
Appropriate electives might include:
Romance Languages
­ 309 ­
ArtH 254 Impressionism (Deleted 2000-2001)
History 307 The French and Haitian Revolutions
Religion 301 Psychology of Religion
All courses in French Literature and Language above the 103 level.
In addition, students should take at least two non-language courses that are taught in French.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN FRENCH
Two alternative routes are available to those who wish to apply for the degree with honors.
The first of these involves the writing of a senior thesis. Honors candidates are required to devote to their
theses two semesters of independent study (beyond the nine courses required for the major) and the winter
study period of their senior year (493-W031-494). The thesis will be written in French and will usually be
in the range of from forty to sixty pages. Candidates are expected to submit thesis proposals in May of their
junior year. By the end of the first semester of the senior year, students will normally have finished the
research for the thesis. By the end of the winter study period, candidates will submit to the department an
outline and rough draft of their work. At this time, the student will make a presentation of his project at a
departmental colloquium. The thesis will be discussed and evaluated to determine whether or not the stu-
dent should continue in the honors program. The second semester of independent thesis work will be spent
revising and rewriting the thesis. The completed dissertation in its final form will be due at the end of April.
The second route is a group of three clearly related courses (offered by the Department of Romance Lan-
guages or by other departments, such as History, Art, Philosophy, English, etc.), only one of which may be
counted in the nine courses comprising the major. One of the courses will be an Independent Study (plus
senior year WSP 030). At the end of the spring semester the student will write an essay that synthesizes the
content of the three related courses. Students may apply for this route by November 2 of the senior year.
In the case of both routes to the degree with honors, the department's recommendation for graduation
with honors will be based on the originality and thoroughness of the finished project.
THE CERTIFICATE IN FRENCH
The Certificate in French Language and Culture consists of a sequence of seven courses for which the
student must earn the cumulative grade average of B or higher. In addition, the student must achieve a
score of 60 on the College Level Examination Program (CLEP) College French (Levels 1 and 2) test. This
test will be administered by the Department of Romance Languages once a year during the month of April
to all candidates for the Certificate in French Language and Culture.
For students with little or no prior background in French, the course sequence consists of French
101-102, French 103-104, and any three courses in French above the 104-level, one of which must be at
the 200 level or higher. If the student begins with French 103-104, the sequence then continues with three
courses in French above the 104 level, including one at the 200 level or higher. The student must then take
two more courses either in French above the 104 level or in other departments. The courses in other depart-
ments must contain a significant component of material representing French or Franc phone cultural, intel-
lectual, political, social, and art-historical topics. The choice of the courses must be approved by the depart-
ment.
PLACEMENT
A placement test in French is administered at Williams at the opening of the fall semester. Incoming
first-year students who register for any French course above the 101-102 level must take this test, regard-
less of their previous preparation.
STUDY ABROAD
French majors are strongly encouraged to complete part of the major requirements by studying abroad
either during the academic year or the summer. Through its special affiliation with the Hamilton Junior
Year in France, the department offers a comprehensive academic and cultural experience in a francophone
environment. Major credit for study abroad will normally be assigned as follows: up to 1 credit for one
semester; up to 3 credits for a full year or two semesters. The final assignment of credit will be authorized
in consultation with the student's major advisor upon return to Williams. Such credits can only be deter-
mined by review of course format, materials, and evidence of satisfactory academic performance. Any
student contemplating study in France is advised to consult with faculty members in French before select-
ing a study abroad program. Because of the wide range of academic quality, some programs are considered
deficient, and, therefore, unsatisfactory choices for Williams students.
LANGUAGE AND CIVILIZATION COURSES
RLFR 101(F)-W088-102(S) Elementary French
This is a year-long course which offers a thorough introduction to basic French language skills: under-
standing, speaking, reading, and writing.
The class meets five hours a week.
Evaluation in both semester-long courses will be based on quizzes, midterm and final exams, composi-
tions, and class participation. At least four hours of language laboratory exercises are mandatory.
Romance Languages
­ 310 ­
Students registered for 101-102 are required to attend and pass the sustaining program during the winter
study period. Credit granted only if both semesters are taken.
For students who have taken less than two years of French in high school.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MTWRF ROCHE
RLFR 103(F)-104(S) Intermediate French
The two-course sequence continues and completes the introduction to basic language skills begun in
French 101-102. Greater emphasis is placed on the integration of vocabulary and grammatical structures
into meaningful contexts so as to expand reading and comprehension as well as written and oral self-ex-
pression. The first semester combines the development of written and oral skills with a review of signifi-
cant aspects of French grammar. The second semester of the sequence seeks also to develop skills of textu-
al analysis and interpretation. Textual resources will consist of representative readings from the areas of
French literature and culture, pop culture and folklore, film, journalistic press, art, and socio- political is-
sues. Conducted in French.
French 103 and 104 meet for four hours a week and include a language laboratory component.
Requirements: class participation, oral class presentations, short papers, and exams.
Prerequisites: French 101-102 or examination placement.
The two courses in this sequence normally constitute a year's program, at the end of which the student may
enter French 105 (Studies in French Language and Literature) or French 109, 110, or 112 (Introduction to
French Literature). A student may enter the sequence at the 104 level by special permission of the depart-
ment and on the basis of a placement examination.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR, 11:20-12:35 TR Conference: 2:10-3 W, 1:10-2 W First Semester: NORTON
9:55-11:10 TR, 11:20-12:35 TR Conference: 2:10-3 W, 1:10-2 W
Second Semester: ROCHE, STAMELMAN
RLFR 105(F) Studies in French Language and Culture
The goal of this advanced language course is to strengthen students' skills in speaking, writing, and think-
ing in French, while at the same time developing their knowledge of French culture as it has been ex-
pressed through the centuries in literature, art, history, and--more recently--film. Grammar will be re-
viewed, and texts will be chosen from French and Francophone sources. Conducted in French.
Requirements: short papers, regular quizzes and exams, oral presentations, and active participation in class
discussions.
Prerequisite: French 103 or French 104, an SAT score of 600, or by placement.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR, 9:55-11:10 TR Conference: 1:10-2 W DUNN, ROCHE
LITERATURE COURSES
RLFR 109(F) Introduction to French Literature: The Literature of Desire and
Repression
A study of representative French texts from the seventeenth to the twentieth centuries in which the issues of
desire and repression help the reader to understand authorial intention and its relation to the process of
writing. Among the topics to be discussed: the transposition of male and female voice, the rhetoric of desire
and sexuality, Platonism and the sublimation of desire, the salon as a venue of power, provincial and city
life as settings for the elaboration of gender themes and conflicts, language and its relation to money and
desire, and levels of aggression and passivity. Texts to be read and discussed: Phèdre (Racine), Manon
Lescaut (Prévost), Eugénie Grandet (Balzac), Madame Bovary (Flaubert), L'Amant (Duras), La Lectrice
(Jean). Conducted in French.
Requirements: class participation, a midterm exam, and several short papers.
Prerequisite: French 104 or 105 or by placement text, or permission of instructor.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR ROCHE
RLFR 110(S) Introduction to French Literature: The Search for Identity
"We are so used to disguising ourselves for others," wrote the seventeenth-century author, La Rochefou-
cauld, "that we wind up disguised to ourselves." Through the study of short masterpieces of the seven-
teenth, eighteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth centuries, we will study a variety of authors' different ap-
proaches to questions of self-deception, self-discovery, and self-understanding. Writers to be studied in-
clude Corneille, Pascal, La Rochefoucauld, Mme. de La Fayette, Voltaire, Mme. Claire de Duras, Balzac,
Mauriac, Colette, and Camus. Conducted in French.
Requirements: active participation in all class discussions, three short papers, one longer paper, one oral
presentation.
Prerequisite: French 104 or 105, or 109 or by placement test, or permission of instructor.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 WF DUNN
RLFR 202 French Film (Not offered 2000-2001)
This course will be an opportunity to view and discuss a series of films that are representative of the rich
and varied tradition of French cinema from its origins to the recent past. We will be paying particular atten-
tion to the ways in which films engage the spectator and use moving images and recorded sound to tell
their stories. We will also be considering how the films reflect on and interrogate aspects of twentieth-cen-
tury French and Francophone culture and society, and in particular on the role of film itself as a vehicle of
cultural perception. We will be viewing the early films of the Lumière brothers, films from the twenties and
Romance Languages
­ 311 ­
thirties of Jean Vigo, Abel Gance and Jean Renoir; films from the fifties and sixties of François Truffaut,
Jean-Luc Godard and Alan Resnais and more recent films of Agnes Varda, Luc Besson, and Chantal Ack-
erman. Conducted in French.
Requirements: 1-page email journal entries on each of the films, one 5-page paper, one presentation, and a
final 10-page paper.
Prerequisite: French 109 or 110 or 112 or permission of the instructor.
RLFR 203 The Spirit of the Renaissance: Rediscovery and Invention (Not offered 2000-2001)
The seminar will examine the literary culture of France in the sixteenth century through selected master-
works of poetry and prose. During the age that marks the transition between the Middle Ages and neo-
classicism, French society is engaged in a process of vigorous experimentation in such themes and issues
as individualism, spontaneity, inspiration, eroticism, literary genre, poetics, the visual arts, and social con-
flict. We will give particular attention to the shift from oral to printed culture and the setting of individual
works within the context of modern theories of language and writing. Authors to be studied: Rabelais, Du
Bellay, Ronsard, and Montaigne. Conducted in French.
Requirements: class participation, two short papers, an oral presentation, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: French 109, 110, 112 or permission of the instructor.
NORTON
RLFR 204(S) (formerly 406) The Female Prison: Convents and Brothels
In this course, we will examine eighteenth-, nineteenth-, and twentieth-century texts in which woman's
destiny is defined in terms of spatial, social, and psychological confinement in mysticism or sexuality, ex-
cluding her from marriage and society. Convents and brothels, schools that teach ambiguous sexuality,
subversion, and revolt, may be more interchangeable than antithetical. Texts include Diderot's La
Religieuse, Prévost's Manon Lescaut, Laclos's Les Liaisons Dangereuses, Mme. de Lafayette's La Con-
tesse de Tende, Mme. de Duras's Ourika, Maupassant's La Maison Tellier, Zola's Nana, Colette's Gigi, and
Beauvoir's Le Deuxième Sexe. Conducted in French.
Requirements: several short papers, class presentations, and a longer final paper.
Prerequisite: any French literature course.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR DUNN
RLFR 207 Nineteenth-Century Novel (Not offered 2000-2001)
A study of four of the greatest novels ever. These novels helped define what the novel is and could be. We
will read Le Père Goriot by Balzac, Le Rouge et le Noir by Stendhal, Madame Bovary by Flaubert, and
Germinal by Zola. We will read these texts within the social and historical context of nineteenth-century
France and investigate how the novel developed as a form over the course of the century. Conducted in
French.
Requirements: three short papers and a longer final paper.
Prerequisite: French 109 or 110 or higher or permission of instructor.
RLFR 209 French Surrealist Literature and Art (Not offered 2000-2001)
Dealing with Surrealism as an avant-garde literary, artistic, social, and cultural movement, the course will
attempt to define the philosophy, aesthetics, and ideologies of Surrealism by examining in detail the novels,
poems, manifestos, essays, films, photographs, and paintings by which the Surrealists attempted to estab-
lish a communion with what they called "the marvelous," to liberate human imagination, and to inaugurate
a new humanism, which would, as one Surrealist wrote, "transform the world, change life, [and] remake
from scratch human understanding." Discussion will be given to the notion of Surrealist beauty, to the role
of chance, play, and the unconscious in Surrealist creation, to the changing definitions of love and desire in
Surrealist experience, and the male appropriation of the female body in Surrealist representations. Read-
ings will include the works of André Breton, Louis Aragon, Paul Eluard, Robert Desnos, Tristan Tzara,
Joyce Mansour, and Benjamin Peret. In addition, study will be devoted to the Dada creations of Marcel
Duchamp and Francis Picabia and to the Surrealist painting and photography of Max Ernst, René Magritte,
Leonora Carrington, Frida Kahlo, Man Ray, Salvador Dalí, Yves Tanguy, Joan Miró, and the Surrealist
constructions of the American, Joseph Cornell. Films by Dalí, Luis Buñuel, and others will be shown.
Conducted in English. (Students seeking course credit toward the French major will do the readings and
written work in French; other students will do them in English.)
Requirements: active participation in class discussions, one short paper, one longer final paper, possibly
one-hour exam, and oral class presentations.
No prerequisites.
STAMELMAN
RLFR 211 The Poetry of Revolution and Modernism: Baudelaire, Rimbaud, Mallarmé (Not
offered 2000-2001)
With modernism begins a revolt that writes itself in as well as against language. Poetry in France, specially
from 1850 on, initiates a revolution. It seeks to subvert the world and the word, to open consciousness to
untried experiences of the real, and to call into question the forms of representation by which society and
culture maintain their power. The course will focus attention on the subversive intent of three major nine-
teenth-century poets whose works attempt to create a truly revolutionary and modern consciousness that
will define French literature and criticism well into the late-twentieth century. Certain subjects to be dis-
Romance Languages
­ 312 ­
cussed in depth will include: (1) the search for the unknown; (2) the escape from the world; (3) the attitude
toward nature and the modern city; (4) the use of symbol and allegory; (5) the power of memory in poetic
re-creation; (6) the nature of the prose poem as a new modernist genre; (7) the genesis of symbolism; (8)
the place of dream and hallucination in poetic experience; and (9) the relation of music (Claude Debussy,
Pierre Boulez, Jim Morrison) to poetic expression. In particular, the works of each poet will be discussed in
relation to the historical and cultural events of the time: Baudelaire and the modernization of Paris; Rim-
baud and the insurrection of the Paris Commune; Mallarmé and fin-de-siècle and symbolist aesthetics.
Readings will include Baudelaire's Les Fleurs du mal and Le Spleen de Paris; Rimbaud's early poems,
Une Saison en enfer, and Les Illuminations; and Mallarmé's Poésies; plus critical writings by Benjamin,
Blanchot, Kristeva, and Bonnefoy. Conducted in French.
Requirements: active participation in class discussions, three papers, one hour exam, and oral class presen-
tations.
Prerequisite: French 109 or 110 or permission of the instructor.
STAMELMAN
RLFR 212 Sister Revolutions in France and America (Not offered 2000-2001)
In the late-eighteenth century, two revolutions burst forth--they were the most striking and consequential
events in modern history, decisive turning-points that transformed society and politics. This course takes an
interdisciplinary approach to the study of the overarching ideas and visions of the sister revolutions.
Through works of literature, correspondence, political essays and speeches, we will seek to understand the
fundamental goals and accomplishments of both revolutions. Who were their leaders and according to
what principles did they govern? Did revolutionaries in France find a model in America for their Revolu-
tion? What is the meaning of the "Terror" in France and what light does it shed on modern revolutionary
movements? Why was the American Revolution followed by decades of stability while the French Revo-
lution bequeathed a turbulent succession of failed governments? Have America and France continued to
conceive of themselves as revolutionary nations? We will read works by the following historians, novelists,
and politicians: Rousseau, Robespierre, Saint-Just, Michelet, Tocqueville, Victor Hugo, Edmund Burke,
Thomas Paine, James Madison, Alexander Hamilton, John Adams, Thomas Jefferson, David B. Davis,
and Hannah Arendt. Films on revolution by Renoir, Wajda, Gance and others will be viewed.Conducted
in English. Students with a reading knowledge of French are encouraged to read French texts in the origi-
nal.
Requirements: several papers and active participation in all class discussions.
No prerequisites.
(This course is part of the Leadership Studies cluster.)
DUNN
RLFR 214 Travels, Topographies, Curiosities and Encounters: The Renaissance Sense of Place
(Not offered 2000-2001)
Renaissance thinkers and writers are fascinated with the past as a living, spatial register and with the future
as a construct of the imagination. Through the study of representative French Renaissance texts centered
on travel, exploration, and inquiry, this course will explore the way in which sixteenth-century writers ap-
proach discovery as a mode of recognition that helps authenticate and define our sense of place. For the
Renaissance this sense is shaped from a variety of sources prompting writers to return to the major Greek
and Latin travel epics (The Odyssey and The Aeneid), to rewrite these epic journeys as phantasmagoric
quests and figures of poetic aspiration, and to establish the relevancy of the past for helping Europe come to
terms with the dislocating discovery of the "New World." We shall focus on François Rabelais's Tiers livre
and Quart livre, Joachim Du Bellay's archeological and Odyssean sonnets in Les Antiquitez and Les Re-
grets, and Michel de Montaigne's Essays. Conducted in French.
Requirements: class participation, two papers, an oral presentation, and a one-hour exam.
Prerequisite: French 109, 110, or 112, or permission of the instructor.
NORTON
RLFR 215(F) The Fashioning of Fashion: Theory and Practice (Same as Literary Studies
217)
"Fashion," Roland Barthes wrote, "is too serious and too frivolous at the same time." As a product of cul-
ture, at once trivial and essential, fashion exhibits a compulsion to create signs, to reproduce changing
meanings, and to agitate, as well as normalize, the perpetual play of difference and novelty. The course will
examine fashion as a system of communication; a network of variable signs; a writing (on and of the
body); an ideology of socially-constructed images of femininity and masculinity; a meeting point for gen-
der, class, and political relations of power; a system for controlling the eroticized body; a temporal whirl-
wind of impermanence and change ("the ecstasy of the new"); a playing-out of the forces of desire and
consumption; an instrument for plundering and recycling the styles of the past; and, finally, a reality of
everyday life constitutive of social order, collective fantasy, and personal self-definition. We will explore
the ways that fashion--in particular clothing, perfume, and cosmetics, as mediated by strategies of repre-
sentation (i.e., advertising, publicity, photography, media, literature, art, cinema, consumer cul-
ture)--create, reproduce, and disseminate a certain kind of "imaginary," where fictions of desire, eroticism,
aesthetics, myth, and national identity circulate. Three general goals will orient our study: first, to under-
stand how the sign systems of fashion, fashion history, and fashion advertising produce meaning and value
Romance Languages
­ 313 ­
within culture; second, to examine the "imaginary" of desire, fantasy, and identity produced by the creation
and marketing of clothes, perfume, and cosmetics; and third, to analyze the "rewriting" of face and body
(the phenomenon of the "makeover") which fashion seeks to inspire. Attention will be given: (1) to the
history of fashion, perfume and cosmetics, primarily, but not exclusively, in nineteenth- and twentieth-cen-
tury France; (2) to the representation of fashion in works of literature (Baudelaire, Huysmans, Zola, Proust,
Calvino, Suskind, Robbins), cinema (Funny Face, Unzipped, Pret-à-Porter, Tales of Cities and Clothes),
and cultural and feminist theory (Barthes, Baudrillard, Lipovetsky, Bordo, Bartky, Simmel, Corbin); (3) to
the collaboration of designer, fashion house, model, wearer, and spectator in the creation and dissemination
of fashion; (4) to the links between fashion and "spectacle," fashion and postmodernism, fashion and fe-
tishism, fashion and domination; and (5) to fashion as both the endless play of difference ("a signification
without a message," Baudrillard) and the interlacing of desire and death (Benjamin). Conducted in En-
glish.
The first organizational meeting for the course will take place at 7:00 p.m. on Thursday, September 7th in
Weston 10.
Requirements: active participation in class discussions, oral presentations, one hour-exam, and one 20-
page paper final paper.
Enrollment limited to 15.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W STAMELMAN
RLFR 303 The Voyage of the Renaissance Poet: The Poetics of Regret and Transcendence
(Not offered 2000-2001)
The French Renaissance discovery of a vernacular poetic consciousness is one of the most significant and
creative literary contributions of the early modern period. Many aspects of this discovery are rooted in the
reappraisal of ancient culture and in the tendency to personify, through myth, the transcendent impulses of
the Poet. This course will explore the main features of this poetic phenomenon through the themes of op-
portunity/regret, poetic intoxication, erotic madness, divine inspiration, and the Sublime as they emerge
from Renaissance literary incarnations of mythological figures such as Kairos/Occasion, Bacchus, Venus,
Eros, and Apollo. Readings will consist mainly (though not exclusively) of selected poetic texts from the
work of Du Bellay, Scève, and Ronsard and of prose texts from Rabelais and Montaigne; brief background
readings from Longinus and Quintilian. Conducted in French.
Requirements: class participation, three shorter papers, one hour-long test, and oral presentations.
Prerequisite: French 109 or 110, or permission of instructor.
NORTON
RLFR 304(F) (formerly 208) The Age of Mirrors: Proportions and Disproportions in the
Seventeenth-Century Text
One of the most luminous architectural images of Louis XIV's court is the Hall of Mirrors at Versailles. As
an exercise in decorative bluff, it embodies the aspirations of a culture fascinated by strategies of deception,
the simultaneous harmonizing and dislocation of one's sense of space and vision. This course will examine
some of the consequences of this displacement in a literary culture which too often has been conceived in
the strictly neoclassical terms of order and codification. Among the themes and topics to be considered will
be court spectacle, man's disorientation and reconciliation in the cosmos, the art of silence and conversa-
tion, the strategies and limits of rhetoric, the `je ne sais quoi', the tragic and comic visions, and the portraits
of court and bourgeois society. Readings will include selections from the works of Pascal, Boileau, Des-
cartes, La Fontaine, Corneille, Racine, Molière, Madame de Sévigné, Saint-Simon, La Bruyère, and Féne-
lon. Conducted in French.
Requirements: class participation, three shorter papers, one hour-long test, and oral presentations.
Prerequisite: French 109, 110, 112 or permission of instructor.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MW NORTON
RLFR 308 Origins and Originalities: Literary Masterpieces of the Renaissance (Not offered
2000-2001)
The literary culture of the sixteenth century was shaped by two intersecting ideas: first, that books have the
power to refashion an absent past and make it seem less remote; second, that through this process of re-
newal, writers create liberating structures, works which set themselves apart radically from their own
sources. This tendency to look back and look forward simultaneously--to renovate and innovate--is the
defining mode of Renaissance literary discourse. The result is an age richly exciting in the way it articulates
its view of the world. The course will trace the main features of this double vision in selected readings from
six major authors: Erasmus, Machiavelli, Castiglione, Rabelais, Montaigne, and Shakespeare. Among the
areas to be examined will be the shift from oral to printed culture, concepts of language, genre, and rheto-
ric, historical and sociopolitical forces, education, the visual arts, and humanism. All readings in English;
conducted in English.
Lecture and discussion.
Requirements: class participation, a midterm, and a final paper.
NORTON
RLFR 312 Between the Two World Wars (Not offered 2000-2001)
The period from 1913 to 1939 was an adventurous time for the French novel. In this course, we will study
novels by Gide, Proust, Colette, Camus, Martin du Gard, Mauriac, Malraux, and Sartre. Although there is
Romance Languages
­ 314 ­
great diversity among these authors, they were all reacting to the aftermath of the First World War and the
breakdown of traditional French culture. Through the popular character of the rebellious adolescent, they
experimented with revolt against the stifling social order of Church and family. The real challenge of the
period, however, concerned not a break with the past or discoveries of new levels of consciousness and
freedom, but rather the mature acceptance of responsibility for the future and the articulation of fresh spiri-
tual and political visions. Conducted in French.
Requirements: several short papers, a longer final paper, and oral class presentations.
Prerequisite: any French literature course or permission of the instructor.
DUNN
RLFR 314(S) (formerly 401) Order and Adventure: Twentieth-Century French Poetry
A comprehensive study of the stylistic, aesthetic, and philosophical developments of modern French
poetry from 1900 to the late 1990s. Attention will be given to the influence of nineteenth century symbol-
ism, to the relation of poetry to painting and other plastic arts, to the effect of the machine age on poetic
style, to creations of surrealist imagination, to the influence of the two World Wars on poetic expression, to
experiments with language and image, to changing notions of the self, to representations of city (Paris) and
country, and to the intensity of faith or doubt among different poets regarding the power of poetry to signify
and represent the world. Readings will include poetry and poetic prose by Apollinaire, Breton, Eluard,
Desnos, Ponge, Bonnefoy, Jaccottet, Jabès, Réda, and Gaspar. Attention will also be given to the poetry of
women poets like Albiach, Zins, Chedid, Perrier, and Risset. In addition, readings of prose essays and art
criticism of certain poets will be assigned. Conducted in French.
Requirements: two hour exams and two 8-page papers.
Prerequisite: French 109 or 110 or permission of the instructor.
This course fulfills the requirement for the Senior Seminar.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W STAMELMAN
RLFR 408 Rites of Lust, Blood, Power, and Words: French Tragedy in the Age of Absolutism
(Not offered 2000-2001)
To read and understand French classical tragedy is to penetrate a rhetorical code that reduces myth and
history to certain powerful common denominators. Against a backdrop of absolutist notions of statecraft
Pierre Corneille and Jean Racine wrote plays that transcend their particular historical moment to uncover
deep, primal truths about the human psyche and its relation to the cosmos. This course will examine some
of the most profoundly troubling and challenging works of these two seventeenth-century playwrights in
order to reach a clearer understanding of why their resonance as literature came to be refracted through the
richest inflections of modern criticism: Goldmann and neo-Marxism, Barthes and the French New Criti-
cism, psychoanalysis, and structuralism. Among the works to be read are: Corneille's Le Cid, Horace, Cin-
na, and Polyeucte, and Racine's Athalie, Iphigénie, Phèdre, Andromaque, and Mithridate. Conducted in
French.
Requirements: class participation, two papers, an oral presentation, and a one-hour exam.
Prerequisite: French 109, 110, 112, or permission of instructor.
NORTON
RLFR W030 Honors Essay
RLFR 493(F)-W031-494(S) Senior Thesis
RLFR 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
RLFR 511(F) Intensive Grammar and Translation
An intensive grammar course for students interested either in developing or in improving their basic read-
ing skills in French. Emphasis will be on a general review of grammar and sentence structure as well as on
developing a wide range of vocabulary centered around art history. Conducted in English.
Evaluation will be based on participation, papers, a midterm, and a final exam.
For graduate students. Others by permission of the instructor.
Hour: TBA DESROSIERS
RLFR 512(S) Readings in French Art History and Criticism
An advanced translation course specializing in art history. Texts will be selected from fundamental works
of art history and criticism and from the specialized literature required in concurrent art seminars in the
graduate program in art history. Conducted in English.
Evaluation will be based on participation, papers, a midterm, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: French 511 or permission of instructor.
For graduate students. Others by permission of the instructor.
Hour: TBA DESROSIERS
ITALIAN
RLIT 101(F)-W088-102(S) Elementary Italian
This is a year-long course which offers a thorough introduction to basic Italian language skills with primary
emphasis on comprehension of the spoken language. Students interact with taped materials and submit
written compositions on a regular basis.
The class, which meets five hours a week, is conducted entirely in Italian.
Romance Languages
­ 315 ­
Evaluation will be based on chapter tests and a number of unannounced quizzes (50%), a final exam
(20%), completion of workbook and lab manual exercises (20%), and classroom attendance/participation
(10%).
Enrollment limited to 30.
Students registered for 101-102 are required to attend and pass the sustaining program during the winter
study period. Credit granted only if both semesters are taken.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF and 8:30-9:20 TR NICASTRO
SPANISH
The Spanish major consists of nine courses above the 103-104 level. These nine courses include 301,
any course 200 level or above, 401, and 402.
The major seeks to provide training in literary analysis and linguistic expression, as well as an appreci-
ation of Hispanic civilization, through the study of the major writers of the Spanish-speaking world.
Students majoring in Spanish may replace one of their Spanish electives either with a Linguistics course
or with one course in Latin-American Studies that is 200-level or higher.
Inasmuch as all courses in Spanish assume the active participation of each student in discussions con-
ducted in the foreign language, regular attendance at class meetings is expected.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN SPANISH
Two alternative routes are available to those who wish to apply for the degree with honors.
The first of these involves the writing of a senior thesis. Honors candidates are required to devote to their
theses two semesters of Independent Study (beyond the nine courses required for the major--and the win-
ter study period of their senior year (493-W031-494). The thesis will be written in Spanish and will usually
be in the range of from forty to sixty pages. Candidates are encouraged to submit thesis proposals in May
of their junior year. By the end of the first semester of the senior year, students will normally have finished
the research for the thesis. By the end of the winter study period, candidates will submit to the department a
completed first draft of their work. At this time, the student will make a presentation of his project at a
departmental colloquium. The thesis will be discussed and evaluated to determine whether or not the stu-
dent should continue in the honors program. The second semester of independent thesis work will be spent
revising and rewriting the thesis. The completed dissertation in its final form will be due at the end of April.
The second route is a group of three clearly related courses (offered by the Department of Romance
Languages or by other departments, such as History, Art, Philosophy, English, etc.), only one of which
may be counted in the nine courses comprising the major. One of the courses will be an Independent Study
(plus senior year WSP 030) in the spring of the senior year, at the end of which the student will write an
essay that synthesizes the content of the three related courses. Students may apply for this route by Novem-
ber 2 of the senior year.
In the case of both routes to the degree with honors, the department's recommendation for graduation
with honors will be based on the originality and thoroughness of the finished project.
THE CERTIFICATE IN SPANISH
The Certificate in Spanish Language and Culture consists of a sequence of seven courses for which the
student must earn a cumulative grade average of B or higher. In addition, the student must take the ETS
Comprehensive Proficiency Test and achieve a score of "Advanced" in the reading and listening portions.
The test will be administered by the department once a year during the month of April to all students desir-
ous of obtaining the Certificate. Those so interested should express their intent to the chair of the depart-
ment by March 1 or earlier.
For students with no prior Spanish background, the course sequence will consist of Spanish 101-102,
Spanish 103-104, and three courses in Spanish above the 104 level, with at least one of these courses at the
200 level or higher. If the student starts out the sequence at Spanish 103-104, in addition to the three
courses in Spanish beyond the 104 level (including a 200-level course or higher), two electives may be
taken in other departments. One elective should be in Spanish or Latin-American cultural history (art, liter-
ature, drama, music) and the other in Spanish or Latin-American intellectual, political, or social history.
Spanish 111, 112, or 208 can be counted for the elective requirement.
List of possible electives in other departments:
Anthropology 215 The Secrets of Ancient Peru: Archaeology of South America
Anthropology 216 Native Peoples of Latin America
Anthropology 217 Mesoamerican Civilizations
ArtH 200 Art of Mesoamerica
ArtH/EXPR 209/Anthropology 219 The Art and Archaeology of Maya Civilization: A Marriage
Made in Xibalba
Economics 226 Economic Development and Change in Latin America
History 242 (formerly 287) Latin-American from Conquest to Independence
History 243 (formerly 288) Modern Latin America, 1822 to the Present
Political Science 344 Rebels and Revolution in Latin America
Political Science 349T Cuba and the United States
Romance Languages
­ 316 ­
Other electives may likewise be considered as departments create new courses. However, students should
consult with the chair of Romance Languages before making any enrollment decisions.
PLACEMENT
A placement test in Spanish is administered at Williams at the opening of the fall semester. Incoming
first-year students who wish to register for any Spanish courses above the 101 level must take this test.
STUDY ABROAD
Spanish majors, as well as non-majors interested in further exposure to the language and the culture, are
strongly encouraged to include study in Spain or Latin America as part of their program at Williams.
Through its special ties with the Hamilton College Academic Year in Spain, the department offers a com-
prehensive linguistic and cultural experience in a Spanish-speaking environment, for periods either of a
semester or a year. Credit for up to two courses per semester overseas can be granted toward the Spanish
major. Students interested in study abroad should consult with a member of the department at their earliest
convenience.
RLSP 101(F)-W088-102(S) Elementary Spanish
This course focuses on grammar, elementary composition, practice in conversation, and reading of easy
modern prose. It is conducted by the intensive oral method.
The class meets five hours a week. In addition, as part of their preparation, students are required to spend
two half-hour periods every week in the Language Laboratory.
Evaluation will be based on participation, compositions, quizzes, and a final exam. Enrollment limited to
20. For students who have studied less than two years of Spanish in secondary school.
Students registered for 101-102 are required to attend and pass the sustaining program during the winter
study period. Credit granted only if both semesters are taken.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF and 8:55-9:45 TR First Semester: OVERSTREET
9:00-9:50 MWF and 8:55-9:45 TR Second Semester: ROUHI
RLSP 103(F)-104(S) Intermediate Spanish
This course is a continuation of Spanish 101-102. It focuses on the review of grammar and stresses the
spoken as well as the written tongue. Reading of literary selections of the modern period.
The class meets four hours a week. In addition, students are required to spend two half-hour periods every
week in the Language Laboratory.
Evaluation in both courses will be based on regularity of class participation, oral reports, frequent quizzes
and compositions, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Spanish 101-W-102 or two years of Spanish in secondary school.
Two sections. Each section limited to 20 students.
The two courses in this sequence normally constitute a year's program. A student may elect 104, only by
special permission of the department.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF, 11:00-11:50 MWF Conference: 2:10-3 W, 3:10-4 W
First Semester: AUSTIN, BELL-VILLADA
10:00-10:50 MWF, 11:00-11:50 MWF Conference: 2:10-3 W, 3:10-4 W
Second Semester: AUSTIN, OVERSTREET
RLSP 105(F) Advanced Composition and Conversation+
This course involves intensive practice in speaking and writing. Students are also expected to participate
actively in daily conversations based on selected short stories by Peninsular writers, write frequent com-
positions, plus perform regular exercises using the World Wide Web.
Evaluation will be based on regularity of class participation, frequent quizzes and compositions, and a final
exam.
Prerequisites: Spanish 103-104 or three years of Spanish in secondary school.
Two sections. Each section limited to 20 students.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF, 12:00-12:50 MWF Conference: 2:10-3 W, 3:10-4 W AUSTIN, ROUHI
RLSP 106 Advanced Composition and Conversation (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered
Spring 2002)+
This course may be taken separately or as a continuation of Spanish 105. Written and oral work will be
based on selected short stories by Latin-American writers. Weekly compositions, plus regular exercises in
the language laboratory.
Requirements: a weekly essay based on the stories read in class, written laboratory exercises, participation
in the grammatical and literary discussions, quizzes, a midterm, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Spanish 103-104 or three years of Spanish in secondary school.
BELL-VILLADA
RLSP 111(F) Spain and Its Cultures
In this course we will examine in detail five distinct moments in Spanish history and culture: Córdoba in
the Middle Ages, Madrid during the reign of Felipe II, Madrid during the Napoleonic occupation in the
early nineteenth century, Barcelona during the Civil War, and contemporary Spain. Each of these units will
include materials from several disciplines, such as history, literature, art and architecture. Students will read
works of poetry, theatre, narrative fiction and essay, as well as secondary texts that establish the historical,
cultural, social and political context of each epoch. Films, news reports, and a recent novel will constitute
Romance Languages
­ 317 ­
part of the course's unit on contemporary Spain. Conducted in Spanish.
Requirements: meaningful discussion in class that reflects students' engagement with the material, an oral
presentation, a short paper, a midterm and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Spanish 105 or permission of the instructor.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF OVERSTREET
RLSP 112(S) Latin-American Civilizations*
An introduction to the multiple elements constituting Latin-American culture. Class assignments include
readings from selected Latin-American essayists and screenings of classic films. Particular focus on the
conflict between local and foreign cultural traditions. Areas to be considered: Spanish Catholicism, the
influence of European liberalism and U.S. expansion, the Indian and African contribution, and the cultural
impact of social revolution in Mexico and Cuba. Conducted in Spanish.
Requirements: two essays on assigned topics, active discussion of the ideas and the facts presented in class,
a midterm, and a final.
Prerequisites: Spanish 105 or permission of the instructor.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR BELL-VILLADA
RLSP 201 Spanish Romanticism and Realism (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered Spring
2002)
Although Spain is commonly viewed as a romantic country, some specialists doubt the very existence of
Spanish Romanticism. This paradox can be explained by the observation that romantic sensibility and val-
ues have been handed down through the centuries in Spain, permeating its literature from theCelestina and
Golden Age drama on through the time of the actual definition of the movement in the mid-nineteenth
century, up to the Generation of 1898, the Generation of 1927 and, finally, neoromantic postmodern narra-
tive. Similarly, realism can be defined as a mode of representation of reality and its variations depending on
how reality is conceived and defined. Thus, in this course we will study Romanticism and Realism not
only as major literary trends of the nineteenth century but also as "small r" romanticism and realism; re-
spectively a worldview and a technique of representation, that are manifested in the art of various times.
We will discuss in depth issues such as: (1) the nature of romantic rebellion, (2) how to recognize a roman-
tic hero, (3) the sublime and the romantic struggle with language, (4) marginality and otherness as bases of
romantic sensibility, (5) romantic dreams and their dangers, (6) the Realists' vision of bourgeois society,
and, (7) realism and the truth. Readings will include novels, short stories, poetry and drama by Larra, Du-
que de Rivas, Espronceda, Zorrilla, Rosalía de Castro, Béquer, Galdós, Clarín, Pardo Bazán, Lorca, Cernu-
da, and José María Merino.
Requirements: active participation in class discussion, two papers, two oral presentations, and final exam.
Prerequisite: Spanish 105 or higher.
RLSP 202(S) The Generation of 1898
This is a study of how selected writers confronted the so-called "problema de España" at the turn of the
twentieth century. We will study works of poetry, fiction and essay by authors such as Unamuno, Macha-
do, Azorín, Baroja, Maetzu, and Ortega y Gasset among others, focusing on the ways in which these artists
and intellectuals saw their role in the regeneration of decadent Spain. Conducted in Spanish.
Requirements: meaningful participation on class discussion which reflects students' engagement with the
material, two papers, and an exam.
Prerequisite: Spanish 105 or higher.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR OVERSTREET
RLSP 203 Major Latin-American Authors: 1880 to the Present (Not offered 2000-2001; to be
offered Fall 2001)*+
A survey of some of the leading imaginative writers of Hispanic America. Readings will begin with the
modernista poets and go on to include fiction of Mexico by Rulfo, a wide sampling of verse by Pablo
Neruda, and narratives of the "Boom" period by authors such as Borges, Cortázar, and García Márquez.
Conducted in Spanish.
Prerequisite: Spanish 105 or higher.
BELL-VILLADA
RLSP 205(F) The Latin-American Novel in Translation (Same as Literary Studies 215)*
A course specifically designed to enable students who have no knowledge of Spanish to read and discover
those Latin-American authors who, in the twentieth century, have attracted world-wide attention. Among
the texts to be discussed: Borges, Labyrinths; Cortázar, Blow-up and Hopscotch; lesser works by Fuentes
and Puig; and by Nobel Prize-winner Gabriel García Márquez, One Hundred Years of Solitude.
Requirements: class participation, two brief papers, a midterm, and a final exam.
Does not carry credit for the Spanish major.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR BELL-VILLADA
RLSP 208 The Spanish Civil War in Literature and Film (Not offered 2000-2001; to be
offered Spring 2002)
The Spanish Civil War (1936-39) has generated a vast bibliography and filmography that reflects widely
antagonistic interpretations. The ideals and passions of this war have not subsided, and indeed have been
recreated and relived time and again in art and literature. On a world level it was the first clear clash be-
Romance Languages
­ 318 ­
tween democracy and totalitarianism. From the Spanish perspective, it remains the most important single
event in understanding modern Spain. The course will begin with a historical introduction to the origins,
development, and outcome of the war, then concentrate on the poetic and personal accounts of mostly
Spanish authors, as reflected in poetry, short fiction, novels, and films. Readings by Ayala, Sénder, Aub,
Andújar, Goytisolo, Matute, Neruda, Alberti, Machado, and others. Classic and contemporary films, as
well as documentaries, will be shown each week. Conducted in Spanish.
Evaluation will be based on student participation, an oral report, two papers, and exams.
Prerequisite: Spanish 111 or permission of instructor.
RLSP 211 Introduction To Spanish Literature: From The Middle Ages To The Golden Age
(Not offered 2000-2001)
This course will introduce the student to some of the major works of Spanish literature from its beginnings
through the Golden Age. We will study the historical context in which the works were written as well as the
literary history of the periods in question. Students will learn methods of textual analysis through readings
of relevant literary criticism. Readings will include epic and lyric poems, a picaresque novel, several addi-
tional prose selections, and two plays. Conducted in Spanish.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, short paper assignments, and midsemester and final exams.
Prerequisite: Spanish 105 or permission of instructor.
ROUHI
RLSP 213 Women Writers in Contemporary Spain (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered
Fall 2002)
This course will analyze the most representative novels written by women in Spain's recent past. Special
attention will be paid to the ways in which the authors express in their own words their modern day prob-
lems, their gender anxieties, their role within society, and their social and political activism. Readings from
works by Rodoreda, Montero, Martín Gaite, Tusquets, Roig, Puértolas and Moix. Conducted in Spanish.
Requirements: two oral presentations, two short papers (6 pages) and a final exam. Course grade will be
based on active participation.
Prerequisite: Spanish 105 or higher.
TBA
RLSP 217(F) Love in the Spanish Golden Age
The principal focus of this course is the Spanish "comedia" of the seventeenth century (with supplemental
readings from prose and poetry) to provide us with a dynamic and critical understanding of the theme of
love as constructed by the greatest dramatists and authors of the period. Works by Lope de Vega, Tirso de
Molina, Calderón, Cervantes, San Juan de la Cruz, and others will show us how the theme was treated
from diverse perspectives, and how it related to key concepts such as honor, religion, and artistic creativity.
Conducted in Spanish.
Evaluation will be based on meaningful participation, short written assignments, and two 5- to 7-page pa-
pers.
Prerequisite: Spanish 105 or permission of instructor.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR ROUHI
RLSP 301(S) Cervantes's Don Quijote+
This course offers the opportunity for a reading of Europe's first modern novel. We will study the text
closely, complementing our reading with detailed references to the literary and social background that will
help us decipher the many genres and registers engaged by Don Quijote. In addition, we will consider the
principal studies dealing with this work, and analyze the novel from several perspectives suggested by
critics. Conducted in Spanish.
Evaluation will be based on meaningful class participation, short written assignments, a midterm exam,
and a final research paper.
Prerequisite: any 200-level course.
(This course is part of the Critical Reasoning and Analytical Skills initiative.)
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR ROUHI
RLSP 306T Latino Writing: Literature by U.S. Hispanics (Not offered 2000-2001; to be
offered Spring 2003)*+
Writing by U.S. Hispanics constitutes a new voice in American letters. In this tutorial, we will read and
discuss work by U.S. Latinos and examine the social backgrounds to their texts. The experiences of im-
migration and assimilation, and the specific complexities of being both Hispanic and North American will
be addressed. Authors to be studied: José Antonio Villarreal, Tomás Rivera, Richard Rodríguez, Sandra
Cisneros, Rudolfo Anaya, Piri Thomas, Edward Rivera, Oscar Hijuelos, Cristina García, and historical
texts by Carey McWilliams, and Rodolfo Acuña. Given the absence of a critical consensus around these
recent titles, our task is to gain some sense of their common traits as a tradition, and place them within the
larger body of literature of the Americas and the world.
The tutorial will examine one work or set of authors per week. A student will bring, written out in full, an
oral presentation focusing on the artistic features and sociocultural content of the assigned reading. Ques-
tioning of the presenter, on the part of the second tutee and the tutor, will follow. The course is designed to
accommodate both Spanish and English speaking students. A student able to read and speak Spanish will
Romance Languages, Russian
­ 319 ­
be paired with another student of similar proficiency. Students who neither read nor speak Spanish will be
paired together.
Requirements: five short oral presentations/papers (about 20-25 minutes) and a final longer one (about
40-45 minutes).
Prerequisite: some previous course work in any literature beyond the 100 level is helpful. Students select-
ing the Spanish option for credit toward the Spanish major must have taken at least one 200-level Spanish
course or seek permission of the tutor.
BELL-VILLADA
RLSP 401(F) Studies in Spanish Literature
This is a variable topics course. For 2000-2001, the topic will be "Novel Identities: History and Memory in
the Spanish Novel Since 1942." Primary texts will include La familia de Pascual Duarte, La Plaza del
Diamante, Últimas tardes con Teresa, Tiempo de silencio, Señas de identidad, y El cuarto de atrás. In this
seminar, we will read these novels in light of the ways in which fictional identities are constructed and
represented, and how these identities are related to a sense of social or historical place, or to a lack of such a
sense of belonging. We will read the texts closely and use contemporary critical analyses to relate the
works to their literary and historical background. Conducted in Spanish.
Requirements: meaningful discussion in class that reflects students' engagement with the material, an oral
presentation, several short papers and one final research paper.
Prerequisite: any 300-level course or permission of the instructor.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR OVERSTREET
RLSP 402(S) Studies in Modern Latin-American Literature*+
This is a variable topics course. For 2000-2001, the topic will be "Power, Repression, and Dictatorship in
the Latin-American Novel." Military dictatorship is among the most crucial factors in Latin-American so-
ciety and history, and some of the continent's leading novelists have taken it upon themselves to depict the
experience in their work. In this course we will examine both the fact of dictatorship itself and the diverse
representation thereof in Spanish-American fiction. Novels by García Márquez, Carpentier, Fuentes, Po-
niatowska, and Tomás Eloy Martínez will be closely studied. Students will also read Absalom! Absalom!
by Faulkner, whose influence on Latin-American authors' techniques of representation has been decisive
and profound. Conducted in Spanish.
Requirements: three papers based on the readings, one oral report on the life and personality of a given
dictator, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: any 300-level course of two 200-level courses or permission of the instructor.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR BELL-VILLADA
RLSP W030 Honors Essay
RLSP 493(F)-W031-494(S) Senior Thesis
RLSP 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
RUSSIAN (Div. I)
Chair, Professor GAIL M. NEWMAN
Professor: GOLDSTEIN. Assistant Professor: CASSIDAY. Visiting Lecturer: WELSH. Teaching
Associate: SOKOLOVA.
LANGUAGE STUDY
The department provides language instruction to enable the student to acquire all four linguistic skills:
understanding, speaking, reading, and writing. Russian 101-W088-102 covers the basics of Russian gram-
mar. Russian 103 and 104 offer additional instruction in grammar and provide extensive practice in reading
and conversation. Russian 201 and 202 aim to develop facility in speaking, writing, and reading.
STUDY ABROAD
The department strongly encourages students desiring to attain fluency in Russian to spend a semester
or year studying in Russia or one of the former Soviet republics. Students generally apply to one of several
approved foreign study programs. Russian 104 or the equivalent and junior standing are normally prereq-
uisite for study abroad.
LITERATURE AND CULTURE IN TRANSLATION
The department regularly offers courses on Russian literature and culture in English for those students
who have little or no knowledge of Russian, but who wish to become acquainted with the major achieve-
ments in Russian literary and cultural history.
THE CERTIFICATE IN RUSSIAN
To enhance a student's educational and professional profiles, the Certificate in Russian offers a useful
tool for using the language in a wide variety of disciplines. The sequence of language and culture courses is
designed to supplement a student's major at Williams by enabling the student to expand his or her knowl-
edge in a related field.
Russian
­ 320 ­
The course of study for the certificate gives credit for Russian 101 and 102, which do not count toward
the major. Students who enter Williams with previous training in Russian may substitute more advanced
courses for the 100- and 200-level courses; they can also be exempted from up to two of the required
courses. Thus, in order to earn a certificate a student must take no fewer than five courses (including three
language courses) after enrolling at Williams.
Students must receive a minimum grade of B in each course taken in the sequence. In addition, they
must receive a score of at least 85% on a standardized language proficiency test administered by the de-
partment.
Required Courses
101
102
103
104
201
Electives
--at least one course on Russian cultural history
--at least one course on Russian intellectual, political, or social history, or post-Soviet economics
MAJORS
The department supports two distinct majors: Russian Literature and Russian Studies.
Russian Literature
The Russian Literature major consists of ten courses. Students selecting this major should usually have
completed Russian 202 or the equivalent by the end of the junior year. Majors will normally be expected to
take a 400-level Russian course in their senior year, even if they have previously taken another 400-level
class.
Required Courses
Russian 103, 104 Intermediate Russian
Russian 201, 202 Advanced Russian
Russian 402 Senior Seminar
Electives
Five other courses. At least two must focus on topics in Russian literature. One may be a relevant course
offered in other departments and programs such as Literary Studies, History, and Music.
Russian Literature majors may receive major credit for up to four courses taken during study abroad.
Russian Studies
Russian Studies offers students an interdisciplinary approach to the intellectual and cultural history of
Russia and the former Soviet republics. Students complete the major by combining courses in Russian
language and literature with courses in history, political science, music, economics, and art.
The Russian Studies major consists of ten courses. Students selecting the major must normally complete
Russian 202 or the equivalent by the end of the junior year. Majors will normally be expected to take the
400-level seminar offered in their senior year, even if they have previously taken another version.
Required Courses
Russian 103, 104 Intermediate Russian, or the equivalent
Russian 201, 202 Advanced Russian
Russian 402 Senior Seminar
Electives
Five other courses drawn from Russian offerings above 202 and offerings in other departments chosen
in consultation with the chair of the Russian Department. The electives must include courses from at least
two departments other than Russian. Examples of appropriate courses in other departments are:
History 240 (formerly 232) Muscovy and the Russian Empire
History 241 (formerly 233) The Rise of the Soviet Union
Music 128 Masters of Russian and Soviet Music
Russian Studies majors may receive major credit for as many as four courses taken during study abroad.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN RUSSIAN
At the beginning of the second semester of the senior year, students may nominate themselves to candi-
dacy for the degree with honors. By the end of the junior year at the latest, however, they will have estab-
lished in consultation with the department their qualifications for embarking on the project, the pattern of
study to be followed, and the standards of performance.
Students earn a degree with honors by submitting a senior thesis (493- W031-494) of honors quality.
RUSS 101(F)-W088-102(S) Elementary Russian
An introduction to contemporary standard Russian, this course provides opportunities to acquire basic pro-
ficiency in all four language skills: listening comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing, through inten-
sive use of authentic written materials and a strong emphasis on the spoken word in all class activities.
Russian
­ 321 ­
Greater emphasis is placed on writing in the second semester.
The class meets five hours a week. Regular assignments requiring work in the language lab are given.
For students who have studied Russian in secondary school, consultation with the instructor is required
before registering for any Russian language course in the sequence 101 through 202.
Requirements: active class participation, completion of all written and lab assignments, quizzes, tests, and
a final exam.
Credit granted only if both semesters are taken. Students electing this course are required to attend and pass
the sustaining program in the winter study period.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF and 8:30-9:45 TR First Semester: WELSH
9:00-9:50 MWF and 8:30-9:45 TR Second Semester: GOLDSTEIN
RUSS 103(F), 104(S) Intermediate Russian
A continuation of Elementary Russian 101-102, this course seeks to develop conversation, comprehen-
sion, and composition skills through the use of a variety of materials that treat topics from Russian and
Soviet culture, current events, and daily life. Selected readings from Russian short stories are included, as
are the review and expansion of grammar topics covered in 101-102.
The class meets four hours a week with the fourth hour a conversation conference section, time to be ar-
ranged.
Requirements: active class participation, completion of all written and lab assignments, quizzes, and a final
exam.
Prerequisite for 103: Russian 101-102 or permission of instructor.
Prerequisite for 104: Russian 103 or permission of instructor.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF First Semester: GOLDSTEIN
10:00-10:50 MWF Second Semester: WELSH
RUSS 201, 202 Advanced Russian (Not offered 2000-2001)
This course focuses on vocabulary building and intensive development of reading, spoken, and written
skills. Conversation is not so much emphasized as is the ability to present and defend a point of view. A
wide variety of literary and journalistic texts will be read and discussed. Russian television news and films
will also be viewed.
The class meets four hours a week with the fourth hour a conversation conference section, time to be ar-
ranged.
Requirements: active class participation, completion of all written assignments, quizzes, several short es-
says, and a final exam.
Prerequisite for 201: Russian 104 or permission of instructor.
Prerequisite for 202: Russian 201 or permission of instructor.
Students considering study in Russia are strongly advised to complete these courses before embarking on
such study.
RUSS 203 Nineteenth-Century Russian Literature in Translation (Not offered 2000-2001)
Literature provided the primary medium for political, philosophical, and religious debate in nineteenth-
century Russia. In this course, we will examine the place of literature, and especially of the novel, in Rus-
sian society and how the literary process shaped writers, readers, and texts. By tracing the evolution of the
novel in Russia during the nineteenth century, we will develop an understanding of Russian culture and its
vital contribution to world literature. Readings by Karamzin, Pushkin, Lermontov, Gogol, Turgenev, Dos-
toevsky, Tolstoy, and Chekhov. All readings will be in English.
As part of the Critical Reasoning and Analytical Skills initiative, this course will focus on developing stu-
dents' ability to analyze literature objectively and to interpret literature in both written and oral argumenta-
tion.
Requirements: active class participation, frequent short papers, class presentations, and a final research
project.
No prerequisites. Enrollment is limited to 20.
(This course is part of the Critical Reasoning and Analytical Skills initiative.)
CASSIDAY
RUSS 204(S) Bolshevism, Glasnost, and Beyond: Twentieth-Century Russian Literature in
Translation
At the close of the twentieth century, we are perfectly positioned to assess how the revolutionary changes
that have swept over Russia during the last hundred years are reflected in the country's literature. In this
course, we will read a variety of literary genres from several historical periods, placing emphasis on the
Russian revolutions at the beginning and end of the twentieth century and their impact on the country's
literature. Special attention will be paid to the pre-Revolutionary avant-garde, the emergence and decline of
Soviet literature, and the unique contributions of women to the literary canon of Russia. Readings by Bul-
gakov, Pasternak,
Nabokov, Solzhenitsyn, and others. Knowledge of Russian is not required.
All readings will be in English.
Requirements: active class participation, three short papers, and a final exam or research paper.
No prerequisites.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR CASSIDAY
Russian
­ 322 ­
RUSS 206(S) Topics in Russian Culture: Feasting and Fasting in Russian History
This course will use the methodology of food history to explore the broader historical, economic, and artis-
tic conditions that gave rise to Russian culture. We will examine culinary practice as well as the social
context of cooking and eating in Russia. In order to elucidate the important interplay between culture and
cuisine, we will discuss such issues as the domestic roles of women and serfs, the etiquette of the table, the
role of drinking and temperance movements, and the importance of feasts and fasts in the Russian Ortho-
dox Church calendar. Short stories, memoirs, and cookery books will provide insight into class and gender
differences, cooking techniques, and the specific tastes that characterize Russian cuisine. This class will
present Russian culture from a predominantly domestic point of view that originates from the wooden
spoon as much as from the scepter. Knowledge of Russian is not required.
Requirements: several short written assignments and class presentations and a final project involving re-
search in some aspect of Russian culinary history and participation in a communal feast.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 50.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR GOLDSTEIN
RUSS 208(F) History of Russian Art (Same as ArtH 266)
This course offers a survey of Russian art from the first to the third millennia, from religious icons to com-
mercial ones. We will look at early broadsides, society portraits, landscapes, and genre paintings, as well as
a wide range of Russian handicrafts. Special emphasis will be placed on the halcyon period from 1910 to
1930, when Russian Cubo-Futurists, Suprematists, and Constructivists profoundly influenced the develop-
ment of art throughout the Western world. After examining the Socialist Realism of the Stalin era, we will
progress through Moscow conceptualism to the current appropriation of Western style into a post-Soviet
aesthetic.
Requirements: active class participation, two 3- to 5-page papers, one class presentation, and a final 10-15
page paper or final exam.
No prerequisites.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF GOLDSTEIN
RUSS 209 Terrible Ivans, Great Catherines, and New Russians: 1000 Years of Russian
Culture (Not offered 2000-2001)
This course provides an introduction to Russian culture and civilization by examining the country's rich
art, music, film, literature, and other media. We will focus on a number of issues of particular importance in
Russia today and explore their origins and evolution in the country's 1000-year history. Topics will include
Russia's relationship to the West, the special role of literature in Russia, the Russia mafia, dictatorship and
revolution, and the changing status of women in Russian society. Students will be required to make weekly
postings on the course's website that will construct a virtual Russia on the internet. All works will be read in
translation.
Requirements: active class participation, weekly website postings, two short papers, and a final research
project.
No prerequisites.
CASSIDAY
RUSS 303(F) Russia in Revolution
Revolution has provided one of the key impulses behind literary and cultural movements of the twentieth
century around the world, and nowhere more so than in Russia. This course will examine the emergence
and development of revolutionary culture in Russia during the early twentieth century. We will study a
variety of materials, including history, literature, journalism, theater, and film, in an attempt to understand
the many revolutions that shaped Russia's destiny from approximately 1900-1930. We will begin the se-
mester with the Revolution of 1905 ("Bloody Sunday") and devote significant attention to the two revolu-
tions of 1917 (in February and October). In addition, we will examine the so-called Stalin revolution of the
late 1920s and end the semester with a historical reassessment of these revolutions after the fall of the So-
viet Union. Primary course readings will be in Russian; some background reading will be in English. Class
sessions will be conducted entirely in Russian.
Requirements: active class participation, regular short written assignments, regular class presentations, a
final research project.
Prerequisites: Russian 202 or the permission of the instructor.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF CASSIDAY
RUSS 304 Bolshevism, Glasnost, and Beyond: Twentieth-Century Russian Literature in
Translation (Not offered 2000-2001)
For those who wish to take Russian 204 for credit toward a Russian major or Certificate in Russian. Stu-
dents must fulfill the requirements for Russian 204 and, in addition, attend a weekly, one-hour discussion
section conducted in Russian, that will be based on selections from the course syllabus to be read in Rus-
sian.
Requirements: active class participation, three in-class presentations based on student's short papers.
Prerequisite: Russian 201 or permission of instructor.
CASSIDAY
Russian, Science and Technology Studies
­ 323 ­
RUSS 305(F) Dostoevsky and His Age
This course will examine the life and works of Fyodor Dostoevskii in the context of Western intellectual
history. Readings will include
Dostoevskii's highly influential novella, Notes from Underground, his first major novel, Crime and Pun-
ishment, his masterpiece, The Brother Karamazov, and several shorter works. Over the course of the se-
mester, we will talk
about Dostoevskii's age and society, examining the larger trends and problems reflected in his novels: the
slums of St. Petersburg with their prostitutes, beggars, and moneylenders; widespread demands for social
and political reform; religious and philosophical debate. All readings will be in English.
Requirements: active class participation, three short papers, and a final
research project.
No prerequisites.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR CASSIDAY
RUSS 306 Tolstoy and His Age (Not offered 2000-2001)
This course will examine the life and works of Lev Tolstoy in the context of Western intellectual history.
Readings will include Tolstoy's two major novels,War and Peace and Anna Karenina, as well as a number
of shorter works such as The Kreutzer Sonata and The Death of Ivan Ilych. We will also examine some of
Tolstoy's aesthetic and didactic works. Ultimately, we will develop an understanding of the writer's envi-
ronment and his impact on the numerous social movements calling for change in the second half of the
nineteenth century. All readings will be in English.
Requirements: active class participation, two short papers, and a final research project.
No prerequisites.
CASSIDAY
RUSS 402(S) Senior Seminar: Petersburg: Site and Symbol of Cultural Transformation
Petersburg was the flashpoint of revolution in early twentieth-century Russia. Virtually from the
time Peter the Great wrenched the city from the northern swamp three hundred years ago, Peters-
burg has served as a cultural shorthand for many of the tensions in Russian society. In this seminar,
we will identify how Russian writers and artists have engaged with the city during the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries. We will start with excerpts from Bely's Petersburg and with the city's
foundation myth, establishing a set of questions about the city's role in Russian culture that will
guide our inquiry throughout the semester. We will consider Petersburg as a cultural and artistic foil
to Moscow, and will spend time studying the architectural and semiotic contrasts between the two
cities. The first half of the semester will focus on literature; the second half will focus on music,
film, and other arts according to student interest. Primary materials will include works by Pushkin,
Gogol, Dostoevsky, Blok, Bely, Mandelshtam, Brodsky, Eisenstein, Pudovkin, Mamin, Shostako-
vich. Students will also monitor the current Russian press for articles relevant to the course topic.
Primary course readings will be in Russian, with some background readings in English. Classes will
be conducted entirely in Russian.
Requirements: active class participation, frequent short written assignments, in-class presenta-
tions, and a final research project.
Prerequisites: Russian 202 or the permission of the instructor.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF WELSH
RUSS 493(F)-W031-494(S) Senior Thesis
RUSS 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES (Div. II)
Chair, Professor DONALD deB. BEAVER
Advisory Committee: Professors: D. BEAVER, DETHIER, L. KAPLAN. Associate Professor:
ALTSCHULER.
Science and Technology Studies (SCST) is an interdisciplinary program concerned with science and
technology and their relationship to society. In addition to being concerned with the historical development
and a philosophical understanding of the ideas and institutions of science and technology; Science and
Technology Studies also examines their ethical, economic, social, and political implications.
The role that science and technology have played in shaping modern industrial societies is generally
acknowledged, but few members of those societies, including scientists and engineers, possess any under-
standing of how that process has occurred or much knowledge of the complex technical and social interac-
tions that direct change in either science or society. The Science and Technology Studies Program is in-
tended to help create a coherent course of study for students interested in these questions by providing a
broad range of perspectives. At the present time courses are offered which examine the history or philoso-
phy of science and technology, the sociology and psychology of science, the economics of research and
development and technological change, science and public policy, technology assessment, technology and
the environment, scientometrics, and ethical-value issues.
Science and Technology Studies
­ 324 ­
To complete the requirements of the program, students must complete six courses. The introductory
course and senior seminar are required and three elective courses are chosen from the list of designated
electives. Students may choose to concentrate their electives in a single area such as technology, American
studies, philosophy, history of science, economics, environment, current science, or current technology, but
are encouraged to take at least one elective in history, history of science, or philosophy. The sixth course
necessary to complete the program is one semester of laboratory or field science in additiontotheCollege's
three-course science requirement. Other science courses of particular interest include Chemistry 110 and
Biology 134.
The program is administered by a chair and an advisory committee of faculty who teach in the program.
Students who wish to enroll normally register with the chair by the fall of their junior year.
SCST 101(F) Science, Technology, and Human Values (Same as History of Science 101)
A study of the natures and roles of science and technology in today's society, and of the problems which
technical advances pose for human values. An introduction to science technology studies. Topics include:
scientific creativity, the Two Cultures, the norms and values of science, the Manhattan Project and Big
Science, the ethics and social responsibility of science, appropriate technology, technology assessment, and
various problems which spring from dependencies engendered by living in a technological society, e.g.,
computers and privacy, automation and dehumanization, biomedical engineering.
Requirements: two or three short exercises, two short papers (3-5 pages and 5-10 pages), and a final exam.
Satisfies one semester of Division II requirement.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF D. BEAVER
SCST 401(F) Senior Seminar: Critical Perspectives on Science and Technology
A research-oriented course designed to give students direct experience in evaluating and assessing scientif-
ic and technological issues. Students initially study particular techniques and methodologies by employing
a case study approach. They then apply these methods to a major research project. Students may choose
topics from fields such as biotechnology, computers, biomedical engineering, energy, and other resource
development. Students will apply their background of historical, philosophical, and technological perspec-
tives in carrying out their study.
Requirements: research paper or project.
Satisfies one semester of Division II requirement.
Hour: TBA D. BEAVER
Elective Courses
ANSO 320 Health and Illness in Cross-Cultural Perspective
ArtH 304/Environmental Studies 324 American Transport History (Deleted 2000-2001)
Biology 132 Human Biology and Social Issues
Biology/Environmental Studies 134 The Tropics: Biology and Social Issues
Chemistry 113 Chemistry and Crime: From Sherlock Holmes to Modern Forensic Science
Economics 225 Economics of Health and Health Care
Economics 515/Environmental Studies 377 Environmental Policy and Natural Resource Manage-
ment
Environmental Studies 307/Political Science 317 Environmental Law
Environmental Studies 402 The Environment, the Individual, and Society
Environmental Studies/American Studies 405 Automobiles and American Civilization
History of Science 216 Gender, Science, and Technology
History of Science 240 Technology and Science in American Culture
History of Science 305 Technology and Culture
Music 223T Music Technology for Musicians
Philosophy 209 Philosophy of Science
Philosophy 210 Philosophy of Medicine
Courses of Related Interest
ANSO 205 Ways of Knowing
Anthropology 102/Environmental Studies 106 Human Evolution: Down from the Trees, Out to the
Stars
Anthropology/Environmental Studies 209 Human Ecology
Anthropology 253 Neanderthals: Gods or Monsters? (Deleted 2000-2001)
ArtH/Environmental Studies 201 American Landscape History
ArtH 257 Architecture 1700-1900
ArtH 306/Environmental Studies 326 North-American Dwellings
Environmental Studies 302 Environmental Planning and Analysis Workshop
Environmental Studies/ArtH 303 Countryside Planning (Deleted 2000-2001)
Geosciences/Environmental Studies 103 Environmental Geology and the Earth's Surface
History/History of Science 336 Magic and Science in the Middle Ages (Deleted 2000-2001)
History 475 (formerly 356) Modern Warfare and Military Leadership
History of Science 224 Scientific Revolutions: 1543-1927
History of Science 320/History 293 History of Medicine
Mathematics 381 History of Mathematics
Physics 100 Physics of Everyday Life
­ 325 ­
SOCIOLOGY (Div.II)--see ANTHROPOLOGY ANDSOCIOLOGY
THEATRE (Div. I)
Chair, Professor DAVID EPPEL
Professors: BUCKY, EPPEL. Assistant Professors: BEAN**, S. HAMILTON. Visiting Assistant
Professor: LEPECKI. Lecturers: BROTHERS, CATALANO.
As a reflection of the theatre's historical relationship to literature and the arts, stage production is studied
in the context of the literary and artistic movements which have informed theatrical endeavor. The major in
Theatre emphasizes the collaborative nature of the discipline by drawing upon courses offered by faculty
of the Language, Literature, Music, and Art Departments. Although students will be equipped to proceed
to graduate and professional schools in theatre, the major is primarily directed toward those interested in
studying the theatre as an artistic phenomenon and as an interpretive tool. Because a deep understanding of
theatre requires training and experience with the synthesis on stage, the major includes curricular study of
production and performance, as well as continued participation in departmental stage production.
Williamstheatre, the production arm of the Department of Theatre, operates under the supervision of the
departmental faculty. Major departmental productions as well as laboratory and experimental productions
of all kinds are mounted on both the MainStage of the Adams Memorial Theatre, and the DownStage
Theatre. Participation in acting or technical work is open to all members of the Williams College commu-
nity. Students majoring in Theatre will be asked to consult regularly with departmental advisors in devising
the sequence of courses and production participation that will constitute their major.
The course numbering system for the Department of Theatre follows the numbering system of the Col-
lege as a whole with two exceptions. Theatre 101, Plays, Directors, Theories, and Theatre 102, Introduc-
tion to Technical Theatre, are limited in their enrollment to first-year students and sophomores except in
special cases by permission of the instructor. The reason for this departure is to keep these courses to a
manageable size so that they can continue in their present format as both lecture and laboratory.
MAJOR
Theatre 101 Plays, Directors, Theories
Theatre 102 Introduction to Technical Theatre
Theatre 201 The Design Response
Theatre 203 Interpretation and Performance I
Theatre 301 Junior Seminar in Dramaturgy
Theatre 401 Seminar for Senior Majors
and
One course from Theatre 311-321 Studies in Dramatic Literature
and
Two courses from:
Theatre 204 Interpretation and Performance II
Theatre 210 Multicultural Performance
Theatre 211 Topics in African-American Performance: Theatre, Film, and Dance of the Harlem Re-
naissance
Theatre 213T Paul Robeson: Visible Man
Theatre 302 Scenic Design
Theatre 303 Stage Lighting
Theatre 305 Costume Design
Theatre 306 Advanced Acting
Theatre 307 Stage Direction
Theatre 308 Directing Workshop
Theatre 322T Performance Criticism
Theatre 323 Theatre of Images
Theatre 324 Theatre for the Ear: Telling Stories Through Sound
Theatre 397, 398 Independent Study
The department strongly recommends that students elect additional collateral courses in dramatic litera-
ture taught by the English and modern language departments, and courses in opera taught by the Music
Department. Students with an interest in theatre design should particularly elect Art Studio courses in
drawing.
Production requirement for the major: All majors in Theatre are required to participate in a minimum of
eight productions in addition to the laboratory requirement for Theatre 102. Participation in at least three of
the eight must be in technical production, and one must be in stage management. Assignment to produc-
tions is normally made in consultation with the department.
Theatre majors are strongly urged to include dance and fencing in fulfilling their Physical Education
requirements.
Theatre
­ 326 ­
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN THEATRE
The department will consider students for the honors degree who have shown exemplary achievement
in their academic endeavors as well as in their activities in theatrical productions.
Students who intend to apply for the degree with honors must present an oral, preliminary proposal to
the Honors Committee of the Theatre Department by the middle of October in their junior year. This pre-
sentation should be accompanied by a proposal for a specific course cluster, which would form part of the
honors process, and would consist of: two elective courses outside the Theatre Department, clearly related
to the execution of a thesis or a project in directing, performance, design, or writing for the theatre, and
completion of the project in Theatre 491 or 492 or the thesis in Theatre 493 or 494. A winter study project
(W030 or W031 may be taken to augment the work completed in one of these Theatre courses, but it is not
required. Each honors project will be assessed by the Theatre Department Honors Committee, and over-
seen by one of its members.
Courses elected in fulfillment of the honors program are not applicable to the normal major requirement.
THEA 100(F) Introduction to Theatre
This is a survey course, open to all students. It does not form part of the Theatre major, but can serve as
prerequisite for certain upper level theatre courses. The course will look at dramatic texts in terms of their
production potential and try to understand the concept "from the page to the stage." We will read ten to
twelve plays taken from various periods and cultures, and "see" them on the stages of your imaginations.
There will be a practical element to the course--a Wednesday lab during which students will work in
groups on various theatrical assignments. In addition, there will be some acting (you do not have to be an
actor or even want to be an actor to take this course), some directing, some designing, all at the basic level.
Students will be assessed on their level of participation, their attendance in class, and their collaboration
within smaller groups. There will be two 2-page papers on responses to the productions seen at the AMT
during the semester, and a final assignment--either practical or paper.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR and 1:10-3:50 W EPPEL
THEA 101(F) Plays, Directors, Theories
This course will survey major steps in the history of Western drama, from ancient Greek to contemporary
American theatre. It will be structured around close readings of key plays: Sophocles' Oedipus, Shake-
speare's Hamlet, Ibsen's A Doll House, Chekhov's The Seagull, Beckett's Waiting for Godot, Anna De-
veare Smith's Fires in the Mirror, among others. We will contextualize each play within its historical and
political context and explore the diversity of directorial, dramaturgical and acting techniques inspired by
them in the past and present. We will also view groundbreaking stagings of some of the plays read in class.
By combining close textual reading with historical background, and dramaturgical analysis with an explo-
ration of staging techniques, we will assess the ways by which Western drama built its tradition around
seven major ideas: "Catharsis," "Mimesis," "Passion," "Actor as Machine," "Actor as Psychologist," "The
Epic," and "Performance."
Lecture/discussion format.
Required for the Theatre major, and is highly recommended for all potential Theatre majors entering in
2000-01, as well as for students who have a strong interest and some background in theatre history, staging
and/or acting.
Evaluation will be strongly based on class participation. Students are required to present short reading re-
ports every class and to conduct themselves in the classroom as in a seminar situation. There will be a final
exam.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR LEPECKI
THEA 102(S) Introduction to Technical Theatre
As an overview of performance spaces, play technologies, and production, the course will examine how
and where plays are performed, produced, and designed. Students will attend lectures, participate in labs in
drafting and technical production, and will be required to participate on the production crew of one or more
departmental productions.
Prerequisite: Theatre 101.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR and 1:10-3:50 W Lab: TBA CATALANO
THEA 201(F) The Design Response
A study of theatrical design modes and concepts. This course will deal with the formation of a design re-
sponse to playtexts and other dramatic materials, and the translation of that response into scenery, lighting
and costumes. Students will study the development of images that communicate with other theatre artists
and the audience to convey feeling and meaning.
The course will aim to develop overall visual design skills, study the techniques employed in devising set,
costume and lighting, as well as the ways in which they can interrelate to form a unified design. To this end,
we will stress the development of verbal and visual communication skills to convey design ideas, and
study process (individual and collaborative) as well as product.
Evaluation will be based on weekly projects, a larger final project and class participation in discussions and
labs. All visual presentations will be accompanied by short written assignments.
Prerequisite: Theatre 102 or ArtS 100 or ArtS 103 or permission of the instructor.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 MR S. HAMILTON
Theatre
­ 327 ­
THEA 203(S) Interpretation and Performance I
The development of technical skills and intellectual and emotional resources required for the actor. In-
cluded will be the study of voice and movement, characterization, staging fundamentals, performance
styles, textual analysis, and control.
Although there will be some modest written assignments, the principal means of evaluation in the course
will be committed participation in the preparation and performance of production exercises.
Prerequisite: Theatre 100, 101 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limited to 15.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 MR EPPEL
THEA 204(F) Interpretation and Performance II
Hour: 1:10-3:50 MR EPPEL
THEA 205(F) The Culture of Carnival*
Carnival is a regenerative festival as well as a transgressive one. It is a time for upheavals and recreating for
one day, a new world order. Men dress as women, women dress as men, the poor become kings; drink and
sex and outrageous behavior is sanctioned. Central to this course are the cultural and religious life of these
societies and how these festivals exist politically in a modern world as theatre and adult play. We will look
at festivals in such places as New Orleans, Venice, and Rio. A variety of sources will be used, such as
newspaper accounts, films, photography, personal memoirs and essays on the subject.
Students will be evaluated on regular active class participation, one oral presentation, one 5-page essay and
one 15-page research paper.
No prerequisites. Preference will be given to sophomores and first year students. Enrollment limited to 20.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR BROTHERS
THEA 210(S) Multicultural Performance*
This course will focus on exploring and questioning examples of multicultural performance in the nine-
teenth and twentieth centuries. We will begin by attempting to define the terms multicultural and intercul-
tural, and trace chronologically recent theatre history where representations of culture have occurred,
whether celebratory, derogatory, or indifferent. The course will begin with nineteenth-century blackface
minstrelsy, the first American popular entertainment form to utilize all cultures in its humor. We will
compare the Harlem Renaissance-era plays of white and African-American dramatists regarding the Afri-
can-American experience (Porgy and Bess by Heyward and Gershwin; plays by African-American
women playwrights Mary Burrill and Marita Bonner); turn to the use of orientalism in Bertolt Brecht's
Good Person of Szechwan; move to the Black Power era of the 1960s and Aimé Césaire's A Tempest, his
answer to Shakespeare's portrayal of Caribbean people in Shakespeare's The Tempest. The next segment
of the course will involve contemporary examinations of the issues raised by the earlier multicultural/inter-
cultural work considered: orientalism in Peter Brook's Mahabharata and David Henry Hwang's M. But-
terfly; Latino identity politics in Luis Valdez's Zoot Suit and Guillermo Gõmez-Peña's New World Border;
and twentieth-century blackface uses by The Wooster Group in Routes 1 & 9 and The Emperor Jones.
Finally, we will consider a new era of multicultural/intercultural performance, where the stage itself be-
comes a place of contestation between and among cultures. Works to be discussed will be Robert Lepage's
The Seven Streams of the River Ota, Reza Abdoh's Quotations from the Ruined City, and Anna Deavere
Smith's Twilight: Los Angeles, 1992.
Lecture/discussion.
Students will be evaluated based on their satisfactory completion of: a midterm exam, one presentation and
short related paper, a final exam, attendance in class and at several arranged viewings (of live and recorded
performance) outside of class.
Prerequisite: Theatre 101 or English 101 (or the equivalent) or permission of the instructor.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR BEAN
THEA 211 Topics in African-American Performance: Theatre, Film, and Dance of the Harlem
Renaissance (Same as American Studies 211) (Not offered 2000-2001)*
From 1919 to 1929, Harlem in New York City was "in vogue." The rate of African-American cultural
production of theatre, film, and dance was astounding during this period, known also as The Negro Awak-
ening and the Decade of the New Negro. At the onset of the decade, there were around twenty published
plays by African-Americans; by the end, the number increased to over eighty. W. E. B. Du Bois, in his
tireless promotion of African-American artists, put out the call for plays to "depict our life, experience and
humor." Twenty plays with African-American themes appeared on Broadway, five written by African-
Americans. The Broadway theatre pieces most often consisted of black musical revues--the precursors to
the American musical--and featured the best black performers of the day in year-long runs. Most revues,
such as Shuffle Along and Blackbirds, featured cakewalk and tap dancing and the music of the jazz age. In
addition, African-American film production companies, makers of "race" films, were flourishing, headed
by the visionary filmmaker Oscar Micheaux and numbering over one hundred by the end of the decade.
In this course, we will explore these cultural productions of the era of the Harlem Renaissance in relation to
their place in African-American performance history. What happened in African-American performance
during this period has arguably influenced all black artistic production since then, and we will examine this
argument in depth. In addition, we will consider the fluidity between the forms of theatre, film, and dance
Theatre
­ 328 ­
and also between performance and the thriving literary scene, with luminaries such as Langston Hughes
and Zora Neale Hurston, who both wrote plays as well as novels, poetry and essays.
Students will be evaluated on the basis of class participation, presentations, and a semester-long research
project.
No prerequisites.
BEAN
THEA 213T Paul Robeson: Visible Man (Not offered 2000-2001)*+
In 1958, W. E. B. Du Bois said of Paul Robeson (1898-1976), "He is without doubt today, as a person, the
best known American on earth [....] Only in his native land is he without honor and rights." Robeson was
the son of a slave who escaped to freedom. He attended Rutgers University in New Jersey, where he be-
came the first African-American named as an all-American in football, in addition to being class valedicto-
rian and Phi Beta Kappa. After attending Columbia Law School, Robeson took up acting to earn extra
money. His journey to national notoriety began with his role in Eugene O'Neill's play, All God's Chillun
Got Wings (1924), in which Robeson was wooed by a white woman. Public outrage caused O'Neill to
choose instead to revive his play The Emperor Jones with Robeson in the title role. As a performer, Robe-
son was offered roles that were often in the "noble savage" category; as an activist, he constantly partici-
pated in anti-lynching, pro-union, and civil rights campaigns. Robeson performed internationally in
theatre, film and on the concert stage, utilizing his command of twenty languages. His labeling in 1947 as
an "avowed or active propagandist for un-American ideologies" in the Senate McCarthy hearings led to a
boycott of his performances at home and the denial of his passport by the federal government, effectively
curtailing his international career as well. As a response, Robeson wrote Here I Stand (1958), a book that
begins, "I am a Negro."
Robeson's investment in his identity and visibility as an African-American in relation to his performance
and political activism will be the focus of this tutorial. Each student will spend the semester researching,
developing, and writing two papers. The ongoing work on research projects will be presented throughout
the semester as works-in-progress to the tutorial partner and the professor, and occasionally to the class as a
whole.
Students will be evaluated on the basis of their successful completion of two short research papers, as well
as their critiques of their tutorial partner's work. Given the intimate tutorial format of the course, class par-
ticipation and attendance is mandatory.
Prerequisite: permission of the instructor.
BEAN
THEA 301(F) Junior Seminar in Dramaturgy
Dramaturgy, in the words of theatre director Eugenio Barba, is theatre's ergon-- the weaving of actions. If
playwriting explores the intricacies of plot and text, dramaturgy works with the dynamics of performance's
textures. This seminar will focus on dramaturgy in two levels--practical and historical/theoretical. We will
start the semester with a general introduction to contemporary dramaturgical practices. This introduction
will serve as a basis for an active assessment of the Fall Williamstheatre production. The class will attend
rehearsals and conduct dramaturgical analysis of the play under production and of its staging. In the second
half of the semester, we will expand from our practical immersion in dramaturgy's labor and will analyze
ways by which directors have approached and re-defined dramaturgy in their work. We will read texts on
the subject by Eugenio Barba, Robert Lepage, Elizabeth LeCompte, Patrice Pavis, Bertolt Brecht, Antonin
Artaud, Herbert Blau among others.
This class is highly recommended for Junior theatre majors. In addition, given dramaturgy's transdiscipli-
nary nature, visual arts and music majors as well as participants in the dance program are encouraged to
enroll.
Evaluation will be based strongly on student participation. Throughout the semester, each student will gen-
erate a dramaturgical dossier which will be evaluated at the end of the semester.
Enrollment limited to 15.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR LEPECKI
André Lepecki is a writer, dramaturg. He has a Ph.D. in Performance Studies from New York University.
He is currently working on an art installation for the Vienna Festwochen 2000 on the history of the body in
dance. In addition, he is the dance dramaturg for American choreographer Meg Stuart (Belgium), and the
U.S. correspondent for Ballet International (Germany).
THEA 302 Scenic Design (Not offered 2000-2001)
A study of scenic design for the theatre, this course will consider several playtexts of differing styles and
will question the relationship of these styles to the physical environments suggested and/or required by the
plays. Assignments will investigate the formal aspects of design including composition, form, and color.
Drawing, drafting, research, model building, and short written assignments will comprise the course work.
The final project will be a complete scenic design for a play, musical or opera.
Evaluation will be based upon committed participation in daily assignments and classroom discussion, and
the successful completion of the final project.
Prerequisite: Theatre 201.
S. HAMILTON
Theatre
­ 329 ­
THEA 303 Stage Lighting (Not offered 2000-2001)
In this introduction to the art of stage lighting, basic design principles are considered together with instruc-
tion in instrumentation, color theory, electricity, and script analysis. Individual projects and theatre produc-
tion work are required.
Prerequisite: Theatre 201 or permission of instructor.
E. JONES
THEA 305 Costume Design (Not offered 2000-2001)
An introductory study of the art of costume design. The course focuses on the costume designer's process:
script analysis, collaboration, research, color theory, basic design principles, rendering techniques, orga-
nizational skills and the presentation of designs.
Evaluation will be based on design assignments including a full final design project, costume lab, research
files and committed participation.
Prerequisite: Theatre 201 or permission of instructor.
BROTHERS
THEA 306 Advanced Acting (Not offered 2000-2001)
An intensive course for experienced acting students that will concentrate on the techniques and styles of
acting.
Prerequisites: Theatre 203, 204 and permission of instructor.
BUCKY
THEA 307(F) Stage Direction
An introduction to the resources available to the Stage Director for translating interpretative concepts into
stageworthy physical realization. Kinetic and visual directorial controls, as well as textual implication and
elements of dramatic structure, will be studied in detail.
Although there will be some written assignments, including the assembly of directing production books
and critiques of several productions, the principal means of evaluation in the course will be committed
participation in the preparation and performance of production exercises.
Prerequisite: Theatre 203, 204, or permission of instructor.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 TF BUCKY
THEA 308 Directing Workshop (Not offered 2000-2001)
This is a studio workshop dealing with the preparation, performance, and evaluation of brief dramatic exer-
cises and one-act plays. The emphasis will be on the director's confrontation with the text, the actors, and
the directorial controls chosen in support of interpretative concept.
Prerequisite: Theatre 307 or permission of the instructor.
BUCKY
THEA 311-321 Studies in Dramatic Literature
A study of important works of dramatic literature, with special emphasis upon theatrical interpretation. The
body of works selected will represent a common historical period, style, playwright, nationality, or critical
approach.
Prerequisites: Theatre 101 or permission of the instructor.
THEA 311 Greek and Roman Drama (Same as Classics 103 and Literary Studies 223) (Not offered
2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)
(See under Classics for full description.)
THEA 312(F) Modern Drama (Same as English 202)
(See under English for full description.)
THEA 313(S) Studies in Dramatic Literature: Samuel Beckett and Harold Pinter (Same as English
365)
(See under English for full description.)
THEA 314(F) Queer Worldmaking in Literature, Film and Performance (Same as English 369)*
(See under English for full description.)
THEA 316(S) Tragedy and Dramatic Theory (Same as English 224)+
(See under English for full description.)
THEA 321(S) American Minstrelsy (Same as American Studies 302)*
(See under American Studies for full description.)
THEA 322T(S) Performance Criticism+
There are two goals for this course: to have students see performance and to write critically about it.
Throughout the course we will always be concerned with (1) the definition and practices of performance,
(2) the ways of writing critically about those practices, and (3) the conflicts between criticism and perfor-
mance. The class will begin with an in-depth analysis of performance reviews and criticism. Students'
writing will be developed to communicate stylistically the form of the performance through the content.
Students will be required to write four pieces of critical writing on performance (live or recorded) over the
semester, both in draft and final form.
Theatre
­ 330 ­
Students will be evaluated based on their completion of writing assignments in class workshops, four
pieces of critical writing on performance, and written analyses of their colleagues' assignments.
Prerequisite: Theatre 101 or English 101 (or the equivalent) or permission of the instructor.
Hour: TBA BEAN
THEA 323(F) Theatre of Images
This course will investigate what Bonnie Marranca, editor ofPerforming Arts Journal, describes as theatre
"in which the painterly and sculptural qualities of performance are stressed transforming this theatre into a
spatially-dominated one activated by sense impressions, as opposed to a time-dominated one ruled by lin-
ear narrative." The class will examine the work and methodology of some of the practitioners of this form,
including Robert Wilson, Meredith Monk, Ping Chong, and Mabou Mines. This study will prepare class
members to create their own short pieces, which will take a Theatre of Images approach to a specific theme
to be determined by the class.
Evaluation will be based on class participation in discussions and labs, one major paper and class presenta-
tion of the material covered in the paper, and a final project which will be a short performance piece.
Prerequisite: completion of a 200-level course in any of the performing or fine arts, or permission of the
instructor.
Hour: 10:00-11:50 MWF S. HAMILTON
THEA 324(S) Theatre for the Ear: Telling Stories Through Sound
The class will be devoted to the study of extant pieces of radio theatre and aural art, and the creation of
original work. The course will serve as an introduction to aspects of contemporary theatrical sound design,
including dramatic textual analysis from a sound designer's point of view, and an introduction to digital
sound editing software. A goal of the class is the creation of projects suitable for playback on WCFM.
Lecture/discussion/lab.
Evaluation: attendance, class participation and frequent projects.
Short written statements will accompany all aural presentations. There will also be an extensive final proj-
ect: a piece of a fully realized piece of original radio theatre.
Prerequisites: successful completion of any 200-level course in any of the arts or creative writing, or per-
mission of the instructor; and familiarity with Macintosh platform. Enrollment Limit to 12.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR S. HAMILTON
THEA 326T(S) The Moving Image and Performance Style (Same as ArtS 382T)
(See under Art Studio for full description.)
THEA 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
THEA 401(F) Seminar for Senior Majors
The Senior Seminar will be devoted, each year, to a detailed study of issues of dramatic theory, stage histo-
ry, and styles and modes of theatre production, raised by a major work of dramatic literature chosen by the
department. Students will be required to do extensive research on topics that serve to illuminate the social,
political and artistic context in which the work was conceived, and to relate their theoretical conclusions to
the pragmatic and collaborative process of stage production. A fully-mounted production of this work will
be presented in the semester following the seminar, and students enrolled in the seminar will either be re-
quired to perform a major role in the production, or to function as its Scenic, Lighting or Costume Designer.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR and 1:10-3:50 W Lab: TBA BUCKY
THEA 491(F), 492(S) Senior Production
THEA W030 Senior Production
May be taken to augment work of 491 or 492, but not required.
THEA 493(F), 494(S) Senior Thesis
THEA W031 Senior Thesis
May be taken to augment work of 493, 494, but not required.
Of interest to advanced students:
THE NATIONAL THEATRE INSTITUTE
The Department of Theatre is affiliated with the National Theatre Institute, which offers additional
theatre study through its resident semester program. The Institute is fully accredited by Connecticut Col-
lege and is a member of the Twelve-College Exchange. Limited numbers of Williams students can there-
fore be selected to take a full semester of intensive theatre study at the NTI, located at the Eugene O'Neill
Memorial Theatre Centre in Waterford, Connecticut. During the semester, students from participating col-
leges live and work as members of a theatre company gaining experience with professional theatre artists
in a workshop environment. Early application is essential.
­ 331 ­
WOMEN'S AND GENDER STUDIES (Div. II)
Chair, Professor JANA SAWICKI
Advisory Committee: Professors: BUNDTZEN, S. GRAVER, HEATHERINGTON, SAWICKI,
SWANN, WATERS***. Associate Professor: CASE. Assistant Professors: S. BOLTON, BUELL*,
CARTER-SANBORN, M. DEVEAUX, SPRINGER. Lecturer: MATHEWS§§. Affirmative Action
Officer: MCINTIRE. Librarian: MENARD. Health Educator: DENELLI-HESS.
Women's and Gender Studies can be defined as the study of how gender is constructed, how it is in-
flected by differences of race, ethnicity, sexuality, class, etc., how gender affects the experiences and situa-
tions of men and women, and how assumptionsaboutgenderinfluencetheconstructionofknowledgeand
experience.Theprogramin Women's and Gender Studies is therefore open to students majoring in a wide
variety of disciplines who wish to focus in a coherent way on gender issues. The program is designed to
introduce students to scholarship in Women's and Gender Studies, which has brought neglected material
into established fields and raised important methodological questions about sex and gender that cross disci-
plinary boundaries and challenge established intellectual frameworks.
To fulfill the requirements for a concentration in the Women's and Gender Studies Program, students
will take five courses. Women's and Gender Studies 101, Introduction to Women's and Gender Studies,
introduces students to major works in the development of modern feminist thought and to issues central to
Women's and Gender Studies. Students are encouraged to take Women's and Gender Studies 101 in their
first or second year. In addition, students elect three Women's and Gender Studies courses from at least two
departments. Electives will vary according to the course offerings each year. Students may develop a stu-
dent-initiated course as an elective. In order to confront the breadth of issues raised by Women's and Gen-
der Studies as an interdisciplinary mode of inquiry, students are advised to distribute their choices as widely
as possible. In their junior or senior year, after taking Women's and Gender Studies 101 and two electives,
one of which may be taken concurrently, students are required to take a Women's and Gender Studies
seminar, in which they will write a substantial essay or develop a project in an area of special interest. This
seminar explores topics in Women's and Gender Studies. The topic varies from year-to-year. Under excep-
tional circumstances, the chair can allow an Independent Study to substitute for the seminar. Students may
take more than one seminar, space permitting.
Students are urged to declare a concentration in the Women's and Gender Studies Program by the fall
semester of their junior year. To do this, or to obtain further information about the program, contact the
Women's and Gender Studies chair, Stetson D13, x2305.
CONTRACT MAJOR IN WOMEN'S AND GENDER STUDIES
In consultation with the chair of Women's and Gender Studies, students may develop a contract major
proposal in Women's or Gender Studies. Interested students should meet with the chair in the first semester
of the sophomore year. Students proposing a contract major should take Women's and Gender Studies 101
and plan to take Women's and Gender Studies 402 in their junior or senior year. Contract major proposals
must be approved by the Committee on Educational Policy.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN WOMEN'S AND GENDER STUDIES
Honors in Women's and Gender Studies may be granted to concentrators or contract majors after an
approved candidate completes a thesis (493-W031, W031-494) or honors project (491-W030,
W030-492), delivers a public presentation of the work, and is awarded an honors grade by her/his advisor
and one other reader from the Women's and Gender Studies Program.
The honors project may be one semester (plus winter study) or a year-long project. It may consist of a
conventional research thesis of 40-70 pages or of other modes of presentation (e.g., art, music, poetry, the-
ater, fiction). Proposals for non-thesis projects may include evidence of experience and competence in the
chosen mode.
A student may become a candidate for honors in Women's and Gender Studies after the following crite-
ria are met:
1) in April of the junior year, submission and Women's and Gender Studies Committee approval of a 4-
to 6-page project proposal, in which the ideas, aim, general methodology, and preliminary bibliography for
the project are outlined and a faculty advisor is named;
2) at the end of the junior year, cumulative grade point average of B+ from courses in two of the three
academic divisions (humanities, social science, natural science);
3) on the first day of classes of the senior year, submission and approval by the faculty advisor of a 5- to
10-page prospectus for the project.
All honors work, including the public presentation will be graded by at least two faculty members--a
third will be consulted if there is a significant discrepancy between the first two graders. Readers' grades
will be averaged and honors will be awarded as follows: A+/A Highest Honors; A-/B+ Honors.
Women's and Gender Studies
­ 332 ­
Courses
[ ] Courses not offered in 2000-2001 are listed in brackets.
* An asterisk indicates that the course meets the Peoples and Cultures distribution requirement.
Sequence Courses
Women's and Gender Studies 101 Introduction to Women's and Gender Studies
Women's and Gender Studies 402 The Personal and The Political: Confessional Narrative and Femi-
nist Politics+
Elective Courses
Students will elect three Women's and Gender Studies courses from at least two different departments.
See department listings for full descriptions. Note: Depending on the topic(s) of course papers and their
ability and willingness to do supplemental reading, students can transform other courses into electives.
Anyone who is interested in such an option must consult the program chair at the beginning of the semester
in order to sign a course "contract."
[American Studies/Women's and Gender Studies 346 Women of Color in the U.S.: Public and Private
Cultures*]
[ANSO 201 Violence]
ANSO/Women's and Gender Studies 240 Gender and Science: Historical and Contemporary Issues
ANSO 325 Culture, Religion, and World View in China and Japan* (Deleted 2000-2001)
ArtH/Classics 216 Body of Evidence: Greek Sculpture and the Human Figure
[ArtH 246 Baroque Art: Images of Men and Women]
ArtH 449 The Meanings of Poses in Baroque Art
ArtH 451 Ideal Bodies: The Modern Nude and Its Dilemmas (Deleted 2000-2001)
ArtH 453 Lessons from the Diva Sarah Bernhardt and Icons of Mass Culture (Deleted 2000-2001)
ArtH 454 The Power of Stereotypes (Deleted 2000-2001)
[Chinese 243 Gender Issues in Traditional Chinese Literature*]
Classics/ArtH 216 Body of Evidence: Greek Sculpture and the Human Figure
Classics 239/History 322 (formerly 239) Women in Greece and Rome
[Classics/Religion 274 Women's Religious Experiences in the Ancient Mediterranean World]
[Economics/Women's and Gender Studies 203 Gender in Economic Analysis]
[Economics/Women's and Gender Studies 223 Gender and Economic Development*]
[Economics 355 Feminist Economics]
English/American Studies 218 Introduction to U.S. Latina and Latino Writing*
English/Women's and Gender Studies 219 Introduction to Literature by Women
English 318 Histories of the Early-Modern Body, 1543-1750
English 328 Jane Austen and George Eliot (Deleted 2000-2001)
English 336 Femmes Fatales and New Women (Deleted 2000-2001)
[English 341 American Genders, American Sexualities]
[English/American Studies/Women's and Gender Studies 346 Women of Color in the U.S.:
Public and Private Cultures*]
English 351 Queer Theories
English 356T Dead Poets' Society
English 369/Theatre 314 Queer Worldmaking in Literature, Film, and Performance
English 371 Feminist Theory and the Representation of Women in Film
[English 377 Suicides and Survivors]
[English 389 The Fiction of Virginia Woolf]
French 215/Literary Studies 217 The Fashioning of Fashion: Theory and Practice
French 204 The Female Prison: Convents and Brothels
Geosciences 101/Environmental Studies 105 Biodiversity in Geologic Time
[German 311 Telling Lives/Inventing Selves: Biography and Autobiography in the Two Germanies
and Austria, 1915-Today]
History 129 (formerly 107) Religion, Race and Gender in the Age of the French Revolution
History 309 (formerly 278)/Religion 232 Women and Islam*
[History 313 (formerly 345) Women in Chinese History*]
History 322 (formerly 239)/Classics 239 Women in Greece and Rome
[History 335 (formerly 316) Class, Gender, and Race in Post-1945 Britain]
[History 343 (formerly 328) Gender and History in Latin America*]
[History 354 (formerly 321) Gender and Community in Early America*]
[History 376 (formerly 320) /American Studies 320 Adolescence in America]
[History 378 (formerly 344)/Women's and Gender Studies 344 The History of Sexuality in America]
[History 379 (formerly 324)/Women's and Gender Studies 324 Women in the United States Since
1870]
History 385T Inventing Gender: America 1600-1850 (Deleted 2000-2001)
[History 394 (formerly 346) Comparative Masculinities: Britain and the United States Since
1800]
Women's and Gender Studies
­ 333 ­
[History 396 (formerly 338) Victorian Psychology]
[History 453 (formerly 361) Salem Witchcraft]
History of Science 216 Gender, Science, and Technology
Literary Studies 112 Introduction to Cultural Studies: Adultery and the Fallen Woman
Music 131 Gender, Class, and Race in Western Musical Society (Deleted 2000-2001)
Music 133 Men, Women, and Pianos (Deleted 2000-2001)
[Philosophy 327 Foucault: Gender, Power, and the Body]
Political Science 208 The Politics of Family Policy
[Political Science 209 Poverty in America]
Political Science 311 The Personal and the Political in Practice: Gender, Sexuality, and Political Pow-
er in America (Deleted 2000-2001)
Political Science/Women's and Gender Studies 336 Sex, Gender, and Political Theory
Religion/Classics 209 The Religious Landscape of the Roman Mediterranean
Religion 232/History 309 (formerly 278) Women and Islam*
[Religion/Classics 274 Women's Religious Experiences in the Ancient Mediterranean World]
[Religion/Women's and Gender Studies 282 Feminist Approaches to Religion]
[Spanish 213 Women Writers in Contemporary Spain]
Theatre 323 Theatre of Images
[Women's and Gender Studies/Economics 203 Gender in Economic Analysis]
Women's and Gender Studies/English 219 Introduction to Literature by Women
[Women's and Gender Studies/Economics/Environmental Studies 223 Gender and Economic Devel-
opment*]
[Women's and Gender Studies/Religion 282 Feminist Approaches to Religion]
[Women's and Gender Studies 308 Gendering Social Movements and Organizations]
[Women's and Gender Studies 324/History 379 (formerly 324) Women in the United States Since
1870]
Women's and Gender Studies/African and American Studies 302/American Studies 304 U.S. Mascu-
linity and Its Others
Women's and Gender Studies/Political Science 336 Sex, Gender, and Political Theory
[Women's and Gender Studies/American Studies/English 346 Women of Color in the U.S.:
Public and Private Cultures*]
WGST 101(F,S) Introduction to Women's and Gender Studies
This team-taught lecture and discussion course introduces a range of feminist issues, theories and contro-
versies. It has several aims: to provide critical and analytical tools for thinking about gender as it is inflected
by race, class, sexuality, and culture, to explore key issues confronting women in American society, and to
discuss strategies for addressing them. The course will examine issues such as: body politics, sexuality,
reproductive freedom, sexual violence, gender and work, and motherhood.
Requirements: two 5- to 6-page essays, class presentations, and an 8- to 10-page final essay on activism.
No prerequisites. Required course for the Women's and Gender Studies Program.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR First Semester: SAWICKI, SWANN
1:10-2:25 MR Second Semester: CASE, SPRINGER
WGST 203 Gender in Economic Analysis (Same as Economics 203) (Not offered 2000-2001)
(See under Economics for full description.)
WGST 219(F) Introduction to Literature by Women (Same as English 219)
(See under English for full description.)
WGST 223 Gender and Economic Development (Same as Economics 223 and Environmental
Studies 223) (Not offered 2000-2001)*
(See under Economics for full description.)
WGST 240(S) Gender and Science: Historical and Contemporary Issues (Same as ANSO 240)
(See under ANSO for full description.)
WGST 282 Feminist Approaches to Religion (Same as Religion 282) (Not offered 2000-2001)
(See under Religion for full description.)
WGST 302(S) U.S. Masculinity and Its Others (Same as African-American Studies 302 and
American Studies 304)*
Gender, as a relational category, is traditionally defined in terms of a masculine/feminine dualism. This
seminar will examine what happens when men and women step outside of socially constructed bound-
aries. Specifically, we will explore the impact of normative masculinity on bodies labeled as "Other." Us-
ing historical texts, feminist theory, and popular culture (especially film), we focus on the voices and per-
spectives of these "Others" (e.g.,women, men of color, lesbians, gay men, transgendered and disabled
men) and on how they interpret the impact of this gender norm on their lives. We will engage these per-
spectives as they relate to childhood socialization, work, sports, parenting, health care, media, sexuality,
leisure, and relationships. Films may include Boyz'n the Hood, Saving Private Ryan, The Brandon Teena
Story, and Tongues Untied.
Women's and Gender Studies, Peoples and Cultures Courses
­ 334 ­
Requirements: oral history interview, occasional weekly assignments, and a 15-page essay.
Prerequisites: Women's and Gender Studies 101 or permission of instructor.
Hour: 7:00-9:30 p.m. T SPRINGER
WGST 308 Gendering Social Movements and Organizations (Not offered 2000-2001)
The Million Man March, the Women's Liberation Movement, the Promise Keepers, the American Indian
Movement, Riot Grrls, the Montgomery Bus Boycott, the Disability Movement, White Supremacists;
these are but a few of the social movements we will examine in this course. The central question we will
answer is: How do gender, race, class, sexual orientation, and physical ability generate social movements
and influence the daily functioning of organizations? Beginning with classical social movement theories
and feminist critiques, students will gain a fuller understanding of how history, politics, and culture interact
within social movements. Using primary and secondary sources, students will analyze social movements
as a process of "meaning-making" in U.S. citizens' lives.
SPRINGER
WGST 324 Women in the United States Since 1870 (Same as History 379) (Not offered
2000-2001)
(See under History for full description.)
WGST 336(S) Sex, Gender, and Political Theory (Same as Political Science 336)
(See under Political Science for full description.)
WGST 344 The History of Sexuality in America (Same as History 378) (Not offered
2000-2001)
(See under History for full description.)
WGST 346 Women of Color in the U.S.: Public and Private Cultures (Same as American
Studies 346 and English 346) (Not offered 2000-2001; to be offered 2001-2002)*
(See under English for full description.)
WGST 402(S) The Personal and the Political: Confessional Narrative and Feminist Politics+
This course is designed to enable advanced Women's Studies students to engage in common re-
search on vital interdisciplinary topics. Confessional practices have played a central role in second
wave feminism whether in the form of consciousness raising in the early seventies, lesbian coming
out stores, or revealing the truth about one's history as a survivor of rape or sexual abuse. In this
course, we explore the historical roots of confession in women's lives and literature as well as its
personal and political functions. Readings may include confessions of witches at the Salem witch
trials, female slave narratives, coming out stories, as well as theoretical and critical essays investi-
gating issues related to authority, authenticity, power, identity formation and self-recovery.
Format: discussion.
Requirements for the course include weekly 1- to 2-page critical response essays and one substan-
tial research paper (15-20 pages). Students will present work-in-progress, read and discuss one
another's papers and be asked to write at least two drafts of their research papers.
Prerequisite: Women's and Gender Studies 101 and two electives (one of which may be taken dur-
ing the spring term in which the seminar is held).
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W SAWICKI
WGST 491(F)-W030, W030-492(S) Honors Project
WGST 493(F)-W031, W031-494(S) Senior Thesis
WGST 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
PEOPLES AND CULTURES COURSES
The peoples and cultures requirement is intended to help students to begin to understand the cultural
diversity of American society and the world at large, so that, as citizens of an increasingly interconnected
world, they may become better able to respond sensitively and intelligently to peoples of varied social
backgrounds and cultural frameworks. Courses which fulfill this requirement are thus designed to familiar-
ize students with some dimension of American cultural diversity or that of the non-Western world. Each
student must complete one graded semester course primarily concerned with: (a) the peoples and cultures
of North America that trace their origins to Africa, Asia, Latin America, Oceania, or the Caribbean; Native-
American peoples and cultures; or (b) the peoples and cultures of Africa, Asia, Latin America, Oceania, or
the Caribbean. Although this course, which may be counted toward the divisional distribution requirement,
may be completed any semester before graduation, students are urged to complete the course by the end of
the sophomore year.
Courses that may be used to meet the requirement in 2000-2001:
African and Middle-Eastern Studies 402(S) Topics in African and Middle-Eastern Studies:
Ritual, Politics and Power: Understanding Political Action (Same as ANSO 402)*
African-American Studies 302(S) U.S. Masculinity and Its Others (Same as American Studies
304 and Women's and Gender Studies 302)*
Peoples and Cultures Courses
­ 335 ­
American Studies 135(F) African-American Literary Lives (Same as English 135)+*
American Studies 218(F) Introduction to U.S. Latina and Latino Writing (Same as English 218)*
American Studies 220(S) Introduction to African-American Writing (Same as English 220)*
American Studies 250(F) Introduction to U.S. Latino Studies (Same as History 286)*
American Studies 302(S) Junior Seminar in American Studies: American Minstrelsy (Same as
Theatre 321)*
American Studies 304(S) U.S. Masculinity and Its Others (Same as African-American Studies
302 and Women's and Gender Studies 302)*
American Studies 358(S) Black Heroes in American Literature (Same as English 358)*
American Studies 367(F) Treacherous Terrain: Asian American Literary and Cultural Production
(Same as English 367)*
American Studies 386(S) Asian American Women's Writing (Same as English 386)*
American Studies 403(F) Senior Seminar in American Studies: Notions of Race and Ethnicity in
American Culture (Same as History 469)*
ANSO 402(S) Senior Seminar: Ritual, Politics, and Power: Understanding Political Action (Same
as African and Middle Eastern Studies 402)*
Anthropology 218(S) Colliding Cultures: The Anthropology and History of Contact*
Anthropology 101(F,S) The Scope of Anthropology*
Anthropology 103(S) Pyramids, Bones, and Sherds: What is Archaeology?*
Anthropology 209(S) Human Ecology (Same as Environmental Studies 209)*
Anthropology 216(S) Native Peoples of Latin America*
Anthropology 224(F) Middle East Cultures*
Anthropology 246(S) Religions of Contemporary South Asia (Same as Religion 246)*
Anthropology 273(S) Sacred Geographies (Same as EXPR 273 and Religion 273)*
Anthropology 331(F) Witchcraft, Sorcery, and Magic*
Anthropology 402(S) Senior Seminar: Ritual, Politics, and Power: Understanding Political
Action (See ANSO 402)*
ArtH 172(S) Introduction to Asian Art: From the Land of the Buddha to the World of the
Geisha*
ArtH 200(F) Art of Mesoamerica*
ArtH 270(F) Japanese Art and Culture*
ArtH 274(S) Chinese Calligraphy: Theory and Practice*
ArtH 376(F) Images and Anti-Images: Zen Art in China and Japan*
Asian Studies 201(F) Asia and the World (Same as Political Science 100F)*
Asian Studies 211(F) Japan Before Perry: De-Mythicizing Land and Culture*
Asian Studies 212(S) Japan's World After 1945: What Price Peace and Prosperity?*
Asian Studies 403(F) Trans-Pacific Racisms and U.S.--Japanese Relations*
Asian Studies 404(S) Re-examining Memories of the Atomic Bombs: Searching for a Common
Global Past*
Asian Studies 493(F)-W031-494(S) Senior Thesis*
Asian Studies 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study*
Chinese 101(F)-W088-102(S) Basic Chinese*
Chinese 152(S) Basic Taiwanese*
Chinese 201(F), 202(S) Intermediate Chinese*
Chinese 301(F), 302(S) Upper-Intermediate Chinese*
Chinese 401(F), 402(S) Advanced Chinese*
Chinese 412(S) Introduction to Classical Chinese*
Chinese 493(F)-W031-494(S) Senior Thesis*
Chinese 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study*
CRAB 201(F)-202(S) Arabic*
CRHE 201(F)-202(S) Hebrew* (This course is part of the Jewish Studies cluster.)
CRHI 201(F)-202(S) Hindi*
CRKO 201(F)-202(S) Korean*
CRSW 201(F)-202(S) Swahili*
Economics 204(S) Economic Development in Poor Countries (Same as Environmental Studies
234)*
Economics 212(F) Sustainable Development (Same as Environmental Studies 212)*
Economics 226(S) Economic Development and Change in Latin America*
Economics 377(S) Environmental Policy and Natural Resource Management*
Economics 501(F) Development Economics I*
Economics 502(S) Development Economics II*
Economics 515(S) Environmental Policy and Natural Resource Management (Same as
Environmental Studies 377)*
English 135(F) African-American Literary Lives (Same as American Studies 135)+*
English 218(F) Introduction to U.S. Latina and Latino Writing (Same as American Studies
218)*
English 220(S) Introduction to African-American Writing (Same as American Studies 220)*
Peoples and Cultures Courses
­ 336 ­
English 358(S) Black Heroes in American Literature (Same as American Studies 358)*
English 367(F) Treacherous Terrain: Asian American Literary and Cultural Production (Same as
American Studies 367)*
English 369(F) Queer Worldmaking in Literature, Film and Performance (Same as Theatre 314)*
English 386(S) Asian American Women's Writing (Same as American Studies 386)*
English 395(F) Screening Black Words: Contemporary film adaptations of Afro-American
Narratives*
Environmental Studies 209(S) Human Ecology (Same as Anthropology 209)*
Environmental Studies 212(F) Sustainable Development (Same as Economics 212)*
Environmental Studies 234(S) Economic Development in Poor Countries (Same as Economics
204)*
Environmental Studies 377(S) Environmental Policy and Natural Resource Management (Same as
Economics 515)*
EXPR 273(S) Sacred Geographies (Same as Anthropology 273 and Religion 273)*
History 114(S) (formerly 110) The Mao Cult*
History 129(S) (formerly 107) Religion, Race, and Gender in the Age of the French Revolution*
History 148(F) (formerly 102) The Mexican Revolution: 1910 to NAFTA*
History 164(S) (formerly 104) Slavery in the American South*
History 209(F) (formerly 275) The Origins of Islam: God, Empire, and Apocalypse (Same as
Religion 231)*
History 213(S) (formerly 284) Modern China, 1850-Present: Continuity and Change*
History 216(F) (formerly 285) Modern Japan*
History 243(S) (formerly 288) Modern Latin America, 1822 to the Present*
History 249(F) (formerly 225) The Caribbean from Slavery to Independence: A Comparison of
Empires*
History 281(F) (formerly 261) African-American History Through Emancipation*
History 282(S) (formerly 262) African-American History From Reconstruction to the Present*
History 286(F) (formerly 250) Introduction to U.S. Latino Studies (Same as American Studies
250)*
History 309(S) (formerly 278) Women and Islam (Same as Religion 232)*
History 342(S) Creating Nations and Nationalism in Latin America*
History 364(F) (formerly 311) History of the Old South*
History 365(S) (formerly 312) History of the New South*
History 367(F) (formerly 342) Social and Economic History of the Southwest, from Pre-Conquest
to American Occupation*
History 384(F) (formerly 331) Comparative Asian-American History, 1850-1965*
History 386(S) (formerly 317) Intellectual Traditions of Chicano Nationalism*
History 387(F) (formerly 211) Puerto Ricans in the United States*
History 443(F) (formerly 355) Slavery, Race and Ethnicity in Latin America*
History 467(S) Black Urban Life and Culture*
History 469(F) Notions of Race and Ethnicity in American Culture (Same as American Studies
403)*
History 471(S) (formerly 369) Methods in Latino Studies: Community, Family, and Identity
Formation*
History 478(S) (formerly 381) The Ghetto from Venice to Harlem*
Japanese 101(F)-W088-102(S) First-Year Japanese*
Japanese 201(F), 202(S) Second-Year Japanese*
Japanese 276(S) Premodern Japanese Literature and Performance*
Japanese 301(F), 302(S) Third-Year Japanese*
Japanese 401(F), 402(S) Fourth-Year Japanese*
Japanese 493(F)-W031-494(S) Senior Thesis*
Japanese 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study*
Literary Studies 215(F) The Latin-American Novel in Translation (Same as Spanish 205)*
Music 122(F) African-American Music*+
Music 126(S) Musics of Asia*
Music 130(S) History of Jazz*+
Music 209(F) Music in History III: Musics of the Twentieth Century*
Music 230(S) Seminar in Caribbean Music*+
Political Science 100(F) (Section 01) Asia and the World (Same as Asian Studies 201)*
Political Science 204(S) (formerly 140) Introduction to Comparative Politics: The Powers of
Nationalism*
Political Science 222(S) The United States and Latin America*
Political Science 224(S) Ethnic Conflict in World Politics*
Political Science 247(S) Political Power in Contemporary China*
Political Science 249(S) Latin-American Politics*
Political Science 267(F) Arab-Israeli Relations*
Psychology 341(F) Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination*
Peoples and Cultures Courses, Related Course Listings
­ 337 ­
Religion 231(F) The Origins of Islam: God, Empire and Apocalypse (Same as History 209)*
Religion 232(S) Women and Islam (Same as History 309)*
Religion 246(S) Religions of Contemporary South Asia (Same as Anthropology 246)*
Religion 248(S) Traditional Religions of India: Narrating the Self/Noself*
Religion 273(S) Sacred Geographies (Same as Anthropology 273 and EXPR 273)*
Sociology 303(F) Race and Ethnicity in America*
Sociology 402(S) Senior Seminar: Ritual, Politics, and Power: Understanding Political Action
(See ANSO 402)*
Spanish 112(S) Latin-American Civilizations*
Spanish 205(F) The Latin-American Novel in Translation (Same as Literary Studies 215)*
Spanish 402(S) Studies in Modern Latin-American Literature*+
Theatre 205(F) The Culture of Carnival*
Theatre 210(S) Multicultural Performance*
Theatre 314(F) Queer Worldmaking in Literature, Film and Performance (Same as English
369)*
Theatre 321(S) American Minstrelsy (Same as American Studies 302)*
Women's and Gender Studies 302(S) U.S. Masculinity and Its Others (Same as African-American
Studies 302 and American Studies 304)*
RELATED COURSE LISTINGS
There are a number of significant areas of studies in which Williams offers many relevant courses, yet
no formal program. To alert students to the opportunity for integrating courses from diverse disciplines into
a focus area and to encourage them to do so, the courses in this section are organized as lists of topic-related
courses. For their full descriptions, see the respective departmental sections.
Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Studies
Gay, lesbian, and bisexual studies focuses on the social construction of sexuality, past and present. Al-
though, at present, Williams does not have a formal concentration in gay, lesbian, and bisexual studies, the
College offers a number of courses which examine how social, cultural, and political institutions shape
sexualities, as well as the responses and resistances thereto, through a variety of texts and contexts. The
following courses include significant components on gay, lesbian, and bisexual studies (at least two weeks
out of the semester).
Classics/History 222 (formerly 216) Greek History
Classics 239/History 332 (formerly 239) Women in Greece and Rome
English 341 American Genders, American Sexualities
Greek 403 Greek Lyric Poetry
History 335 (formerly 316) Class, Gender, and Race in Post-1945 Britain
History 379 (formerly 324)/Women's and Gender Studies 324 Women in the United States Since
1870
History 378 (formerly 344)/Women's and Gender Studies 344 History of Sexuality in America
History 394 (formerly 346) Comparative Masculinities: Britain and the United States Since 1800
History 477 (formerly 352) History and the Body
Philosophy 327 Foucault: Gender, Power, and the Body
Religion 232/History 309 (formerly 278) Women and Islam
Sociology 210 The Construction of Social Problems
Theatre 100 Introduction to Theatre
Women's and Gender Studies 101 Introduction to Women's and Gender Studies
Women's and Gender Studies 402 The Personal and the Political: Confessional Narrative and Femi-
nist Politics
Medieval Studies
ArtH 232 Italian Art: 1300-1500 (Deleted 2000-2001)
ArtH 233 Italian Art: 1500-1600 (Deleted 2000-2001)
Classics 101/Literary Studies 107 Greek Literature
Classics 103/Literary Studies 223/Theatre 311 Greek and Roman Drama
Classics/ArtH 213 Greek Art and Myth
Classics/History 222 (formerly 216) Greek History
Classics/History 223 (formerly 218) Roman History
English 304/Literary Studies 317 Dante
English 305 Chaucer
History 203/Religion 217 The Early Middle Ages (Deleted 2000-2001)
History 204/Religion 218 The Later Middle Ages (Deleted 2000-2001)
Mathematics 381 History of Mathematics
Political Science/Philosophy 231 Ancient Political Thought
Religion/Classics 203 Introduction to Judaism
Religion 211 Paul and the Beginnings of Christianity
Related Course Listings, Writing-Intensive Courses
­ 338 ­
Political and Economic Philosophy
Economics 354 Perspectives on Economic Theory
Philosophy 101 Introduction to Moral and Political Philosophy
Political Economy/Economics 301/Political Science 333 Analytical Views of Political Economy
Political Science 203 (formerly 130) Justice: Introduction to Political Theory
Political Science 204 (formerly 140) Introduction to Comparative Politics: The Powers of National-
ism
Political Science/Philosophy 231 Ancient Political Thought
Sociology 101 Invitation to Sociology
International and Global Studies
ANSO 387 Propaganda
Anthropology 101 The Scope of Anthropology
Anthropology/Environmental Studies 209 Human Ecology
Anthropology 342 Anthropology of Law: Order and Conflict
Economics 204/Environmental Studies 234 Economic Development in Poor Countries
Economics 215 The World Economy
Environmental Studies 101 Humans in the Landscape
Environmental Studies/Biology 203 Ecology
History 472 (formerly 351) Slavery, Capitalism, and Revolution: The Impact of the New World on
Europe, 1700-1900
History 475 (formerly 356) Modern Warfare and Military Leadership
History of Science/Science and Technology Studies 101 Science, Technology, and Human Values
History of Science 216 Gender, Science, and Technology
History of Science 305/History 292 Technology and Culture
Music 125 Music Cultures of the World
Political Science 202 (formerly 120) World Politics: An Introduction to International Relations
Political Science 204 (formerly 140) Introduction to Comparative Politics: The Powers of
Nationalism
Religion 101 Introduction to Religion
Religion 234/History 409 (formerly 363) Religion and Revolution in Iran
Sociology 101 Invitation to Sociology
Sociology 203 Social Inequality
WRITING-INTENSIVE COURSES
Courses designated as "writing-intensive"--those with a plus symbol (+) following the course
title--stress the process of learning to write effectively. Such courses include a substantial amount of writ-
ing (cumulatively, at least 20 pages), usually divided into several discrete assignments. Normally, one or
more of these assignments are returned to students for revision and resubmission. Instructors pay close
attention to matters of punctuation, grammar, style, and the construction of arguments when assigning
grades to written assignments, and these issues are further pursued in class discussions and individual
meetings. Writing-intensive courses offered in 2000-2001:
American Studies 133(F) The Frontier in American Literature and Film (Same as English
133)+
American Studies 135(F) African-American Literary Lives (Same as English 135)+*
ArtH 301(F) Methods of Art History+
Astronomy 207T(F) Extraterrestrial Life in the Galaxy: A Sure Thing, or a Snowball's Chance?+
Biology 402T(S) Current Topics in Ecology (Same as Environmental Studies 404T)+
Economics 362(S) Global Competitive Strategies+
Economics 401(F) Senior Seminar+
English 105(F) Poetry and Magic+
English 113(F) "Literary" Reading+
English 114(F) The Art of Memory+
English 123(F) Contemporary American Short Fiction+
English 124(S) Exemplary Lives (Same as American Studies 124)+
English 125(F,S) After The Tempest+
English 126(S) Stupidity and Intelligence+
English 131(F) Writing Short Fiction; Writing about Short Fiction+
English 133(F) The Frontier in American Literature and Film (Same as American Studies 133)+
English 135(F) African-American Literary Lives (Same as American Studies 135)+*
English 150(F) Expository Writing+
English 150(S) Expository Writing+
English 222(F) Studies in the Lyric+
English 224(S) Tragedy and Dramatic Theory (Same as Theatre 316)+
English 225(F) Romanticism and Modernism+
English 226(S) Irish Revivals+
Writing-Intensive Courses, Williams-Mystic Program
­ 339 ­
English 230(S) Introduction to Literary Theory+
Geosciences 105(F) Geology Outdoors+
Geosciences 302(S) Sedimentation+
History 487T(F) (formerly 374T) The Second World War: Origins, Course, Outcomes, and
Meaning+
Music 122(F) African-American Music*+
Music 130(S) History of Jazz*+
Music 230(S) Seminar in Caribbean Music*+
Philosophy 101(F,S) Introduction to Moral and Political Philosophy+
Philosophy 102(F,S) Introduction to Metaphysics and Epistemology+
Philosophy 201(S) Continental Philosophy: From Hegel to Poststructuralism+
Physics 402T(S) Applications of Quantum Mechanics+
Physics 411T(F) Classical Mechanics and Fluid Mechanics+
Political Science 101(F) (Section 02) Seminar: Moral and Political Reasoning+
Political Science 220(S) The Future of World Politics+
Political Science 331T(S) Non-Profit Organization and Community Change+
Psychology 316(F) Clinical Neuroscience+
Psychology 354T(F) Social Interaction and Psychopathology+
Religion 270T(S) Father Abraham: The First Patriarch+
Sociology 103(F) Behind the Rhetoric of Race: Race, Ethnicity and Public Policy+
Spanish 105(F) Advanced Composition and Conversation+
Spanish 301(S) Cervantes's Don Quijote+
Spanish 402(S) Studies in Modern Latin-American Literature*+
Theatre 316(S) Tragedy and Dramatic Theory (Same as English 224)+
Theatre 322T(S) Performance Criticism+
Women's and Gender Studies 402(S) The Personal and the Political: Confessional Narrative and
Feminist Politics+
WILLIAMS OFF-CAMPUS PROGRAMS
WILLIAMS-MYSTIC MARITIME STUDIES PROGRAM
Director, JAMES T. CARLTON
Faculty: SUSAN F. BEEGEL (University of Idaho), MARY K. BERCAW EDWARDS (Connecticut
College), JAMES T. CARLTON (Williams College), GLENN S. GORDINIER (Mystic Seaport),
JOHN O. JENSEN (Stone Fellow, Mystic Seaport), JAMES H. MCKENNA (Williams College),
DENNIS W. NIXON (University of Rhode Island).
Williams College sponsors a one-semester interdisciplinary program which includes credit for one win-
ter study in American Maritime Studies in cooperation with Mystic Seaport Museum. Courses are taught
as part of the College's off-campus program in Mystic, Connecticut. Students apply for either the fall or the
spring semester and take four of five courses offered. Students also take part in a noncredit maritime skills
class of their choice, choosing from celestial navigation, sailing, music of the sea, ship smithing, and the
outdoor demonstration squad. Students live in cooperative houses at Mystic Seaport and participate in field
seminars to the Pacific Coast, Nantucket Island, and New York harbor, as well as an 11-day offshore trip as
part of their coursework. Interested students may obtain further information and an application through the
Dean's Office. An open house is held annually in November. A personal interview is required. Admission
is competitive. Students must meet Williams College and Williams-Mystic application deadlines.
AMS 201(F,S) America and the Sea, 1600-Present (Same as History 352)
This course focuses on the history of America's relationship to the sea from the age of discovery through
the heyday of merchant sail to the triumph of steam and the challenges of the twentieth century. Readings
in primary sources and secondary works on the social, economic, and diplomatic implications of maritime
activities culminate in a research paper. Topics such as shipbuilding, whaling, and fisheries are studied
through museum exhibits and artifacts in the material culture component of the course.
Lectures and discussions.
Requirements: an hour test, a research paper, and a final exam.
Hour: TBA JENSEN
AMS 211(F,S) Oceanographic Processes (Same as Geosciences 210)
This course is an introduction to the physical, chemical, geological, and biological processes that control
the major features of the world's oceans. Topics include ocean circulation, waves and tides, plate tectonics,
shoreline processes, biological productivity, and food web structure. This overview of the oceans is de-
signed for both non-science majors and science majors who desire a general course on oceanography. Lec-
tures and laboratories, including coastal and near-shore field trips, 11 days offshore, and a laboratory or
field research project.
Requirements: an hour test, a research project, a presentation, and a final exam.
Williams-Mystic Program, Williams-Oxford Programme
­ 340 ­
Williams students who have taken Geosciences 104 may not take Geosciences 210/American Mari-
time Studies 211 for credit.
Hour: TBA MCKENNA
AMS 231T(F,S) Literature of the Sea (Same as English 231T)
A study of the ways in which the sea has often filled the literary imagination and found expression in narra-
tive, poetry, drama, and myth. Special emphasis is given to such authors as Melville, London, Steinbeck,
Proulx, and Hemingway, as well as Shakespeare, Coleridge, and Conrad. This course is taught in small
group tutorials with occasional larger classes and lectures.
Requirements: regular papers and class discussion; no final exam.
Hour: TBA First Semester: BERCAW EDWARDS
TBA Second Semester: BEEGEL
AMS 311(F,S) Marine Ecology (Same as Biology 231)
Using the principles of evolutionary biology and experimental ecology, this course examines the processes
that control the diversity, abundance and distribution of marine organisms. Major marine communities,
including estuaries, the rocky shore, sandy beaches, salt marshes, coral reefs, and the deep sea are dis-
cussed in detail.
Lectures and laboratories, including coastal and near-shore field trips, 11 days offshore, and a laboratory or
field research project.
Requirements: an hour test, a research project, a presentation, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Biology 101 and 102 or equivalent or permission of instructor.
Hour: TBA CARLTON
AMS 351(F,S) Marine Policy (Same as Environmental Studies 351)
This seminar takes a topical approach to the study of marine law and policy. Studies include fisheries, har-
bor development, coastal zone management, admiralty law, law of the sea, marine pollution and shipping.
Guest lecturers, discussions, and field trips.
Requirements: a midterm, a major research paper, a presentation, and a final.
Hour TBA NIXON
WILLIAMS-OXFORD PROGRAMME
Director, Professor M. JENNIFER BLOXAM
THE PROGRAMME
Williams College offers a year-long programme of studies at Oxford University in co-operation with
Exeter College, Oxford. Based at Ephraim Williams House in North Oxford, the Programme is designed to
integrate students into the intellectual and social life of one of the world's greatest universities. It uses the
Oxford tutorial system and follows the Oxford three-term calendar. The resident director administers Eph-
raim Williams House, oversees the academic programme, and serves as both academic and personal advi-
sor to the students.
Students in the Oxford Programme enroll for the full academic year, which consists of the Michaelmas,
Hilary, and Trinity terms. These are each eight weeks long (running from early October to early December,
mid-January to mid-March, late April to mid-June), and there are two intervening six-week vacations dur-
ing which students may be expected to continue reading as preparation for upcoming tutorials.
Over the course of the three terms, students normally take four full tutorials and one half tutorial, al-
though some choose to substitute a fifth full tutorial for the half tutorial.
THE CURRICULUM
In addition to extensive opportunities to pursue British and Commonwealth studies, the Programme of-
fers instruction in other fields for which Oxford is particularly noted or which are represented only margin-
ally or infrequently in the Williams curriculum. Special provision is made for accommodating student in-
terests or curricular needs that extend beyond the fields of study listed below. No disciplinary or depart-
mental interest, therefore, is necessarily excluded. Instruction is by tutorial, often supplemented by attend-
ing a programme of lectures or seminars from among the rich array sponsored by the University each term.
In summary, all students enrolled in the Oxford Programme are required to complete four full tutorials
and one half tutorial
TUTORIALS
Students elect four full tutorials and one half tutorial, and sometimes, five full tutorials, during the aca-
demic year. A full tutorial consists of eight tutorial sessions, and a half tutorial of four tutorial sessions.
These are weekly meetings of one or two students with an Oxford tutor at which the student presents an
essay on an assigned topic with discussion focusing on that topic. Eight essays in all will be written for each
full tutorial subject and four for each half-tutorial subject. At the start of the term tutors will assign a list of
readings, which students will be expected to complete on their own during term time and the vacation.
Students may be encouraged to follow a pertinent lecture course offered by the University in the general
area of the tutorial subject.
Williams-Oxford Programme
­ 341 ­
WIOX 211 Art History: English Architecture 1660-1720
A study of the principal buildings of Wren, Hawksmoor, Jones and Vanburgh in relation to the contempo-
rary historical background. Field trips to London and Blenheim in addition to inspection of important sites
in Oxford.
WIOX 215 Biology: Plant and Microbial Biology
The biological diversity of plants and micro-organisms, including aspects of their ecology and evolution,
structural and functional characteristics, life histories, reproduction, taxonomy and systematics, physiology
and biochemistry, genetics and molecular biology, biotechnology. Also the importance of interactions be-
tween plants and microorganisms.
WIOX 216 Biology: Evolution and Systematics
Evolution as the central theme of biology. Methods and data of phylogeny reconstruction. Biogeography.
Macro-evolutionary change; origin of the major groups, extinction, punctuated equilibrium. Adaptation.
Comparative Method. Natural selection. Units of selection. Molecular evolution. Evolution of sex. The
modern synthesis.
WIOX 221 Economics: British Economic History since 1870
Trends and cycles in national income, factor supplies, and productivity; changes in the structure of output,
employment and capital; management and entrepreneurship; the location of industries, industrial con-
centration, and the growth of large firms prices; interest rates, money, and public finance; wages, unem-
ployment, trade unions, and the working of the labor market, the distribution of incomes, poverty, and liv-
ing standards; foreign trade, tariffs, international capital movements, and sterling; Government economic
policy in peace and war.
WIOX 222 Economics: International Economics
Theories of international trade and factor movement, positive and normative, and their application to eco-
nomic policy and current problems. Theory and practice of economic integration. Current problems of the
international trading system. Methods of balance of payments adjustment and financing; policies for at-
taining internal and external balance. Behavior of floating exchange rates; theory and evidence. Optimum
Currency Areas and Exchange Rate Regimes. International Policy Co-ordination and the International
Monetary System.
WIOX 223 Economics: Command and Transitional Economies
The traditional command economy, attempts to reform it in the direction of market socialism, and transi-
tion to a market economy. The subject is studied mainly in relation to the former Soviet Union and Eastern
Europe, but may also refer to other communist countries including China.
WIOX 224 Economics: Economics of Developing Countries
Theories of growth and development. Poverty and income distribution. Human resources. Labor markets
and employment. Industrialization and technology. Agriculture and rural development. Monetary and fis-
cal issues, inflation. Foreign trade and payments. Foreign and domestic capital; economic aid. The role of
government in development; the operation of markets.
WIOX 230 English: The History, Use and Theory of the English Language
History, use and theory of the English Language in the period from Chaucer to the present day, with special
reference to literary language. Topics in linguistic history and theory (such as vocabulary, syntax and
morphology, social and geographical aspects of the use of English) as well as the history and theories of
literary language (such as figurative language, relations between written and oral discourse, and literary
language as persuasion and social action).
WIOX 231 English: English Literature from 1509-1642
WIOX 232 English: English Literature from 1642-1740
WIOX 233 English: English Literature from 1740-1832
WIOX 234 English: English Literature from 1832-1900
WIOX 235 English: Special Authors
Students pick one of these sets and may concentrate on one or two authors.
a) The Beowulf Poet, Alfred or Aefric
b) Chaucer, Margery Kempe, or The Yorke Cycle
c) Donne, Milton, or Marlowe
d) Pope, Defoe, or Behn
e) Wordsworth, Austen, or Johnson
f) R. Browning, G. Eliot or Wilde
g) Yeats, Woolf or Beckett
h) Plath, Rushdie or Pinter
Williams-Oxford Programme
­ 342 ­
WIOX 236 The English Novel
Students may study novelists generally from the eighteenth through the twentieth centuries or may, if they
wish, confine themselves to eighteenth, nineteenth, and/or twentieth century novelists; within the period(s)
chosen. Students may also concentrate on a detailed study of one or two of the novelists, for example:
Richardson, Fielding, George Eliot, Dickens, Henry James, James Joyce, or Virginia Woolf.
WIOX 237 English: Drama
Concentration in one of:
a) 1400-1640 excluding Shakespeare
b) Shakespeare
c) 1640-1890
d) 1890 to the present age
WIOX 245 Geography: The Geographical Environment: Physical
The nature of the major physical environments; their internal interrelationships and their significance to
humans, plants, and animals; processes of environmental change with particular reference to those that
directly affect humans; humans as agents of change in the physical environment.
WIOX 246 Geography: The Geographical Environment: Human
The philosophical, technical, and social basis of approaches to and use of the environment; the history,
economics, and politics of environmental exploitations and conservation in the major physical regions of
the world; the definition of space and territories and the principles of spatial organization in different soci-
eties; geographical variations in patterns of resource use, human activity, population growth, and well-be-
ing, and their expression in the cultural landscape; the processes of international interdependence.
WIOX 247 Geography: The United Kingdom and France
The long-term evolution of the human and regional geography of the United Kingdom and France in its
European and global context: economic, social, and political changes since the Second World War, includ-
ing those associated with the formation and development of the European Community, and their regional
and environmental effects: analysis of the economic forces and geopolitical considerations shaping geo-
graphical change in the United Kingdom and France and of attempts to deal with the resulting problems.
WIOX 251 History: History of the British Isles 1330-1550
For England, Scotland, Ireland and Wales this was a period of dramatic conflict and change which presents
many fascinating paradoxes in economic, social, political, intellectual, religious, and cultural life. This tuto-
rial explores the interaction of these historical dimensions as well as the interaction of the different societies
within the British Isles.
WIOX 252 History: History of the British Isles: 1500-1700
The formation of the British state, the shifting power of the English monarchy, the crisis of Parliament and
civil war, and the drama of the Reformation are the unifying narrative topics of this tutorial, but wider
structural questions of economic and social change, of ideological and cultural development are also ad-
dressed.
WIOX 253 History: History of the British Isles: 1685-1830
The creation of the British state, the diffusion of a 'British' identity to add to existing English, Welsh, Scot-
tish and Irish identities, and the rise of the 'British Empire' and the strains, tensions, and conflicts associat-
ed with these major developments are addressed in this tutorial.
WIOX 255 History: India, 1916-1934: Indigenous Politics and Imperial Control
A detailed examination of the Civil Disobedience Movement, the Congress Party, and the work of Mahat-
ma Ghandi.
WIOX 261 Philosophy: The History of Philosophy from Descartes to Kant
In this course, the works of some of the major philosophers in this period will be studied, such as Descartes,
Locke, Berkeley, Hume, Leibniz, Spinoza, and Kant.
WIOX 262 Philosophy: Ethics
Topics to be studied include ethical concepts (obligation, goodness, virtue); objectivity and the explanation
of value beliefs; moral psychology; freedom and responsibility; consequentialism and deontology; self-in-
terest, prudence and amoralism; rights, justice and equality; Kant; happiness, welfare and a life worth liv-
ing.
WIOX 263 Philosophy: Philosophy of Mind
Topics to be studied include the nature of persons, the relation of mind and body, self-knowledge, knowl-
edge of other persons, consciousness, perception, memory, imagination, thinking, belief, feeling and emo-
tion, desire, action, the explanation of action, subconscious and unconscious mental processes.
WIOX 264 Philosophy: Philosophy of Science and Social Sciences
This tutorial will include such topics such as A) scientific explanation; models; the testing of theories; the
interpretation of probability; laws and causality; scientific change, major schools of philosophy of science,
and B) social `meaning'; individualism, functionalism; rationality, ideology; social prediction; the explana-
tion of action; historical explanation.
Williams-Oxford Programme
­ 343 ­
WIOX 265 Philosophy: Philosophy of Logic and Language
Topics to be studied include meaning, truth, logical form, necessity, existence, entailment, proper and gen-
eral names, pronouns, definite descriptions, intentional contexts, adjectives and nominalization, adverbs,
metaphor, and pragmatics.
WIOX 266 Philosophy: Metaphysics and Theory of Knowledge
Topics to be studied include: the nature of persons, causation, primary and secondary qualities, time, space,
and God, the nature of knowledge, skepticism, induction, and confirmation.
WIOX 267 Philosophy: Philosophical Authorities
Students pick one of these authorities or movements:
a) Plato
b) Aristotle
c) the Rationalists
d) the Empiricists
e) Kant
f) Wittgenstein
WIOX 268 Philosophy of Religion
The analysis of theological and religious language and concepts, and the historical and critical study of the
following: the possibility of natural theology; the nature and grounds of religious belief; the idea and exis-
tence of God; religious views of the universe and man's place in it (religion includes, but is not restricted to,
the Christian religion).
Topics include arguments for the existence of God, answers to the problem of evil, and defenses of the
significance of religious belief and the meaningfulness of religious language. Authors studied include
Aquinas, Hume, Kant, Wittgenstein, and Swinburne.
WIOX 269 Philosophy: Theory of Politics
The critical study of political values and of the concepts used in political analysis: the concept of the politi-
cal; power, authority and related concepts; the state; law; liberty and rights; justice and equality; public
interest and common good; democracy and representation; political obligation and civil disobedience;
ideology; liberalism, socialism and conservation.
WIOX 271 Political Science: Modern British Government and Politics
A study of the structure, powers, and operations of modern British Government, including its interaction
with the European community: the Crown, Ministers, Parliment, elections, parties and pressure groups, the
legislative process; Government departments, agencies, and regulatory bodies; local authorities; adminis-
trative jurisdiction and the Courts.
WIOX 272 Political Science: Soviet and Post-Soviet Government and Politics
The subject comprises the theory and practice of Communist rule in the former Soviet Union and the tran-
sition to a post-Communist society. Attention is devoted to Communist Party and governmental institu-
tions (especially between 1953 and 1991) and to the attempts to construct new political institutions in the
process of systemic transformation. Specific attention will be devoted to ideology and political culture,
political leadership, political participation and the development of representative institutions, and the na-
tional question.
WIOX 273 Political Science: Classical Political Thought up to 1800
The critical study of political theorists whose ideas are still influential, including Plato, Aristotle, Machia-
velli, Hobbes, Locke, Montesquieu, Rousseau, Hume, and Bentham.
WIOX 274 Political Science: Foundations of Modern Social and Political Thought
The critical study of political theorists whose ideas are still influential. Topics studied will include: theories
of political stability and civic virtue; the relationship between the personal and the political; utopian politi-
cal thought; theories of natural law.
WIOX 275 Political Science: International Relations
The principal theories and concepts regarding international politics advanced in the twentieth century. Top-
ics include: law and norms, order, self-determination, security, war and conflict resolution, foreign policy
analysis, international political economy, dominance and dependence, regional integration, and interna-
tional institutions, the balance of power; the theory and practice of arms control and disarmament; the im-
pact of economic interdependence and transnationalism; theories of imperialism and dependency.
WIOX 281 Psychology: Developmental Psychology
Psychological development in humans: the biological and physiological, environmental and heredity in-
fluences which affect development; evidence from comparative studies. The neonate, the infant, the pre-
school child, school children: changes during adolescence; adulthood and further changes of aging. Sex
differences. Developmental aspects of perceptual and cognitive processes: behavioral repertoire including
exploration and play, language, motor skills and social skills, learning, training, and socialization; the de-
velopment of intelligence and personality; developmental disorders and handicaps; computational models
of development. Observational, experimental, and psychometric methods; theoretical issues in develop-
mental studies, including their mathematical treatment.
Williams-Oxford Programme
­ 344 ­
WIOX 282 Psychology: Social Psychology
The biological and cultural background to social behavior: comparison of animal and human social behav-
ior, cultural differences in behavior and attitudes. Verbal and non-verbal communication; conversation,
self-presentation, and other aspects of social interactions; social influence, persuasion, and leadership;
group performance and group decision-making; behavior in organizations; intergroup relations. Social
relationships, exchange processes, interpersonal attraction, aggression, helping and cooperation. Cognitive
social psychology; perception, inference, attribution, and explanation; social representations, attitudes and
beliefs.
WIOX 290 Specially Arranged Subjects
Specially arranged tutorial work in some subject area other than those covered by 211-282, or in some
non-listed subfield of the areas covered (e.g. ancient or oriental languages and literatures, biblical studies,
chemistry, applied mathematics, nineteenth and twentieth century English history, physics, psychology,
social anthropology, theology). For a full description of subjects offered regularly at Oxford University
students should consult the most recent edition of University of Oxford Examination Decrees and Regula-
tions, a copy of which is available in the Dean's Office. Students requesting a specially arranged tutorial
must indicate as a backup choice one of the tutorial offerings from 211-282, and realize that it may not
prove possible to accommodate their requests.
A sample list of recent specially arranged tutorials, by discipline: Archaeology: Anglo-Saxon Archaeology,
Archaeology of Mesopotamia; Biology: Mammalian Genetics; Classics: Cicero the Orator, Homer's
Odyssey, Roman History; English: Creative Writing; Irish Writers; History: Imperialism and Nationalism
1830-1966; Law: Jurisprudence; Mathematics: Number Theory, Statistics; Political Science: Comparative
Government; Religion: Christian Ethics; Studio Art: Figure Painting, Printmaking.
Grades and Credits
Grades for each tutorial reflect the mark assigned to all eight (or four) tutorial sessions, including their
related essays, considered together, as well as the mark for the final examination on work accomplished in
the tutorial and supplementary reading. Final examinations are three hours in the case of full tutorials and
two hours in the case of half tutorials. The final grade recorded on the Williams transcript is calculated by
counting the tutorial mark as two-thirds and the final examination mark as one-third.
Upon satisfactory completion of the requirements for the Williams College Oxford Programme students
receive academic credit for a full Williams academic year. Grades are incorporated into their Williams tran-
script and are included in the computation of their GPA.
Tutorials may be used toward fulfilling the divisional distribution requirement; a student may earn a
year maximum of three distribution credits, with no more than one from each division, for the year.
NON-CREDIT FOREIGN LANGUAGE STUDY
In addition to their required tutorials, students may begin or continue the study of a wide range of for-
eign languages on a non-credit basis through a variety of arrangements available through the University as
well as a number of other educational and cultural institutions in the city of Oxford. The Programme nor-
mally subsidizes such study.
STUDENT LIFE
The Williams College Oxford Programme offers students every opportunity to integrate fully into life at
Oxford. The University offers access to an exceptional variety of sports, societies, interest groups, activi-
ties, and cultural events. Students are closely associated with their counterparts at Exeter College, are able
the share in the social life of the College, to use its athletic facilities, and to dine in Hall during the week.
They have access to the University's athletic events, concerts, theatrical productions, museums, and to
some of its many libraries. All may become members of the Oxford Union Debating Society, which, in
addition to its debating activities and club rooms, possesses dining facilities and the largest lending library
in the University. Students are housed (in doubles) at Ephraim Williams House, which is equipped with its
own library, computer lab, and common rooms as well as with laundry and dining facilities, and which
serves one catered dinner a week during the term. The house is within easy walking distance of the Univer-
sity Parks, convenient to the Summertown complex of shops and restaurants, and about five minutes by
bicycle to the heart of the University.
There is an orientation period in October before the beginning of the academic year to help acquaint
students with Oxford and the opportunities and challenges they will meet during the year. Throughout the
academic year, provision will be made for day trips to such nearby points of interest as Stratford, Stone-
henge, Bath, Wells, Chepstow Castle and Tintern Abbey, and Parliament in London. Students will also
attend a number of theatre productions and other cultural events. In addition, Oxford's proximity to Lon-
don gives students ready access to that city's multiple attractions and resources. The Oxford-London train
service is an hourly one, and the journey takes just over an hour. Buses run even more frequently, and the
journey takes about an hour and a half.
ILLNESS AND INSURANCE
You must be covered either by the Williams College student health insurance policy or some other com-
prehensive insurance plan (generally your family's health insurance). While in the U.K., you will be cov-
ered under the National Health Service (N.H.S.) for routine visits at the Exeter College group medical
Williams-Oxford Programme, Williams Program in Teaching
­ 345 ­
practice and for emergency hospital treatment. Prescription drugs are available through the NHS at a nomi-
nal fee. There are only limited outpatient psychological counseling services available through the NHS and
the Oxford Programme. Any extensive or long-term counseling would have to be covered by your person-
al health insurance policy. Finally, you are not likely to be covered under the NHS for medical services
received in other foreign countries, especially non-European Community countries.
FEES
The tuition and room fees for the Programme are equivalent to those for a year at Williams. Students are
responsible for their own transportation, most of their meals, and personal expenses. For planning pur-
poses, students and their parents should expect the cost of a year on the Williams College Oxford Pro-
gramme to be about the same as a year at Williams. Financial aid eligibility will be figured on the usual
basis of tuition, fees, room, board, and personal and book expenses just as if the student were at Williams.
Similarly, the normal self-help contribution would be expected. Since the academic year ends later at Ox-
ford than at Williams, the summer earning expectation for the following year will be reduced by one half
and the difference made up by additional Williams aid.
APPLICATION
Admission to the Programme is on a competitive but flexible basis. Students must apply to the Dean's
Office by the prescribed deadline (normally in February) and, prior to applying, should consult with the
chair of their major department. They can expect to be notified of acceptance before Spring break. It is the
normal expectation that they will have completed the College's distribution requirement by the end of their
sophomore year. The Admissions Committee takes the GPA into account and expects applicants to have
demonstrated capacity for independent work. Applicants must identify two Williams faculty members
who are willing to provide references (the committee will not request those faculty members to write letters
but will contact them). Because of the emphasis at Oxford on written work, at least one of these faculty
members should be able to offer an assessment of the applicant's writing ability.
WILLIAMS PROGRAM IN TEACHING
The Williams Program in Teaching is designed to address two goals:
1) To enable Williams undergraduates to study the ideas, questions, and practices involved in good
teaching, and to earn certification to teach in public schools.
2) To promote and facilitate an exchange of ideas about teachers, learners and schools, within and be-
yond the Williams campus.
In order to meet the first goal, we have embarked on a partnership with our neighboring college, MCLA,
long devoted to the preparation of schoolteachers. Williams students interested in earning certification
must talk to the Director of the Program in Teaching (Susan Engel, x4522), in order to discuss how to meet
the requirements of this program.
In broad outline:
In addition to choosing and fulfilling requirements for a Liberal Arts major, students seeking certifica-
tion must also take the following courses some time during their four years:
--Psychology 334 The Psychology of Education,
--a 30-hour prepracticum in teaching,
--a course on reading in a specific content area,
--a course on classroom management, and
--a course on adolescent development.
(Several of these requirements can be met during winter study.)
Students must also make a formal application to the MCLA teaching program (this is easily done with
the guidance of their advisor and Susan Engel). Acceptance into this entitles them to enroll for a required
post-BA semester at MCLA, during which time they will fulfill the supervised teaching practicum neces-
sary to earn certification.
­ 346 ­
WINTER STUDY PROGRAM
REMINDERS ABOUT WSP REGISTRATION
All students who will be on campus during the 2000-2001 academic year must register for WSP. Regis-
tration will take place in the early part of fall semester. If you are registered for a senior thesis in the fall
which must be continued through Winter Study by departmental rules, you will be registered for your Win-
ter Study Project automatically. In every other case, you must complete registration. First-year students are
required to participate in a Winter Study that will take place on campus; they are not allowed to do 99's.
Even if you plan to take a 99, or the instructor of your first choice accepts you during the registration
period, there are many things that can happen between registration and the beginning of Winter Study to
upset your first choice, so you must list five choices. You should try to make one of your choices a project
with a larger enrollment, not that it will guarantee you a project, but it will increase your chances.
If you think your time may be restricted in any way (ski meets, interviews, etc.), clear these restrictions
with the instructor before signing up for his/her project.
Remember, for cross-listed projects, you should sign up for the subject you want to appear on your re-
cord.
For many beginning language courses, you are required to take the WSP Sustaining Program in addi-
tion to your regular project. You will be automatically enrolled in this Sustaining Program, so no one
should list this as a choice.
The grade of honors is reserved for outstanding or exceptional work. Individual instructors may specify
minimum standards for the grade, but normally, fewer than one out of ten students will qualify. A grade of
pass means the student has performed satisfactorily. A grade of perfunctory pass signifies that a student's
work has been significantly lacking but is just adequate to deserve a pass.
If you have any questions about a project, see the instructor before you register.
Finally, all work for WSP must be completed and submitted to the instructor no later than Friday, Janu-
ary 26th. Only the Dean can grant an extension beyond this date.
WINTER STUDY 99'S
Sophomores, juniors and seniors are eligible to propose "99's," independent projects arranged with fac-
ulty sponsors, conducted in lieu of regular Winter Study courses. Perhaps you have encountered an inter-
esting idea in one of your courses which you would like to study in more depth, or you may have an inter-
est not covered in the regular curriculum. In recent years students have undertaken in-depth studies of par-
ticular literary works, interned in government offices, assisted in foreign and domestic medical clinics, con-
ducted field work in economics in developing countries, and given performances illustrating the history of
American dance. Although some 99's involve travel away from campus, there are many opportunities to
pursue intellectual or artistic goals here in Williamstown.
99 forms are available online:
http://www.williams.edu/Registrar/winterstudy/99direct.html
The deadline for submitting the proposals to faculty sponsors is Thursday, 28 September.
AFRICAN AND MIDDLE EASTERN STUDIES
AMES 031 Senior Thesis
To be taken by candidates for honors by the thesis route in African and Middle Eastern Studies.
AFRICAN-AMERICAN STUDIES
AAS 030 Senior Project
To be taken by students registered for Afro-American Studies 491 who are candidates for honors.
AMERICAN STUDIES
AMST 030 Senior Honors Project
To be taken by students registered for American Studies 491 or 492.
ANTHROPOLOGY AND SOCIOLOGY
ANSO 010 The Ayn Rand Cult (Same as Literary Studies 010)
(See under Literary Studies for full description.)
ANSO 011 Berkshire Farm Center Service-Learning Internship
A field placement at Berkshire Farm Center and Services for Youth in Canaan, New York. Berkshire Farm
Center is a residential treatment facility for troubled, at-risk adolescent boys who have been remanded to the
Farm by the Family Court. These youths come primarily from lower socio-economic strata, are very ethni-
cally diverse, and hail from both urban and rural areas throughout New York State. The problems that they
bring to Berkshire Farm are multiple. These include: the psychological scars of dysfunctional families, in-
cluding those of physical, emotional, and sexual abuse; chemical dependency; juvenile delinquency; inabil-
ity to function in school settings; and various other issues. Residential treatment is a multi-modal approach
Winter Study Program
­ 347 ­
that includes anger-replacement training, social skills training, and behavioral modification.
Williams students will commute to Berkshire Farm and work under supervision in one of the following
areas: school, cottage life, chemical dependency unit, research, recreation, performing arts, or in individual
tutoring and mentoring.
Students will keep a journal reflecting on their experiences and submit a 5- to 10-page paper synthesizing
their work. A weekly seminar with the instructor will draw on service learning experience. Please note: all
queries about this course should be directed to the instructor, who can be reached at 518-781-4567, ext. 322.
Prerequisites: placement only through a telephone interview with instructor before registering for course.
Enrollment limited to 15.
Cost to student: none.
LARI BRANDSTEIN (Instructor)
D. EDWARDS (Sponsor)
Lari Brandstein is Director of Volunteer Services at Berkshire Farm Center and Services for Youth.
ANSO 012 Children and the Courts: Internship in the Crisis in Child Abuse
The incidence of reported child abuse and neglect has reached epidemic proportions and shows no signs of
decreasing. Preventive and prophylactic social programs, court intervention, and legislative mandates have
not successfully addressed this crisis. This course allows students to observe the Massachusetts Depart-
ment of Social Services attorney in courtroom proceedings related to the care and protection of children.
Students will have access to Department records for purposes of analysis and will also work with social
workers who will provide a clinical perspective on the legal cases under study. The class will meet regular-
ly to discuss court proceedings, assigned readings, and the students' interactions with local human services
agencies. Students will keep a journal and submit a 10-page paper at the end of the course. Full participa-
tion in the course is expected. Please note: all queries about this course must be directed to the instructor,
Judge Locke. Phone messages may be left at 458-4833.
Access to an automobile is desirable but not required; some transportation will be provided as part of the
course.
Enrollment limited to 15.
Cost to student: $25 for books and photocopies.
JUDITH LOCKE (Instructor)
D. EDWARDS (Sponsor)
Judith Locke is Associate Justice of the Juvenile Court, Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
ANSO 013 Lawyers: Specialists in Conflicts
An examination of the paradoxical position of the lawyer in American society. Throughout American his-
tory, the lawyer's role has been ever-changing, yet ever consistent. The legal profession is simultaneously
honored and pilloried. The lawyer's craft is lauded for its inventiveness and precision, yet reviled as the
lowest chicanery. The lawyer is both advocate and mediator, an agent of change and a conservative force.
The lawyer is powerful and privileged, yet utterly dependent on the interests and whims of others. Such is
the fate of the professional described by Karl Llewellyn, a preeminent twentieth-century legal scholar and
activist in the bar, as "a specialist in the conflict of interests between men." This course will plot the inter-
relationship over the past two centuries between the major structural transformations in American society
and the key developments within the legal profession. The course will pay special attention to the profound
and continuing consequences of the development of the corporation, itself a creation of lawyers. It will also
scrutinize the particular and peculiar characteristics of legal craft, the habits of mind, and the unique moral
sensibilities that make lawyers an indispensable occupational group at the center of American social order.
The readings for the course will be classic analyses from observers both inside and outside the legal profes-
sion, including Alexis de Toqueville, Louis Brandeis, Roscoe Pound, Woodrow Wilson, Karl Llewellyn,
Felix Frankfurter, James Willard Hurst, and Robert T. Swaine.
Requirements: active participation in the seminar and a 10-page paper.
Cost to student: approximately $30 for books and readings.
Meeting time: mornings.
DUFFY GRAHAM (Instructor)
D. EDWARDS (Sponsor)
Duffy Graham '83 is an attorney at Preston Gates Ellis, Seattle.
ANSO 014 Wilderness and the American Mind
This course explores the romantic origins and Native American inspirationsof the American love affair
with wilderness. We will read and discussselections from Henry David Thoreau, John Muir, Ernest
Thompson Seton, AldoLeopold, Rachel Carson, Gary Snyder, and Bill Sessions, among others.Genres to
be studied include: philosophical essay, nature story, poetry,scientific analysis, and environmental advoca-
cy. A few of the questions wewill address: What is the difference between nature and wilderness? Arethese
ideas "socially constructed"? Is wilderness preservation a strictlyAmerican conception and agenda?
Requirements: 10-page paper.
Enrollment limited to 25.
Cost to student: approximately $40 for books.
Meeting times: mornings.
CRIST
Winter Study Program
­ 348 ­
ANTHROPOLOGY
ANTH 031 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Anthropology 493-494.
SOCIOLOGY
SOC 031 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Sociology 493-494.
ART
ART HISTORY
ARTH 012 Feng Shui (Same as Asian Studies 013)
Feng shui is the study of the way in which our environments affect every aspect of our lives. The selection
of a property site and the placement of buildings on a property, of rooms within a building and of furniture
within a room influence us, sometimes in obvious ways, often in very subtle ways.
The goal in this course is to give students a foundation in the concepts of feng shui that will lead to the prac-
tical application of feng shui. We will explore the origins and principles of this ancient Chinese discipline
and analyze how this Eastern philosophy is applicable in our Western society. Our in-depth analysis of the
many levels of feng shui, from the mundane to the transcendental, will include a comparison of feng shui
to the similar architectural designs, traditions and rituals of other cultures and of the animal world. We will
also consider the correlation between an environment and the individuals who inhabit that particular space.
We will analyze properties on or near the Williams campus, including spaces in which the students have a
special interest, and we will determine what changes can be made in those environments to improve the
lives of the occupants.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, class assignments and a research paper or design analysis.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 18.
Cost to students: approximately $50.
Meeting time: five times a week for two hour sessions in the mornings. Field trips in Williamstown, North
Adams and Hancock area to analyze specific properties will be held during class time.
VINCENT SMITH (Instructor)
HEDREEN (Sponsor)
Vincent Smith is a feng shui consultant, lecturer and author who is based in New York City. He was gradu-
ated from Harvard College and Yale Law School. He practiced law for 25 years before forming the VMS
Feng Shui Design Co. Vincent Smith has traveled and studied with Professor Lin Yun, who is considered
by many to be the leading feng shui master in the United States. He recently taught a course in feng shui at
Berea College in Kentucky.
ARTH 014 Inventing Joan of Arc: The History of a Heroine in Pictures and Film
Joan of Arc was one of the most dynamic and yet enigmatic personalities of the French Middle Ages. Born
into a poor peasant family in 1412, she gained control of an army, won brilliant military victories, crowned
a king, and was burnt at the stake as a heretic, all before her twentieth birthday. Doubly marginalized by
gender and socio-economic status, she nonetheless managed to shake the Church and State establishments
to their very core. But who was Joan of Arc? Instrument of God's grace? Delusionary fanatic? Nationalist
martyr? Champion of the disenfranchised? Casualty of childhood trauma? Over the centuries since her
death, artists, and not just politicians and scholars, have attempted to answer this question, creating myriad
visions of La Pucelle, as she was also known, under the influence of an ever-changing lens of contempo-
rary tastes and concerns. This course will begin by surveying, through lectures, readings and discussions,
the history of Joan of Arc in painting and sculpture. The class will then watch a series of film versions of
her story (by the likes of DeMille, Fleming, Preminer, Dreyer, Bresson, Rivette and Besson), accompanied
by further readings and discussion.
Evaluation will be based on class participation and a 10-page paper (or alternative project approved by
instructor).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 15.
Cost to students: $50 for books.
Meeting time: three times a week for two-hour sessions in the mornings, with extra sessions for viewing
films, according to need.
LOW
ARTH 016 Museums and Culture
In the fall of 2000, the Williams College Museum of Art will open the fifth exhibition in the "Labeltalk"
series, where Williams College faculty from a broad range of disciplines write labels for works of art from
their own academic perspectives. Why has this series been so popular with both the college community
and the general public? What is different about museums today that would lead to labels written by non-
museum voices? Is this part of a museum trend to simply make art exhibitions more attractive to the gener-
al public, or does this represent a more significant shift in how museums interpret art and engage their audi-
ences?
This course will explore the role of the art museum today in the collection, interpretation and dissemination
Winter Study Program
­ 349 ­
of culture. Readings and class discussions will examine collections management, acquisitions and deac-
cessioning policies, exhibition development, funding, community outreach, and education, and how these
aspects of museum work can impact the interpretation and presentation of an art object. Special attention
will be given to recent museum controversies such as the "Sensation" exhibition at The Brooklyn Museum
of Art. This course will include speakers from the Williams College Museum of Art and possibly other
museums, and Williams College faculty. Students will prepare their own "Labeltalk" labels, which will be
added to the "Labeltalk 2000" exhibition.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, Labeltalk labels, research project, and class participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 12. Students from all majors encouraged.
Cost to students approximately $25.
Meeting time: twice per week for three hour sessions in the mornings.
STEFANIE JANDL (Instructor)
M. GOETHALS (Sponsor)
Stefanie Jandl is the Andrew W. Mellon Curatorial Associate at the Williams College Museum of Art and
coordinator of the "Labeltalk" exhibition series. She received her M.A. in art history from the Williams
College Graduate Program in the History of Art and has 15 years of experience in the arts.
ARTH 018 Dormant: The Awakening of an Artwork
In the tradition of Andy Warhol's Raid the Icebox and Fred Wilson's Mining the Museum, work with artist
Michael Oatman during the conceptual and early stages of an installation for the Williams College Mu-
seum of Art. Dormant (working title) will look at one of the museum's galleries, in particular its previous
life as a dormitory. The installation will involve actors, costumes and the production of a short film made
with the cooperation of students. From research to production, from proposal to documentation, this course
will take you step-by step through the complex processes of making a multi-media installation. Students
will be asked to research on the web, at the museum and in the community in helping the artist prepare for
this exhibition. Interviews and narratives will be produced as part of a collaborative video project. Partici-
pation can include writing, acting, prop-making and special effects.
Evaluation will be based on participation in all class activities and a written report on the student's research.
Students may be required to purchase a text. A brief reading list will be available at the first class.
No prerequisites, although previous experience with video and or studio art/art history is desirable.Enroll-
ment limited to 10.
Meeting time: afternoons.
MICHAEL OATMAN (Instructor)
M. GOETHALS (Sponsor)
Michael Oatman is a painter and installation artist. He received a BFA from The Rhode Island School of
Design and an MFA from the University of Albany. He teaches at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, and the
graduate programs at Vermont College and the University at Albany. He has exhibited widely in the U.S.
and is currently working on exhibitions for MASS MoCA in North Adams
ARTH 020 Contemporary Issues at Regional Museums
This course will survey the best of contemporary art offerings throughout our region. This will include
temporary exhibitions and permanent collection displays at such institutions as Mass MoCa, the Wads-
worth Atheneum, the Aldrich Museum of Contemporary Art, the Worcester Art Museum, and other col-
lege and university art museums. The class will also travel to Boston or New York depending on current
exhibition schedules. The class will begin with a tour of WCMA and continue with four weekly, daylong
museum excursions.
Evaluation will be based on participation in all museum visits and one research presentation and accompa-
nying paper. The topic of the assignment is an object on view at one of the included institutions. The art-
work will be selected by the student from a list available at the first class and then presented to the rest of
the class during the museum visit.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 12.
Cost to student: approximately $25. Students will be required to pay reduced-rate admissions to some of
the museums. The cost and schedule of museum visits will be available during enrollment and at the first
class.
IAN BERRY (Instructor)
M. GOETHALS (Sponsor)
Ian Berry received his M.A. in Curatorial Studies at the Center for Curatorial Studies at Bard College and is
Assistant Curator at the Williams College Museum of Art.
ARTH 022 Audubon and His Oeuvre
The life work of John James Audubon (1785-1851), known primarily for his depictions of North Ameri-
can birdlife, will be compared with other ornithologists and artists in terms of their comparative biogra-
phies, the quality of their art, their degree of verisimilitude, and the context of exploration and discovery of
New World natural history. An intent of this course is to familiarize ourselves with the breadth of Audu-
bon's writings, much less known than his elephant folio volumes of engravings. Two all-day field sessions
to the Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology in Ithaca and to the American Museum of Natural History in
New York City. Possible local trips to meet with regional ornithologists and scholars.
Winter Study Program
­ 350 ­
Requirements: readings and discussions, short papers on specific illustrations or paintings as well as mod-
ern ornithological understandings of bird species and behavior.
No prerequisite. Enrollment limited to 30.
Cost to student: $50.
Meeting time: mornings.
SATTERTHWAITE
ARTH 024 The Ramayana, Epic in Art (Same as Religion 024)
The "Travels of Rama" is one of the most popular epics of India. It is a heroic tale involving romance, sac-
rifice, villainy, and warfare in both the human and cosmic or heavenly scales. To know the Ramayana is to
grasp the essentials of Hindu religion, culture, and values. This course will explore the exciting visual and
performing arts inspired by the Ramayana in India, where the story originated, as well as in the lands of
southeast Asia where it spread. Arts to be explored will include great temple sculptures in stone and
bronze, large scale and miniature painting, plays, dance and musical drama, batik, puppet shows, even
modern day comic books, and film and television productions of the Ramayana. Social and esthetic issues
to be considered may include the roles played by the arts in society; methods and aims of artistic expres-
sion; ideals of beauty and of virtue; social status and gender; the various transformations of the Ramayana
in both literature and art in various parts of India and by various levels of society ("folk" art versus "high"
art), as well as in the various different cultures in southeast Asia. The course will be half art history and half
studio art.
Evaluation will be based on attendance (mandatory), participation in class discussions based on readings,
and the production of painted illustrations to the story.
No prerequisites. No prior artistic training or skill will be required, only enthusiasm and effort. Enrollment
limited to 30.
Cost to students: $120.
Meeting time: mornings (twice per week).
GARY SMITH (Instructor)
JANG (Sponsor)
Gary Smith has a Master's degree in the art history of India from the University of California, Berkeley,
and has traveled widely in India and Southeast Asia. He is also a painter, with an interest in illustration, and
in both Asian and Western art.
ARTH 025 South Indian Textiles
There is more creative energy spent on producing textiles in the subcontinent of India than any other place
in the world. Early trading records indicated that European, Asian and Levantine civilizations valued In-
dia's fine cotton fabrics and the fastness of their colors. Today there is a vast quantity of apparel and table
linens at stores in the U.S. that are made in India and moreover, these are just the exports. Only by being in
India can one truly appreciate the array of textiles made there. The patterns, produced by so many different
methods, make these textiles rich and beautiful in contrast to the simplicity of the places where they are
made.
Cultural history will be examined through cloth production and utilization in Andhra Pradesh in a thriving
community of ikat dyers and weavers as well as the revived art of resist painted kalamkari cloth. Further
south the famous temple town of Kanchipuram in Tamil Nadu is a center of silk weaving, some of which is
brocaded with zari (gold) threads in traditional patterns. Block-printing, tie and dye, and embroidery also
decorate handloomed cottons. Many Indian people work where they live and the guest not only learns
about the art but also the artisan.
The travel study will appeal to a variety of students including those interested in art, anthropology, sociolo-
gy and history. Travel will be limited to one region of India allowing more time on-site. Students will be
expected to have a valid passport to surrender by November 1st along with two photos for the visa applica-
tion.
Requirements: the book, Traditional Indian Textiles by John Gillow and Nicholas Barnard will be required
reading prior to Winter Study. A journal is to be kept and a short paper written and illustrated with draw-
ings, photos, and/or materials will be due by the end of the trip.
Enrollment limited to 10. Priority given to seniors, then juniors, etc.
Estimated cost to student: $2500 which will include visa, all travel to, in and from India, lodging, meals,
guides/interpreters and entrance fees.
ELIZABETH MICHAELS (Instructor)
HEDREEN (Sponsor)
Elizabeth Michaels, the group leader, is a textile colorist and designer with 23 years of experience. She has
a masters in product design and taught a 1997 Winter Study program on "Creating Color" in the Art De-
partment and lead a group during the 1999 Winter Study program on the travel study, "Village Textiles in
India," which was concentrated in western India.
ARTH 031 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for ArtH 493, 494.
ARTH 033 Honors Independent Study
To be taken by candidates for honors by the independent study route.
Winter Study Program
­ 351 ­
ART STUDIO
ARTS 011 Introduction to Computer-Aided Design with AutoCad
This course provides basic instruction in computer aided drafting and design with emphasis on their use in
producing architectural and engineering drawings. Students will receive hands-on instruction in the use of
AutoCad software. Topics include basic drawing use of AutoCad commands and editing. The course is
geared toward art and theatre students who have an interest in design or architecture.
Evaluation will be based on the degree and quality of completion of an assigned CAD project.
No prerequisites, however, a basic knowledge of PC computer use is helpful. Enrollment limited to 15.
Cost to students: $200 for AutoCad software.
Meeting times: mornings--three times a week. Two-thirds of the class time will be devoted to lab work.
JOHN NOVELLI (Instructor)
BENEDICT (Sponsor)
ARTS 013 Figure and Costume
This is a drawing course focusing on the body, nude and clothed. Utilizing a skeleton, a live model and a
wonderful collection of costumes from the theater department, assignments will cover basic technical and
expressive techniques. Meeting from 1pm to 4pm three times a week, the majority of required work will be
done in class; homework will be limited to one drawing assignment per week and a reading assignment on
figure drawing. Because of the extended class time and relatively small class size, the instructor can ad-
dress individual needs, so students at all levels of experience, including the beginner, are welcome. Stu-
dents who would like to be excused from the Arts 100 requirement may at the end of this term, submit their
portfolio for departmental review.
Evaluation will be based on personal improvement, the quality of class work, vigorous class participation,
and the imaginative resolution of four class-based assignments.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 15. Priority will be given in the following order: Seniors, Juniors,
Sophomores, Freshmen.
Cost to student: approximately $120 for materials and a book.
Meeting time: afternoons, 1 to 4 p.m., three times a week.
GLIER
ARTS 015 The Personal is Political: Strategizing Sculpture from a Domestic Space
The home, perhaps the most personal of all spaces, is the point of origin in this sculptural investigation.
What is political in your house? Students will be encouraged to dissect the home, room by room, for issues
and draw from the materials therein. The course will begin with the analysis of personal narratives for
political concerns. Activities, materials and aesthetics specific to the domestic space will be considered as
carriers of personal resonance and political meaning. Projects will employ "sculpture" techniques such as
manipulating domestic ready-mades, home craft processes, and food fabrication. Studio work will be initi-
ated after a class expedition to Wal-Mart, where students will purchase their own materials, and concluded
with an exhibition of works produced in class. Students may come with fabrications skills or acquire them
in class.
Evaluation will based on individual in-class studio work and a final exhibition of sculpture.
Enrollment limited to 15.
Cost to student: approximately $50.
Meeting times: introductory evening lecture, two 3-hour classes per week in the mornings, final exhibition
opening.
SHEILA PEPE (Instructor)
PODMORE (Sponsor)
Sheila Pepe is an artist who lives in New York City. Her work takes a variety of forms: sculpture, drawing,
installations and video. Recent solo exhibitions include, "Josephine" at Thread Waxing Space in New York
City and "Shrink" at the Zihlka Gallery at Wesleyan University. She currently teaches at SUNY Purchase
and has taught at a variety of schools including Williams and Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts.
ARTS 017 Introduction to Theatrical Mask-making (Same as Theatre 017)
(See under Theatre for full description.)
ARTS 019 Introduction to Japanese Woodblock Carving and Printing (Same as Asian Studies
019)
The course teaches the technical aspects of creating Japanese woodblock prints as well as a brief overview
of the history of wood block printing in Asia. The students will each create a woodblock print of their own
design from laying out the initial format to carving and printing a 3 or 4 color print. There will be "work in
progress critiques" and discussion of alternative methods.
Evaluation will be based on attendance and effort, 6 hours per week in studio.
Prerequisite: an interest in art and/or printing techniques would be helpful.Enrollment limited to 12.
Cost to student: approximately $75.
Meeting time: afternoons.
JOSHUA ROME (Instructor)
JANG (Sponsor)
Joshua Rome lived in Japan from the age of twenty-one for twenty-four years. While there, he studied
woodblock techniques with Clifton Karhu for three years and then went on to study cabinetry and lacquer
Winter Study Program
­ 352 ­
techniques with Kuroda Kenrichi for another three years. Rome has had over forty shows at prominent
galleries throughout Japan as well as shows in New York and San Francisco. His works are in the perma-
nent collections of the British Museum in London, the James A. Michener Collection in Hawaii, the Cleve-
land Museum of Art, and the New York Public Library.
ARTS 023 Exploring Self-Portraiture in Video Art
This course will examine how the electronic medium of video can be used for investigations into and re-
flections of the self. The immediacy, intimacy, and accessibility of the video camera, combined with the
raw texture of the video image (think Cops, Blair Witch Project), can provide a unique vision of the video
artist. Does art in general, and video art in particular, inevitably become a self-portrait of the artist? How
can the artist manipulate this medium, and shape his/her reflection in it? How does this visual texture of
video differ from the texture of film? Can the electronic video signal display our reality with more accuracy
than other media, such as photography, painting or sculpture can? Can video function as a mirror? We will
explore these questions as we learn how to shoot and edit video. We will look at self-presentation in the
work of video pioneers (Vito Acconci, Joan Jonas, William Wegman) and current video artists (Sadie Ben-
ning, Daniella Dooling, Anne Robertson, Ken Kobland). Screenings will be followed by discussions of the
work shown. Students will be introduced to the basic technical concepts of video, and will learn basic
shooting and editing skills. Each student will produce a video piece that in some way functions as a self-
portrait (experimental approaches encouraged). Occasional readings will be handed out in class, and stu-
dents will be required to write short, weekly responses to readings and work shown in class.
Evaluation will be based on attendance, participation in class discussions, and the imagination and effort
put into their writing and video projects.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 12. Priority given to art majors.
Cost to student: $50.
Meeting time: two times per week in the afternoon.
ANNA VON SOMEREN (Instructor)
LALEIAN (Sponsor)
Anna Von Someren is a video artist currently living in Boston. She received her M.F.A. from the Massa-
chusetts College of Art, and her work has been screened at such prestigious venues as the New York Video
Festival and the Hong Kong Arts Center. When not making her own experimental work, she freelances as
an editor, cutting television commercials and independent films.
ARTS 027 Fabric Palette, Quilt Canvas
Quilts are timeless. They appeal to our physical and emotional well-being, recalling memories, evoking
feelings of comfort and appealing to our sense of color and design. In this course, we will touch on the his-
tory of traditional quiltmaking in this country and discover when traditional quiltmaking methods moved
into the realm of artmaking.
After accomplishing basic quilting techniques, each member of the class will create and complete an Art
Quilt which will be the basis of a show in the Wilde Gallery, the student gallery in the WLS Spencer Studio
Art Building. Though it is not necessary to be an experienced sewer prior to this course, some facility with
a needle would be helpful. More important will be your concept of design and color and willingness to use
fabric and stitching as your palette and canvas. Since quilting bees are part of the tradition and fun, expect
to work on your project outside of class hours along with other members of the class! You must be pre-
pared for the time commitment required for completion of your project.
Evaluation will be based on completed project, participation and attendance in class.
No prerequisites, but some drawing or sewing experience helpful. Enrollment limited to 15.
Cost to student: $100 for fabrics and other materials related to the course; unless you provide your own ma-
chine, there is an additional $50 fee for sewing machine rental.
Meeting time: mornings - Mondays, Wednesdays and Thursdays.
SYBIL-ANN SHERMAN (Instructor)
TAKENAGA (Sponsor)
In addition to her 26 years as Williams College support staff, Sybil-Ann Sherman has taught quilting work-
shops at North Adams State College (now MCLA) and the YMCA in North Adams. She has participated
in demonstrations of her craft at both Williams and at large craft fairs around Massachusetts. Her work has
been featured in Berkshire Magazine. Ms. Sherman last taught this course in January 2000.
ARTS 033 Honors Independent Project
Independent study to be taken by candidates for honors in Art Studio.
ARTS 035 Making Pottery on the Potter's Wheel (Same as Special 035)
Each class will begin with a lecture-demonstration, followed by practice on the potter's wheel. Each stu-
dent will have the use of a potter's wheel for each class. We will work on mugs, bowls, pitchers, plates, jars,
lids, vases, and bottles, and will finish these shapes as required by trimming and adding handles, lugs, lids,
spouts, and knobs. We will also work on several different handbuilding projects. After the tenth class ses-
sion, all class work will be biscuit-fired. The eleventh class will be devoted to glazing the biscuited pieces.
Glazing techniques will include pouring, dipping, layering, brushing, and stamping, and using wax resist
and other masking techniques to develop pattern and design. The completed work will then be glaze-fired.
The last meeting will be devoted to a "final exam" gallery show of your best work. Woven into lecture-
demonstrations will be presentations on various topics relating to the science and history of pottery mak-
ing.
Winter Study Program
­ 353 ­
The two most important requirements for this course are attendance at all class sessions and enthusiasm for
learning the craft of pottery making.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 9.
Cost to student: $135 plus makeup class fees ($28 per class), if applicable.
Meeting time: mornings.
RAY BUB (Instructor)
HEDREEN (Sponsor)
Ray Bub is a ceramic artist and potter at Oak Bluffs Cottage Pottery in Pownal, Vermont.
ASIAN STUDIES
ASST 010 Daoism (Same as Political Science 010)
(See under Political Science for full description.)
ASST 011 Heterogeneous Japan, 2001: Outside Mainstream of Society
This course looks at different life styles and philosophies of Japanese people of many kinds and types and
discusses whether there is some distinctive Japanese-ness even in such heterogeneity. Topics of study will
include: cult-followers, "queers," and modern nobilities; voices of Japan's minorities--racial, ethnic,
physical, etc.--versus the "cosmopolitan" flavor in Japan's pop culture; Japan's tough urban youths versus
teenagers at competitive high schools; Japan's media image of women versus housewives' grassroots so-
cio-political movements. Class participants will become connoisseurs of contemporary Japan. Regular
course reading will be supplemented by movies, music, and other audio-visual materials.
Evaluation will be based on regular classroom participation and a final 10-page paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 20.
Cost to student: $50 for books.
Meeting time: mornings.
KOSHIRO
ASST 012 Women and Religion in Contemporary Chinese Society (Same as Religion 012 and
Women's and Gender Studies 012)
This course will examine what impacts the religious traditions of China, including Confucianism, Taoism
and Mahayana Buddhism, have had upon shaping the social experiences, roles and images of women in
twentieth century China and Taiwan. We will be exploring dimensions of the modern encounter between
women and traditional Chinese traditions such as the construction of genders and the roles given them in
the Chinese religions, and the images of the "goddess" and the symbolism of the female in art. We will also
engage with contemporary Chinese women's responses to the traditional representations of their spiritual,
sexual and social roles in various women's social movements, as well as a new presentation of the female
body in contemporary Chinese cinema.
Evaluation will be based on participation in class discussions, a group project and a 10-page research paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 15.
Cost to student: about $50 for books and duplicated materials.
Meeting time: mornings.
HO
ASST 013 Feng Shui (Same as Art History 012)
(See under Art History for full description.)
ASST 019 Introduction to Japanese Woodblock Carving and Printing (Same as Art Studio
019)
(See under Art Studio for full description.)
ASST 025 Study Tour to Taiwan
Interested in learning first-hand about Chinese and Taiwanese culture and becoming acquainted with the
so-called Taiwan (economic and political) "miracle"? Want to improve your knowledge of Mandarin, the
world's most widely spoken language? Then join us on this 24-day study tour to Taiwan, Republic of Chi-
na. We'll spend the first two and a half weeks in Taipei, the capital city, where three hours of Mandarin lan-
guage classes will be scheduled each morning. After class, we'll meet as a group for lunch and discussion.
Visits to cultural and economic sites of interest will be scheduled for some afternoons and Saturdays, with
other afternoons, evenings, and Sundays free for self-study and individual exploration of the city. During
the last week, we'll conduct a seven-day tour of central and southern Taiwan. Two orientation sessions will
be conducted on campus in November and December to help prepare participants for their experience.
Requirements: satisfactory completion of the language course and active participation in the other sched-
uled activities.
Prerequisite: Chinese 101. Enrollment limited to 15. Interested students should consult the instructor before
registration.
Cost to student: $2000 (includes round-trip air fare from New York City, tuition, textbooks, accommoda-
tions, weekday lunches, local excursions, and tour of central and southern Taiwan; does not include break-
fasts, dinners, and weekend lunches while in Taipei, estimated at $250, or incidental expenses.)
KUBLER
Winter Study Program
­ 354 ­
ASST 031 Senior Thesis
To be taken by all students who are candidates for honors in Asian Studies.
CHINESE
CHIN S.P. Sustaining Program for Chinese 101-102
Students registered for Chinese 101-102 are required to attend and pass the Chinese Sustaining Program.
Classes meet Mondays, Tuesdays, and Thursdays from 9:00-9:50.
Requirements: regular attendance and active class participation.
Prerequisite: Chinese 101.
Cost to student: one Xerox packet.
LANGUAGE FELLOW
CHIN 031 Senior Thesis
To be taken by all students who are candidates for honors in Chinese.
JAPANESE
JAPN S.P. Sustaining Program for Japanese 101-102
Students registered for Japanese 101-102 are required to attend and pass the Japanese Sustaining Program.
Classes meet Mondays, Tuesdays, and Thursdays from 9:00-9:50.
Requirements: regular attendance and active class participation.
Prerequisite: Japanese 101.
Cost to student: one Xerox packet.
LANGUAGE FELLOW
JAPN 012 Japanese Dyeing: Joy of Kusaki-zome
Kusaki-zome is the traditional Japanese art of dyeing with plant dye. Using a simple technique, it brings
out the wonderful colors in vegetables, flowers, tree leaves and twigs. For instance, tea leaves provide a
light brown color. What color do you think onion skins would give? The most interesting thing is that the
color is never the same since the hue of colors differs greatly depending on the season when the plants were
harvested. The technique is simple; if you can boil eggs, you can enjoy Kusaki-zome. This class requires
no previous artistic training.
To accommodate student demand, two sections of this course will be offered.
Evaluation based on the completion of two projects, with a journal describing the projects, as well as par-
ticipation in the final class exhibition.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 15 per section.
Cost to student: lab fee of $35.
Meeting time: mornings.
KYOKO KABASAWA (Instructor)
CRANE (Sponsor)
Kyoko Kabasawa is a Japanese textile and dyeing artist who teaches at Hokkaido Women's College. In
addition to a number of prizes awarded in Japan, she won an originality award in the Hawai'i Handweav-
ers' Hui 45th Anniversary Biennial Exhibition in August 1998.
JAPN 031 Senior Thesis
To be taken by all students who are candidates for honors in Japanese.
ASTRONOMY
ASTR 011 Leadership in Astronomy: From Copernicus to Hubble and the Age of the
Universe (Same as EXPR 011)
Progress in understanding our Universe has undergone major steps as the result of sweeping new ideas
introduced by major scientists. Copernicus, in his book of 1543, shook the foundations of ancient science;
Tycho, a few decades later, revolutionized the idea of observing the heavens; and Kepler, in 1603-1618,
completed the Copernican Revolution by removing the ancient idea that perfect circles were necessary for
orbits. Halley and Newton, starting in the 1680's, led the world to comprehend the universality of gravity
and linked comets with planets in obeying the law of gravity. In this century, Shapley moved the Sun out of
its central place in the Universe and Hubble, in the 1920's, found that our galaxy was only one out of many
and that the Universe is expanding all around us. In addition to studying the contributions of these leaders,
we will see how Hubble's law of the expanding Universe is being studied as a Key Project of the Hubble
Space Telescope and how astronomers hope to soon know accurately the cosmic distance scale and the age
of the Universe. We will consider the role of NASA, the space shuttle, and astronaut/astronomers in shap-
ing the scientific goals. Readings include Rocky Kolb's "Blind Watchers of the Sky: The People and Ideas
that Shaped our View of the Universe," about the early astronomers, and R. Christianson's "On Tycho's
Island: Tycho Brahe and His Assistants, 1570-1601." Videos will include parts of Tom Hanks's "From the
Earth to the Moon." Dr. Robert Williams, the former director of the Hubble's Space Telescope Science In-
stitute; and James V
oelkel, author of the book "Johannes Kepler and the New Astronomy," plan to join the
class to deliver seminars.
Winter Study Program
­ 355 ­
Grading will be on the basis of a final paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 30.
Cost to student: $15 for readings.
Meeting time: mornings.
(This course is part of the Leadership Studies Cluster)
PASACHOFF
ASPH 031 Senior Research
To be taken by students registered for Astrophysics 493, 494.
ASTR 031 Senior Research
To be taken by students registered for Astronomy 493, 494.
BIOLOGY
BIOL 012 Greenhouses: Defying Winter (Same as Environmental Studies 012)
The growing of plants indoors dates back to Classical times, but truly started to flourish in the Seventeenth
Century with the development of the orangery. In many respects, winter-defying structures to house plants
reached their peak in the Victorian Age, exemplified by the Crystal Palace at the Great Exhibition of 1851
in London. This course will explore the history and uses of greenhouses through class lecture-discussions,
hands-on projects in the College's newly constructed Lewis-Mink Greenhouse, and field trips to visit
greenhouses in the Berkshire County region, the Connecticut River Valley, and New York City. Students
will learn principles of plant propagation and greenhouse functions, from commercial horticulture, to
scientific research, sewage treatment, and horticultural therapy in hospital settings.
Evaluation: each student will conduct a plant propagation project in the Lewis-Mink Greenhouse, write a
short paper relating to some aspect of greenhouses, and submit a journal integrating the course experiences.
Enrollment limited to 15. Preference will be given to students who intend to be biology majors or environ-
mental studies concentrators.
Cost to student: $40 for books, text, and materials.
Meeting time: mornings, plus two all-day field trips.
ART
BIOL 013 Genetically Modified Organisms--Friend or Foe? (Same as Environmental
Studies 013)
Are genetically modified organisms (GMOs) the next Green Revolution or Frankenfood"? While Ameri-
cans were rather quietly accepting the introduction of mixed genes in their food, Europeans have been rais-
ing the alarm, and refusing to accept U.S. imports. This course will examine in depth how to create GMOs,
which ones have been created, and their potential hazards and benefits. No biology prerequisite is required,
as we will start from basics. Our focus will be largely in the agricultural realm. We will look at environmen-
tal and economic aspects of the controversy, and try to propose risk assessment methods.
The course will consist of lectures, discussions and debates, and will culminate in a 10-page position paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 30.
Cost to student: approximately $45 for text and readings.
Meeting time: a minimum of 3 afternoons a week.
LEE VENOLIA (Instructor)
ART (Sponsor)
Lee Venolia is a former Assistant Professor in the Biology Department and is trained in genetics.
BIOL 014 Humanity: The Next Generation
This course will explore recent progress in genetic, reproductive, and developmental technologies. We'll
discuss the science as well as the social controversies associated with genetic screening, gene therapy, fetal
and animal tissue transplantation, human embryo manipulation, and assisted-reproduction technologies.
What advances capture our imaginations? What ones make us shudder? What are the social, economic, le-
gal, and ethical implications of "designing" our children, transplanting animal organs into humans, or clon-
ing ourselves? We'll also examine public perceptions of these scientific frontiers as evidenced in newspa-
pers and magazine articles, science fiction films and books, and scientific documentaries. This course will
be of interest and accessible to both biology majors and non-majors, first-year students through seniors.
Evaluation will be based on student participation in class discussions and a final 10-page paper.
No prerequisites. Not appropriate for students enrolled in Biology 132. Enrollment limited to 16.
Cost to student: approximately $40 for books and readings.
Meeting time: minimum of three mornings a week.
ALTSCHULER
BIOL 015 Bird Song and Dance
This course is intended to provide an intensive, research-oriented experience for a small group of students
interested in laboratory-based approaches to animal behavior and neuroscience. We will examine the rela-
tionship between the sounds a zebra finch produces while it sings and the changes in body, head, and bill
posture that accompany that song and are known as the "dance". We will then go on to consider whether
the brain areas that are known to control the song are also involved coordinating the dance component of
male courtship. Students will learn to acquire, digitize, and analyze sound and video, to score behaviors,
and may also opt to learn some small-animal surgical techniques. Readings from the literature will be as-
Winter Study Program
­ 356 ­
signed, and members of the class will collectively write a formal report of the results of the work that was
accomplished.
Requirements: attendance at class meetings, discussion of the readings, additional independent work, and
contribution to a formal paper reporting the group's results.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 4. Sophomores and first-year students without previous indepen-
dent laboratory experience will be given priority.
Meeting time: minimum of 3-4 mornings a week.
H. WILLIAMS
BIOL 016 Reaching the Underrepresented: Math Software Development for Grade School
(Same as Mathematics and Statistics 016)
Although software titles purporting to teach kids math abound, few successfully engage kids, especially
girls, in a useful manner. In this course, we will review several games asking questions such as: is it mathe-
matical? Is it equitable? Is it engaging? looking specifically for what engages girls of color in math activi-
ties. After exploring various technologies (multiplayer games, real-time voice, intranet, internet, voice rec-
ognition, and speech synthesis), we will write one or more simple web-based games for use in schools
around the country. The goal is to build math skills, confidence and a love of math.
Evaluation will be based on preparation of one or more written reviews and participation in game design.
No prerequisite. No computer experience required. Enrollment limited to 13.
Cost to student: $5 for photocopies and materials.
Meeting time: afternoons plus field trips and extensive lab work.
LASKOWSKI and KEN STANLEY
Dr. Stanley received his Ph.D. at UC Berkeley in 1997 and his BS from Purdue in 1978. He has 11 years
experience as a software engineer and is currently a postdoctorate researcher at UC Berkeley and MIT.
BIOL 019 The Winter Landscape (Same as Environmental Studies 021 and Geosciences 021)
With autumn's foliage but a fading memory, landforms emerge attired in a snowy coat highlighting every
ridge crest, ledged slope, and valley hillock. Glacial landforms from the bygone Ice Ages reveal them-
selves, unburdened of their leafy shroud, and tell me their story of flowing ice and rushing melt water. Inar-
guably, winter affords the geomorphologist--student of landscape evolution--the best view of the land.
The outdoors becomes our classroom and snowshoes/crampons our mode of travel through this winter
landscape.
This class will introduce you to the High Peaks Wilderness of New York's Adirondack Mountains. In addi-
tion, we'll examine the region's natural/cultural history--the vegetative succession after ice retreat, the im-
pact of logging and devastating forest fires during the early twentieth century and pre-Colonial through
modern land use. Within the ADK Blue Line an experiment in land conservation continues, the largest
park in the lower 48, yet composed of more private than public holdings. What does the future hold? What
should be the balance between economic/residential development and conservation?
Evaluation will be based on participation, independent project and presentation of results. Projects may be
field or literature surveys and should focus on the glacial, land use or cultural history of some area. Presen-
tations using slides, posters, or computer graphics are preferred.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 10.
Cost to student: $250 plus personal gear. Students must contact the instructor for a list of required equip-
ment before leaving for the holiday break. This will allow ample time to secure gear. The Dacks trips will
be physically demanding and excellent health is necessary.
Meeting time: see itinerary.
Itinerary:
3-5 Jan; classroom discussions with local afternoon hikes on snowshoes.
8-12 Jan; Dacks trip departs 8AM Mon, returns Fri evening. ADK Loj is our base camp. The
Loj provides us with meals, a bunkroom, and a warm fireplace where we can converse/re-
lax after supper.
16-18 Jan;High Peaks tent camping for 2 nights in Johns Brook Valley. The Great Range/Mt.
Marcy can be accessed. Preparation of projects should begin this week.
22-26 Jan; Completion/Presentation of projects in the classroom.
Possible peaks for your winter 46 list: Marcy(#1, 5344ft) Algonquin(#2, 5114ft) Skylight(#4, 4926ft)
Gray(#7, 4854ft) Colden(#11, 4714ft) Wright(#16, 4580ft) Big Slide(#27, 4257ft) Phelps(#32, 4161ft).
DAVID J. DESIMONE (Instructor)
ART (Sponsor)
Dave DeSimone came to Williams upon completion of his dissertation in glacial geology in 1985 and is a
part-time lecturer in geosciences and environmental studies. In addition, Dave operates a small consulting
hydrogeology business. During the winter, Dave makes regular trips to the Dacks to summit one of the 46
Peaks as he continues to progress toward completion of this goal. He is known, perhaps not enviably, for
squeezing a day trip in during the week--driving 150 miles, ascending a peak, and returning home for
supper. The adirondacks are a special place for him and he avidly learns of the region's natural and cultural
history as the years pass.
Winter Study Program
­ 357 ­
BIOL 021 Internships in Field Biology
Sophomores, juniors and seniors wishing to do internships with conservation organizations, national or
state parks, or field research at other institutions should sign up for Biology 021 as their Winter Study
course. Previous internships have included such diverse programs as working on the problem of
introduced species with a local or national environmental organization, working at a raptor rehabilitation
center and working with their home state's department of environmental management. Students must
make all the arrangements for the internships directly with the sponsoring organization. The costs of travel
and room and board must be borne by the student. Before a student can receive approval to sign up for the
course, a student must work out a detailed plan with Professor Raymond by early October.
Evaluation will be based on a daily field notebook and a summary paper or laboratory report.
Prerequisites will depend on the program chosen.Not open to first-year students. Enrollment limited to 30.
Cost to student: will vary with the program.
RAYMOND
BIOL 022 Introduction to Biological Research
An experimental research project will be carried out under the supervision of a member of the Biology De-
partment. It is expected that the student will spend 20 per week in the lab at a minimum, and a 10-page
written report is required.
Prerequisite: Biology 101. Enrollment limited to 15. This experience is intended for, but not limited to, first-
year students and sophomores, and requires the permission of the instructor. Interested students should
contact Professor Raymond for more information before registering.
Cost to student: none.
Meeting time: mornings.
RAYMOND
BIOL 031 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Biology 493, 494.
CHEMISTRY
CHEM 010 The Origins of Life
Perhaps the most fundamental questions science strives to answer is "how did we get here?". Answering
this question starts with an examination of the formation of the earth, and with the appearance of life. We
have to define what we mean by "life" and examine what basic biological features constitute a living orga-
nism. How did these fundamental features arise? What process allowed them to reproduce? How did early
organisms survive on a planet lacking the atmosphere we enjoy today? How did simple life forms evolve
into humans? We will focus our attention on how one goes about formulating and answering these sorts of
questions, and the answers that are currently available. This course is of interest and accessible to both sci-
ence and non-science majors, and is open to all students.
Evaluation is based on participation in discussions, a 10-page paper, and a presentation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 16.
Cost to student: approximately $50 for reading packet and books.
Meeting time: afternoons.
CHIHADE
CHEM 011 Science for Kids (Same as Environmental Studies 011 and Special 011)
Are you interested in teaching? Do you enjoy working with kids? Do you like to experiment with new
things? Here is a chance for you to do all three! The aim of this Winter Study Project is to design a series of
hands-on science workshops for elementary school children and their parents. Working in teams of 2-4,
students spend the first three weeks of Winter Study planning the workshops. This involves deciding on a
focus for each workshop (based on the interests of the students involved) followed by choosing and de-
signing experiments and presentations that will be suitable for fourth-grade children. On the third weekend
of Winter Study (January 20, 21) we bring elementary school kids with their parents to Williams to partici-
pate in the workshops.
You get a chance to see what goes into planning classroom demonstrations as well as a sense of what it's
like to actually give a presentation. You find that kids at this age are great fun to work with because they are
interested in just about everything and their enthusiasm is infectious. You also give the kids and their par-
ents a chance to actually do some fun hands-on science experiments that they may not have seen before,
and you are able to explain simple scientific concepts to them in a manner that won't be intimidating. It is a
rewarding experience for all involved.
Evaluation is based on participation in planning and running the workshops, and each group is expected to
prepare a handout with descriptions of the experiments for the kids, parents, and teachers. No prerequisites.
You need not be a science major; all that is needed is enthusiasm. Enrollment limited to 25.
Cost to student: none.
Meeting time: mornings. Classes meet three times a week for approximately three hours each session. The
workshop is run on the third weekend of Winter Study (January 20, 21) and attendance from 9:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m. is mandatory that weekend. There are also one or two brief meetings held in the fall term for pre-
liminary planning.
SCHOFIELD and T. SMITH
Winter Study Program
­ 358 ­
CHEM 012 Reporting and Writing About Science and Technology (Same as English 012 and
Special 012)
In this course you read some of the best science writing being published in newspapers, magazines, and
books for the general reader. We try to understand the techniques that skillful writers use to achieve their
ends, especially rhetorical devices that make complex issues and arguments seem simple and comprehen-
sible. In addition to a lot of reading, we also do a lot of writing. By emulating good writing about science
and technology, we develop skills in the art of explanation, which serve you well in other courses. The
goals of this course are to develop an appreciation of good writing about science and to become better writ-
ers ourselves.
There will be numerous short writing assignments, including a longer final article popularizing a topic in
science or technology of your choosing.
Evaluation is based on class participation and completion of all reading and writing assignments.
Prerequisite: one Division III course at Williams prior to this course or permission of the instructor. Enroll-
ment limited to 10.
Cost to student: approximately $30 for books.
Meeting time: MWF afternoons.
JO PROCTER (Instructor)
D. RICHARDSON and ROSENHEIM (Co-Sponsors)
Jo Procter is news director at Williams College. She has an M.S. in communications from Boston Univer-
sity. Her media experience includes Popular Science Magazine, Mutual Broadcasting, and WGBH-TV
(Boston).
CHEM 013 Science and Archaeology
Archaeological studies, which consider the human impact on the environment, can include materials as re-
cent as nineteenth-century glass, or as old as stone tools from hundreds of thousands of years ago. And pa-
leoanthropology, the study of early human remains, covers materials that are millions of years old. Natural
science can answer a wide variety of questions for researchers in the field, not just how old an object is, but
also where, how, and sometimes why an object was made. These answers in turn tell us about patterns of
human development and settlement, and also help us distinguish forgeries from genuine artifacts.
The course consists of approximately two weeks of class meetings and readings, after which students se-
lect a project either in the lab or based on the readings. At the end of Winter Study, students present their
results to the class and submit a 5-7 page written report.
Evaluation is based on class participation, completion of the project, and submission of a satisfactory re-
port.
Prerequisite: a high school chemistry course; college-level chemistry is not required. Enrollment limited to
12.
Cost to student: approximately $5 for reading packet.
Meeting time: mornings.
ANNE SKINNER (Instructor)
D. RICHARDSON (Sponsor)
Anne Skinner is a Senior Lecturer in Chemistry at Williams.
CHEM 014 Emergency Medical Technician--Basic
A course designed to prepare students for the Massachusetts EMT exam and to provide training to become
certified as an Emergency Medical Technician. The course teaches the new national standard curriculum
which makes reciprocity with many other states possible. This is a time-intensive course involving approx-
imately 130 hours of class time plus optional emergency room observation and ambulance work. Students
will learn, among other skills, basic life support techniques, patient assessment techniques, defibrillation,
how to use an epi-pen, safe transportation and immobilization skills, as well as the treatment of various
medical emergencies including shock, bleeding, soft-tissue injuries, and child birth. In order to reduce the
number of class meetings required during Winter Study Period, the course will hold a few meetings begin-
ning in the fall semester. These class meetings, which are mandatory, are held on Sundays with the follow-
ing schedule: 29 October (orientation), 5 November, 12 November, and 19 November.
Evaluation is based on class participation and performance on class exams, quizzes and practical exercises.
Prerequisite: it is recommended that students have American Heart Association Level C BLS Provider
CPR Cards or American Red Cross BLS provider CPR cards before entering the EMT Class. A CPR class
will be offered in October for those students wishing to take the EMT class who don't already have CPR
cards. Enrollment limited to 24 students.
Cost to student: $300 plus approximately $75 for textbook, stethoscope, and BP cuff.
Meeting time: mornings and afternoons; schedule TBA in October.
KEVIN GARVEY (Instructor)
D. RICHARDSON (Sponsor)
Kevin Garvey is a Massachusetts state and nationally approved EMT-I (Intermediate) and an EMT-IC
(Instructor/Coordinator). He had been involved with Emergency Medical Services for 15-20 years. Mr.
Garvey currently works for Baystate Health Systems as an RN (registered nurse) and EMT-I and also
works as an EMT-I for Village Ambulance in Williamstown. Mr. Garvey is also an EMT training instructor
at Greenfield Community College.
Winter Study Program
­ 359 ­
CHEM 015 The X-Ray Revolution
X-rays are a valuable tool for studying the structures of life. They are used to make familiar images of coro-
nary artery blockages and brain tumors, to create micrographs of living cells, and to produce diffraction
patterns of drug-protein complexes. Thanks to new instrumentation (synchrotron radiation), scientists now
have remarkable abilities to produce bright x-ray beams for these and other applications. This course starts
with an introduction to modern methods of x-ray production and transport--from particle storage rings to
free electron lasers. In the remainder of the class, we emphasize the application of x-rays to problems in
bioinorganic chemistry and structural biology on the molecular, cellular, and organ scales. An on-campus
x-ray experiment is optional. The class concludes with a 2-3 day field trip to the National Synchrotron
Light Source on Long Island, where students conduct or observe an experimental project of their choice.
Students present their results to the class and submit a 10-page written report.
Evaluation is based on class participation, completion of the experimental project, and submission of a sat-
isfactory 10-page report.
Prerequisite: Chemistry 101 or 103, Biology 101, or Physics 131 or 141 or permission of instructor.Enroll-
ment limited to 12.
Cost to student: approximately $100 for field trip housing and meals (subsidies available) plus approxi-
mately $20 for miscellaneous course materials.
Meeting time: mornings.
STEPHEN P. CRAMER (Instructor)
D. RICHARDSON (Sponsor)
Steve Cramer, Advanced Light Source Professor at UC Davis, was a Williams chemistry major, Class of
1973. After graduate work at Stanford and a post-doc at Cal Tech, he worked in industry (Exxon and
Schlumberger) and at National Labs (Brookhaven and Lawrence Berkeley Lab).
CHEM 016 Glass and Glassblowing
This course provides an introduction to both a theoretical consideration of the glassy state of matter and the
practical manipulation of glass. While no previous experience is required, students with patience, good
hand-eye coordination, and creative imagination will find the course most rewarding. The class is open to
both artistically and scientifically oriented students.
Evaluation is based on class participation, glass projects, a 10-page paper, and a presentation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 10. Preference given to juniors and seniors. Interested students
should contact Professor Thoman by e-mail prior to registration.
Cost to student: $50 for supplies.
Meeting time: mornings, five days per week.
THOMAN
CHEM 017 Introduction to Research in Archaeological Science
An independent experimental project in archaeological science is carried out in collaboration with Dr.
Skinner whose research involves two types of studies: dating fossil material and establishing the sources of
ancient artifacts.
Requirements: a 10-page written report.
Evaluation is based upon participation in the research project and a 10-page paper.
Prerequisite: variable, depending on the project (at least Chemistry 101) and permission of the Department.
Since projects involve work in a faculty research lab, interested students must consult Dr. Skinner and with
the Department Chair before electing this course. Nonscience majors are invited to participate. Enrollment
limited to space in faculty research lab.
Cost to student: none.
Meeting time: TBA.
ANNE SKINNER (Instructor)
D. RICHARDSON (Sponsor)
Anne Skinner is a Senior Lecturer in Chemistry at Williams.
CHEM 018 Introduction to Research in Biochemistry
An independent experimental project in biochemistry is carried out in collaboration with a member of the
Department with expertise in biochemistry. Biochemistry is a branch of chemistry that deals with the mo-
lecular details of living systems including the interaction of biologically important molecules. In the Chem-
istry Department, studies are underway to investigate the structure/function relationship of proteins, the in-
teraction between proteins and RNA and DNA, DNA structure and repair, and the molecular basis of gene
regulation.
Requirements: a 10-page written report.
Evaluation is based upon participation in the research project and a 10-page paper.
Prerequisite: variable, depending on the project (at least Chemistry 101) and permission of the Department.
Since projects involve work in faculty research labs, interested students must consult with one or more of
the faculty instructors listed below and with the Department Chair before electing this course. Nonscience
majors are invited to participate. Enrollment limited to space in faculty research labs.
Cost to student: none.
Meeting time: mornings.
CHIHADE, KAPLAN, LOVETT, WEISS
Winter Study Program
­ 360 ­
CHEM 019 Introduction to Research in Environmental Science (Same as Environmental
Science 019)
An independent experimental project in environmental science is carried out in collaboration with a mem-
ber of the Department with expertise in environmental science. Current research projects include studies of
atmospheric chemistry related to global warming and acid deposition, heavy metals in the local environ-
ment, and further development of laboratory techniques for ENVI 102 (Introduction to Environmental Sci-
ence).
Requirements: a 10-page written report.
Evaluation is based upon participation in the research project and a 10-page paper.
Prerequisite: a one-semester science course and permission of the Department. Since projects involve
work in faculty research labs, interested students must consult with one or more of the faculty instructors
listed below and with the Department Chair before electing this course. Nonscience majors are invited to
participate. Enrollment limited to space in faculty research labs.
Cost to student: none.
Meeting time: mornings.
KOEHLER, THOMAN
CHEM 020 Introduction to Research in Inorganic Chemistry
An independent experimental project in inorganic chemistry is carried out in collaboration with a member
of the Department with expertise in inorganic chemistry. Opportunities for research in inorganic chemistry
at Williams include the study of transition metals in biological systems (enzymes, proteins), and as building
blocks for new materials with interesting electronic (magnetic, conducting) and optical properties. Students
working in this area will gain expertise in the synthesis of new compounds and their characterization by
modern spectroscopic techniques.
Requirements: a 10-page written report.
Evaluation is based upon participation in the research project and a 10-page paper.
Prerequisite: variable, depending on the project (at least Chemistry 101) and permission of the Department.
Since projects involve work in faculty research labs, interested students must consult with one or more of
the faculty instructors listed below and with the Department Chair before electing this course. Nonscience
majors are invited to participate. Enrollment limited to space in faculty research labs.
Cost to student: none.
Meeting time: mornings.
PARK, SCHOFIELD
CHEM 023 Introduction to Research in Organic Chemistry
An independent experimental project in organic chemistry is carried out in collaboration with a member of
the Department with expertise in organic chemistry. One representative project involves isolation of the
bioactive constituents of Southeast Asian dart poisons from their natural sources and the elucidation of
their three-dimensional structures. Another line of investigation probes new and efficient methods for the
creation of molecules of medicinal interest. Some targets include the kavalactones-the active principles of
the herbal extract KAVA KAVA which is promoted as an alternative anti-anxiety remedy, and octalactin
A-an interesting 8-membered ring compound isolated from marine microorganisms that has shown signif-
icant toxicity toward humans.
Requriements: a 10-page written report.
Evaluation is based upon participation in the research project and the 10-page paper.
Prerequisite: variable, depending on the project (at least CHEM 101) and permission of the Department.
Since projects involve work in faculty research labs, interested students must consult with one or more of
the faculty instructors listed below and with the Department Chair before electing this course. Nonscience
majors are invited to participate. Enrollment limited to space in faculty research labs.
Cost to student: none.
Meeting time: mornings.
D. RICHARDSON, T. SMITH
CHEM 024 Introduction to Research in Physical Chemistry
An independent experimental project in physical chemistry is carried out in collaboration with a member
of the Department with expertise in physical chemistry. Current research projects in the Department in-
clude computer modeling of non-linear, chaotic chemical and biochemical systems, molecular modeling
of water clusters, laser spectroscopy of chlorofluorocarbon substitutes, and experimental studies of the ox-
idation of sulfur dioxide on atmospheric aerosols.
Requirements: a 10-page written report.
Evaluation is based upon participation in the research project and the 10-page paper.
Prerequisite: variable, depending on the project (at least CHEM 101) and permission of the Department.
Since projects involve work in faculty research labs, interested students must consult with one or more of
the faculty instructors listed below and with the Department Chair before electing this course. Nonscience
majors are invited to participate. Enrollment limited to space in faculty research labs.
Cost to student: none.
Meeting time: mornings.
KOEHLER, PEACOCK-LOPEZ, THOMAN
Winter Study Program
­ 361 ­
CHEM 031 Senior Research and Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Chemistry 493, 494.
CLASSICS
CLAS 010 Ovid and the Metamorphoses
One of the most delightful and influential of all the authors of classical antiquity, Ovid was the greatest Lat-
in poet in the generation after Vergil and Horace. His vast compendium of classical mythology, the Meta-
morphoses, contains the versions of Greek and Roman myths that are the most familiar to us. When we
look at a painting or sculpture of a mythological scene, a primary source is usually Ovid. Shakespeare
knew his Ovid well, and until the Romantic Era, Ovid was regarded among the most important classical
authors. The Metamorphoses was read for the sheer joy of its pagan wit and narrative skill, as an allegory
of Christian virtues, and even as foreshadowing the New Testament. Despite all the delight Ovid has pro-
voked, the Metamorphoses remains an enigma. Two thousand lines longer than the Aeneid, with which it
shares the meter and diction of Latin epic, the poem is nonetheless denied the status of epic by many critics,
who also argue about its subject and design. Ovid is recognized as a master story-teller, but there is little
consensus about what is at the heart of his exuberant word-play. The significance of his central theme--the
metamorphosis of a figure from one form to another--is still widely debated. We will read the entire Meta-
morphoses in translation. After an introductory lecture, we will move to discussion of selected stories,
seeking to understand aspects of Ovid's narrative technique, the purpose of his work, and the reasons for its
lasting influence.
Evaluation will be based on several short written exercises, a 5- to 10-page paper, and contributions to class
discussions.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 15.
Cost to student: $15-$20.
Meeting time: mornings.
FUQUA
CLAS 012 Renewal and Transformation (Same as Literary Studies 011 and Theatre 012)
This course will explore themes of renewal and transformation as they relate both to ancient cult, narrative,
and drama and also to post-classical reworkings of ancient myth. Although we shall study the mythologi-
cal, religious, and literary ramifications of these topics, our focus will be on the process by which figures
like Orpheus, Odysseus, Penelope, and Helen are transformed by authors, artists, composers, etc., of later
periods, a process that gives them new life and the creator new avenues of expression. Readings will in-
clude Homer's Odyssey, plays by Sophocles (Ajax, Philoctetes) and Euripides (Bacchae, Helen), and sev-
eral twentieth century plays (Cocteau, Orphée; Anouilh, Eurydice; Williams, The Fugitive Kind; Girau-
doux, Tiger at the Gates). As a final project or paper, students will submit either a substantial original work
of art, in any medium, based on materials covered in the course, or a major paper focusing on the critical
and theoretical issues involved in reworking ancient materials into new form. Our three meetings per week
will be devoted to discussion of readings covered outside class and to student presentations.
Evaluation will be based on classroom participation and on the quality of the final project.
No prerequisite. Preference will be given to juniors and seniors, and to students in the creative arts. Enroll-
ment limited to 15.
Cost to student: approximately $75 for books.
Meeting time: afternoons, three times a week.
PORTER
CLAS 025 Israel and Jordan: Intercultural Interchange, Ancient and Modern (Same as
Religion 025)
Multiculturalism has attained the status of a major slogan in American society over the last decade, but
confluence of various cultures has characterized societies throughout history and throughout the world.
The interaction between various constituencies plays out differently in different geo-political-historical
contexts. On the crossroads between Asia and Africa, and at the same time pulled between the West and
the East, Israel and Jordan dramatically illustrate potential models for intercultural interchange. By visiting
ancient sites while encountering modern institutions and individuals, students will examine how cultural
interchange is played out in a different part of the world and compare the ancient interchanges with the
modern. The ultimate purpose will be to identify and evaluate these different models of interchange. The
deep connection each of these countries has to its past demands a consideration of their dichotomous heri-
tage of dialogue and dispute, adaptation and rejection, domination and rebellion. Topics include Nabatean
places: Netzana, Avdat, and Petra between Arabia and Rome; an elite Englishman's experience of Arabia:
Lawrence of Arabia and Wadi Rum; Greco-Jewish harmony in Sepphoris versus Greco-Jewish conflict in
Caeserea; contemporary attempts at Arab-Jewish coexistence versus tensions in Hebron; Christianity in
the Holy Land: desert monasteries and the Church of the Holy Sepulchre; East meets West: the woman's
movement in Israel and Jordan; Interfaith dialogue between Christian, Moslems and Jews; and the integra-
tion of Jews from Moslem lands, Ethiopia, and FSU.
Among the locations to be visited: Jerusalem, Judaean desert, Hebron, Tel Aviv, Kibbutz Lotan (Israel);
Wadi Run, Humeima, Petra, Madaba, Jabal Musa, Amman, Jerash/Umm Keis, Pella (Jordan); Beit Shean/
Hamat Tiberias, Gamla/Katzrin, Hazor/Tel Dan/ and Haifa, Sepphoris/Caesarea, Jerusalem (Israel).
Duration of trip: three weeks.
Winter Study Program
­ 362 ­
Requirements: an oral presentation about one of the places visited and a 10-page paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 15.
Cost to student: $3500.
KRAUS
CLAS 031 Senior Thesis
May be taken by students registered for Classics 493, 494.
COMPUTER SCIENCE
CSCI 010 C, UNIX and Software Tools
This course serves as a guided tour of programming methods in the UNIX operating system. The course is
designed for individuals who understand basic program development techniques as discussed in an
introductory programming course (Computer Science 134 or equivalent), but who wish to become familiar
with a broader variety of computer systems and programming languages. Students in this course will work
on UNIX workstations, available in one of the Department's laboratories. By the end of the course, stu-
dents will have developed basic proficiency in the C programming language.
The increasing success of UNIX as a modern operating system stems from its unique ability to "prototype"
programs quickly. Students will use prototyping tools, such as Awk and "shell scripts" to write "filters" for
transforming data from a variety of sources. It will become clear that in many cases the overhead of pro-
gramming in languages such as C, Pascal, or FORTRAN is unnecessary. Moreover, students will learn to
effectively use software tools such as debuggers, profilers, and make files.
Evaluation will be based on several programming assignments and shell scripts due throughout the term.
While none of the projects in the course will be particularly large, the successful student will develop a tool
chest, which will extend their computing "effectiveness" in their particular field. Students with computing
needs particular to their field are encouraged to advise the instructor before the first meeting.
Prerequisite: Computer Science 134 or equivalent programming experience. Enrollment limited to 20.
Cost to student: texts.
Meeting time: mornings.
TERESCO
CSCI 015 Software Engineering for Web Applications
Consider the plight of a student who wants to learn how to build a Web application. Web apps rely on mul-
tiple technology layers working reliably together 24x7. To be successful, a student will need to learn a bit
about UNIX, a bit about a relational database management system, a lot about engineering the Web server
object itself, one of a number of scripting languages, the basics of HTTP, a bit about administering permis-
sions and configuration of a Web server, the syntax of HTML, etc. This course (a condensed version of a
course taught in a full semester version at MIT) will attempt to teach you how to design a good web servi-
ce--and give you one practical set of skills to use in doing so.
This course will be problem set based, with lectures interspersed as needed. You will find the problem sets
and the course textbooks at http://photo.net/teaching/one-term-web.html. Everyone will do problem sets 1
and 2. After that, students will have their choice of one of problem sets 3-5 or a project of their own choos-
ing. Collaborative projects, especially projects for a real audience, are encouraged.
Prerequisites: no formal prerequisites, but students will need basic UNIX and Emacs survival skills, and
must know how to structure, write, and debug a computer program; Computer Science 105, 134, or equiv-
alent experience is suggested. Students will be selected based on a questionnaire that will be available on
the web (http://cynthia.arsdigita.com/williams-survey.tcl) at the time of Winter Study registration. Equal
preference will be given to students with strong programming backgrounds and those with interesting
website ideas. Enrollment is limited to 20.
Requirements: completion of 3 problems sets or 2 problem sets plus a project. A mix of group and individ-
ual problem set review will be used for teaching and assessment.
Cost to student: none.
Meeting time: TBD. Lectures will mainly be mid-morning. Lab time (approximately 40 hours per week) is
self-chosen.
CYNTHIA KISER (Instructor)
BAILEY (Sponsor)
Cynthia Kiser is a graduate of Williams College. After getting her Ph.D. in Molecular Biology from Cal-
tech and a stint as a management consultant, Cynthia found a new outlet for her fascination with databases:
building database backed web sites for ArsDigita (www.arsdigita.com)
CSCI 031 Senior Honor Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Computer Science 493-494.
CONTRACT MAJOR
CMAJ 031 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Contract Major 493, 494.
Winter Study Program
­ 363 ­
ECONOMICS
ECON 010 The Microfinance Revolution
Can you work in the world of finance and at the same time help to alleviate world poverty? Yes you can
according to a new generation of dedicated entrepreneurs, bankers and NGO activists who in recent years
have brought community organizing, information technology, and innovative financial contracting togeth-
er to provide financial services to traditionally underserved communities. Examples range from Bangla-
desh's Grameen Bank which reaches millions of poor female borrowers in rural Bangladesh, to microlend-
ers as nearby as North Adams or Boston. Yet microfinance also has its detractors. While enthusiasts cele-
brate microfinance as the best poverty alleviation formula yet because it helps the poor to help themselves
and because it promises to become self-sustaining, critics point out that it may push poor people into debt
and that it is commercializing the social and political agendas of many non-profit organizations. In this
course we will study and discuss the new world of microfinance--both its promise and achievements as
well as its possible dangers and limitations--through films, ethnographic and economic impact studies,
journalistic accounts, and by talking to microfinance entrepreneurs.
Each student will participate in discussions and write a 10-page case study paper or a web report on a par-
ticular microfinance institution.
Prerequisite: Economics 101. Enrollment limited to 20.
Cost to student: about $30 for texts.
CONNING
ECON 011 Public Speaking
It has been said that most people fear public speaking more than death. In a world in which most of us are
asked at one time or another to say something to a group, public speaking is a skill which everyone should
learn. This course will help you become an organized and persuasive public speaker. You will create your
own public speaking style that is comfortable, confident, and conversational. We will focus on organiza-
tional techniques, handling visual aids effectively, eye contact and body language. A supportive atmo-
sphere will give each person an opportunity to receive feedback.
Students will be required to give four to five oral presentations to the class; several of these presentations
will be videotaped. Students will also be required to review their videotapes and write a critique of their
presentations.
Evaluation will be based on in-class presentations, class participation, and the written critique of presenta-
tions.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 14.
Cost to student: approximately $25.
Meeting time: afternoons.
BRAINERD
ECON 012 The Market for Mountains
In this course we will consider the interesting economics of high altitude climbing, an extreme sport which
has experienced extremely rapid growth in the last decade. We will first consider the history of high altitude
climbing, the exploration of peaks and early attempts at reaching their summit. We will then consider how
increased demand for climbing opportunities has affected the labor market in relatively poor, developing
countries like Nepal, where high altitude climbing opportunities are geographically concentrated. We will
also examine the impact of climbing on the quality of the environment, as well as the "pack it in - pack it
out" norm that has evolved in response to environmental degradation that has occurred. In addition, we
will consider recent criticism of an increasingly commercialized industry that provides opportunities for
less experienced climbers to ascend big peaks for big dollars. We will discuss whether the market for
mountains is indeed efficient or whether there is a role for intervention and regulation of high altitude
climbing.
Method of evaluation: short papers and contributions to class discussion.
Requirements: attendance at class meetings (approximately 6 hours per week) to discuss outside readings
(approx. 20 hours per week), plus an overnight trip to Mount Washington in New Hampshire for winter
hiking and an educational program about the dangers of high altitude climbing.
Prerequisite: Economics 101. Enrollment limited to 15. Selection Criteria: a short application to express in-
terest.
Cost to student: $250 including books, reading packet, and overnight trip to Mount Washington. Students
will be expected to provide their own winter clothing and hiking boots.
Meeting time: mornings.
SPENCE
ECON 013 The East Asian Miracle
This course is intended to help CDE Fellows integrate the material they learned in the first semester by ap-
plying it to the circumstances of a particular country or group of countries. During the 2001 Winter Term
session the course will be devoted to a case study of what have been widely perceived to be successful de-
velopment experiences--those of the East and Southeast Asian "miracle" economies. The focus will be on
issues such as the desirability of the economic transformations that have taken place in these countries, the
conditions that may have made such transformations possible, the roles that specific policies may have
played in bringing them about, the causes of the recent economic crisis in the region and its implications for
Winter Study Program
­ 364 ­
future growth in the affected countries, as well as the lessons that the East and Southeast Asian experience
may hold for other developing countries.
The class will be conducted as a seminar. It will meet for three hours on Monday through Wednesday mor-
nings. Course grades will be based on three components that will carry equal weight: 1) daily class partici-
pation, 2) two short (5-7 page) papers, due at the end of the second and third weeks of the course, on topics
to be assigned in class, and 3) a final examination.
Admission based on consent of instructor. The course will be open to no more than three College under-
graduates who have taken Economics 360 or Economics 509. Enrollment limited to 3.
Cost to student: approximately $25-$35 for the purchase of reading packet.
Meeting time: mornings.
MONTIEL
ECON 014 Accounting
The project will examine the theoretical and practical aspects of financial accounting. Although the begin-
ning of the course will explore the mechanics of the information gathering and dissemination process, the
course will be oriented mainly towards users, rather than preparers, of accounting information. The project
will include discussion of the principles involved in accounting for current assets, plant assets, leases, in-
tangible assets, current and long-term debt, stockholders' equity, the income statement and the statement of
cash flows. Students will be expected to interpret and analyze actual financial statements. The nature of,
and career opportunities in, the field of accounting will also be discussed.
The project is a "mini course." It will present a substantial body of material and will require a considerable
commitment of time by the student, including regular attendance and participation in discussion and home-
work cases and problems.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 30.
Cost to student: none.
Meeting time: mornings.
LEO MCMENIMEN (Instructor)
BRADBURD (Sponsor)
Leo McMenimen is returning to Williams this January from the School of Business, Montclair State Col-
lege.
ECON 015 Stock Market
Elementary description and analysis of the stock market. The project will include an examination of the
various ways businesses raise capital in the financial market. The project will include a description of the
mechanics of trading on various exchanges and other markets, stock market indexes or "averages" (Dow
Jones Industrial Average, S&P 500, etc.), and various methods of analyzing investment opportunities.
Stocks, corporate and government debt instruments, money market funds, mutual funds, and stock options
will be examined during the project.
Each student will participate in a team project aimed at analyzing a particular industry, and then a particular
company within the industry. Each team will then prepare a paper justifying their selection of a hypotheti-
cal investment portfolio.
The course will involve a two-day field trip to New York City. Students will leave Williamstown Wednes-
day at 1:00 p.m. and return late Friday evening.
Enrollment limited to 30. Not intended for students who already know much about the stock market; stu-
dents who have had Economics 317 not admitted.
Cost to student: $50 for bus transportation to New York City, obligatory and paid at time of registration.
Lodging in New York City for two nights ($150-$200) and meals are not included in this price and are the
responsibility of the student.
Meeting time: afternoons.
LEO MCMENIMEN (Instructor)
BRADBURD (Sponsor)
Leo McMenimen is returning to Williams this January from the School of Business, Montclair State Col-
lege.
ECON 016 How to Buy a Car
The premise of this course is that car buyers get more for their money if they are aware of the economic
principles involved at the time of purchase. At our first meeting, students will participate in an auto pur-
chase bargaining game; students will be paired off, one playing the role of the "dealer" and the other the
role of the "purchaser." In subsequent meetings we will discuss various issues including: the decision to
buy a new or used car, foreign or domestic car; supply side determinants of car prices such as optimal pric-
ing strategies of manufacturers and dealers, units costs, options' pricing, rebates, special interest rates,
product quality, product safety, advertising, and the roles of government, insurance companies and banks;
and demand side determinants of car prices such as preferences, demographics, exchange rate fluctuation,
seasonal buying cycles and business cycles. At the sixth meeting, students will participate in a second auto
purchase simulation.
Students are expected to do the required readings, participate in both simulations, write two 2-page synop-
ses of the simulations and write a 5-page paper at the end of the program discussing the reasons why the
material we covered helped (or hurt) them in negotiating their second car purchase.
The course will meet twice a week for two hours each session with an additional once-a-week, two-hour
Winter Study Program
­ 365 ­
conference with the instructor. Students will also be expected to meet independently as a group to work on
their strategic plan.
Students will meet with the instructor twice a week for two hours, but are expected to meet as a group for
four hours a week to work on their strategic plan. There will be extensive use of Internet car-buying web
sites.
Prerequisite: Economics 101. Enrollment limited to 20.
Cost to student: less than $10 for handouts.
HUSBANDS FEALING
ECON 017 Business Economics
In this course, the class will carry out a real-time forecast of the U.S. economy and explore its implications
for the bond and stock markets. The course will build upon principles of both macro and micro-economics.
It will provide an introduction to the work done by business economists and the techniques they use. Each
student will receive a disk (for IBM compatible computer) containing an economic database, chart-gener-
ating software and a statistical analysis program. This provides essentially the same resources that an eco-
nomics consulting group has in a regular business setting.
The class will be divided into teams of two or three students with each team focusing on a particular aspect
or sector of the economy. For example, we will examine prospects for inflation, interest rates, basic indus-
tries, high-technology industries, and the internet's impact on the economy. Class time will be divided be-
tween lectures (demonstrations of forecasting tools, discussion of business cycle theories and special top-
ics) and team presentations. The conclusion of the project will be a formal presentation of the economic
forecast with invited guests from the Wall Street investment world.
Each student should expect to spend a reasonable amount of time on independent work, to participate in
short presentations of their analyses as the work progresses as well as in the form presentation during the
last week. There will also be a 3-page paper summarizing the result of the forecast project.
No prerequisites, but Economics 101 is strongly recommended. Enrollment limited to 24.
Cost per student: about $25 for text and other materials.
The class will meet three times per week in the morning with two afternoons of workshops.
THOMAS SYNNOTT (Instructor)
BRADBURD (Sponsor)
Thomas Synnott '58 is Chief Economist, U.S. Trust Company of New York
ECON 018 The Economics of the Internet
The Internet has turned conventional business wisdom on its head. Net businesses with few revenues and
no profits are worth hundreds of times what successful "old economy" businesses are worth. Is this insan-
ity, or has the Internet changed the ground rules of how we make a living and make a profit? We'll explore
the shared cost structure of the Internet, question the legitimacy of Internet business models, and look at
how Internet businesses are--and are not --changing the communities they're located in. Guest lectures
with "net entrepreneurs" and development experts will be followed by group discussions.
Each student will be responsible for researching and presenting a case study examining an internet venture,
or a component of the global internet.
Evaluation will be based on discussion, participation, and the case study.
No prerequisite. Enrollment limited to 20.
Cost to student: $50 for materials and xeroxing.
Classes meet two mornings a week for three hours each meeting.
ETHAN ZUCKERMAN (Instructor)
BRADBURD (Sponsor)
Ethan Zuckerman '93 is an internet entrepreneur, and co-founder of Geekcorps, a non-profit focused on
internet solutions for economic growth in the developing world.
ECON 025 Cuban Socialism and Transition
In Latin America, the "Washington
Consensus" policies of opening markets to trade and foreign investment, privatization of state-controlled
companies, and deregulation have become the norm. From the 1980s and 1990s to the present, comparing
economies in the region has amounted to variations on a common theme. Few case studies exist that allow
comparing fundamentally different economic systems. Cuba is the exception, but U.S. citizens have had
limited access to the country for the past forty years. Consequently, Cuba is viewed from the United States
through a veil of mystery, and often misinformation, that prevents informed comparison. Reactions to
Cuba in the U.S. range from sympathy and unquestioning acceptance of the ends and means of Fidel Cas-
tro's government (in which case Cuba's education and health care systems are commonly cited), to dog-
matic and equally unquestioning opposition to Castro (in which case the government's repression of politi-
cal and religious dissent, and the relative poverty of the island, are commonly cited). This course is in-
tended to challenge both positions. Since 1994, Cuba's largest source of foreign exchange has been tour-
ism, so leisure and educational trips are common-and designed to show the government in a favorable
light. Most travelers remain in Havana, Varadero, and Trinidad, stay in hotels operated by Cuban-European
joint ventures, and tour sites intended to receive them. The small number of students enrolled in this course
will allow us to stray from that path. Students will travel through provinces from La Habana to Camagüey
to Santiago de Cuba, seeing rural Cuba and cities off the usual tourist routes, getting a feel of economic life
for a broader cross-section of Cuban people, and meeting with Cubans who oppose the government:
Winter Study Program
­ 366 ­
among them religious dissidents, political opponents, and aspiring entrepreneurs. On the other hand, stu-
dents will also see the images the government prefers to project, which are no less "real": among them a
model agricultural cooperative, a hospital, a factory, and a state ministry. Throughout the course, students
will be challenged to ask themselves and others:
* How does the dual monetary system, goods rationing, joint ventures, and high license fees
for a limited number of private commercial activities contribute to the government's social
and economic objectives?
* Does the government's opening to foreign trade and investment, while still maintaining
centralized control, represent a sustainable form of socialism?
* How has the U.S. embargo affected Cuban development?
* What are the possible paths for the Cuban economy from this point, and how are they contin-
gent on U.S. policy? Does the most likely path entail the eventual abandonment of socialism
and embrace of the "Washington Consensus"?
Students will be required to keep and ultimately submit a
journal, including entries on assigned topics. They will also be expected to contribute to group discussions
on the topics. Finally, one week after returning, a 4- to 5-page paper will be due; the paper will address one
of the central questions listed above.
Participation in all meetings and events on the itinerary will be required for credit.
Evaluation will be based evenly on the journal, participation in discussions, and the final paper.
Prerequisites: Spanish 105 or demonstrated Spanish fluency. Enrollment limited to 8. Students must con-
sult the instructor before registering. Preference will be given to students with greater Spanish language
abilities and a predisposition to participate in group discussions, and to those who are Economics or Politi-
cal Economy majors. Nevertheless, students majoring in other areas are encouraged to inquire.
Cost to student:
* Airfare: $275 (Roundtrip Nassau - Havana. Students are responsible for arranging their own
travel to and from Nassau, arriving no later than 5:00 p.m. on Wednesday, January 3. The
flight to Havana departs Thursday morning, January 4. The return flight arrives in Nassau
Wednesday, January 23.)
* Hotels: $600 (Including 1/3/01 in Nassau).
* Local/inter-province transportation: $550 (Includes all transportation within Cuba. Excludes
cab fare from Nassau airport to our hotel, approximately $10.)
* Meals for 20 days in Cuba + dinner in Nassau: $540
* Speaker honoraria: $50
* (Subtotal, to be paid to Williams College: $2015)
* Other: students are advised to bring $10 per day for minor purchases, approximately $210.
If the roundtrip flight from the United States to Nassau costs $350, the total cost would be approximately
$2585.
Meeting time: the itinerary and timing of group meetings are to be announced.
MEARDON
ECON 030 Honors Project
The "Specialization Route" to the degree with Honors in Economics requires that each candidate take an
Honors Winter Study Project in January of their senior year. Students who wish to begin their honors work
in January should submit a detailed proposal. Decisions on admission to the Honors WSP will be made in
the fall. Information on the procedures will be mailed to senior majors in economics early in the fall semes-
ter.
Seniors who wish to apply for admission to the Honors WSP and thereby to the Honors Program should
register for this WSP as their first choice.
Some seniors will have begun honors work in the fall and wish to complete it in the WSP. They will be
admitted to the WSP if they have made satisfactory progress. They should register for this WSP as their
first choice.
ECON 031 Honors Thesis
To be taken by students participating in year-long thesis research (ECON 493-W031-494).
ENGLISH
ENGL 010 Fan Fiction: Cult/Culture
This course will examine contemporary American "amateur" fan writing as subculture and super-culture.
In other words, we will read fan writing symptomatically--as both an idiosyncratic archive of marginal
and cultic pleasures, but also as a current in the American mainstream, a broad taxonomy of consumer de-
sire. We will also read it for fun, and examine our own readerly pleasure in, for example, Kirk/Spock and
Xena/Gabrielle "slash" writing. After careful study of the models made available by 'zines, webrings, ded-
icated multimedia fan sites and personal homepages, students will write their own fan fiction and, finally,
produce a short analytical companion piece for one of their classmate's stories. Evaluation will be based on
Winter Study Program
­ 367 ­
these two pieces of writing and regular class participation. Supplementary readings will include works by
Walter Benjamin, Constance Penley, Linda Williams, and Samuel Delany. Warning: syllabus may contain
sexually explicit material. Fan writers are like that.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 19.
Cost to student: $80 for materials.
Meeting time: mornings.
CARTER-SANBORN
ENGL 011 Constructing a Film Sequence
In this course, we will examine factors and stategies involved in the construction of a sequence in a feature
film: the ways in which the dramatic material of a screenplay shapes and is shaped by the work of actors,
set designers, lighting designers, and cinematographers, and is ultimately broken down and restructured in
the editing process. We will focus principally on analyzing sequences from finished films, identifying and
comparing their characteristic strategies (asking, for instance, how Hitchcock might have edited a se-
quence from a film by Welles). One of the instructors, filmaker Andrew Litvack (Williams '87), may also
be able to obtain for us rushes from a film, whose editing into alternative versions we would thus be able to
explore.
Requirements: faithful attendance and active participation in class discussion, and a series of written exer-
cises totalling about 10 pages of writing.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 15.
Cost to student: about $25 for books.
Meeting time: afternoons.
TIFFT and ANDREW LITVACK
Andrew Litvack is 1987 graduate of Williams College. He has been involved in the French film industry
for a number of years and is currently a filmaker living in Paris.
ENGL 012 Reporting and Writing About Science and Technology (Same as Chemistry 012
and Special 012)
In this course we will read some of the best science writing being published in newspapers, magazines, and
books for the general reader. We will try to understand the techniques that skillful writers use to achieve
their ends, especially rhetorical devices that make complex issues and arguments seem simple and com-
prehensible. In addition to a lot of reading, we will also do a lot of writing. By emulating good writing
about science and technology, we will develop skills in the art of explanation, which will serve you well in
other courses. The goals of this course are to develop an appreciation of good writing about science and
technology and to become better writers ourselves.
Requirements: There will be numerous short writing assignments, including a longer final article popular-
izing a topic in science or technology of your choosing.
Prerequisite: one Division III course at Williams prior to this course or permission of the instructor. Enroll-
ment limited to 10.
Required books: Anton, Ted, and Rick McCourt, The New Science Journalists, Ballantine Books, $10.90.
Blum, Deborah, and Mary Knudson, A Field Guide for Science Writers, New York: Oxford University
Press, $13.95. Strunk, Williams Jr., and E.B. White, The Elements of Style. New York: Macmillan $6.95.
The Tuesday editions of The New York Times, $4.
Meeting time: afternoons.
JO PROCTER (Instructor)
D. RICHARDSON, ROSENHEIM, (Co-Sponsors)
Jo Procter is the college's news director. She has a B.S. in communications from Boston University. Her
media experience includes Popular Science Magazine, Mutual Broadcasting, and WGBH-TV (Boston).
ENGL 013 Jane Austen
We will consider what constitutes virtue and virtuosity in Austen's notions of behavior and of literary style,
and will explore how issues of shame, audacity, and obligation affect her portrayal of genteel English soci-
ety during the Napoleonic Wars. We will focus particularly on Pride and Prejudice, Emma, Mansfield
Park, and Persuasion.
Requirements: students will write one 10-page paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 15, with preference given to junior and senior English Majors.
Cost to student: cost of books.
Meeting time: afternoons.
SOKOLSKY
ENGL 014 The Poetry Project
In this course, Williams College students and students from Williamstown Elementary school will explore
together the joys and challenges of reading and writing poetry. Williams students will spend the first week
of January developing a school poetry project: we will read poems by children, compile anthologies of
poems that might especially appeal to children, think about effective ways to introduce children to poetry,
and learn what we can from other poets who have worked in the schools. During the next two weeks, we
will work closely in the classroom with elementary school students, reading and writing poetry together.
This course hopes to draw Williams students who appreciate both poetry and working with children. Poets
are especially welcome.
Requirements: Each student will compile a poetry anthology for use in teaching; for a final project, Wil-
Winter Study Program
­ 368 ­
liams students and elementary school students will together make a book of poems that come out of the
project.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 15.
Cost to student: about $40 for books.
Meeting time: mornings.
SWANN
ENGL 015 The Brontes: The Making of Myths
This course will explore the mythic power of the worlds that a family of four remarkably talented chil-
dren--Charlotte, Branwell, Emily, and Anne Bronte--inhabited and created in an isolated parsonage on
the Yorkshire moors in mid-nineteenth-century England. It will also explore the enduring imaginative
force of that world in their art. Readings will include: (1) juvenilia (selections from Angria and Gondal, the
famous fantasy kingdoms the Bronte children created); (2) adult writings (Charlotte's Jane Eyre, Emily's
Wuthering Heights, and selected poems); (3) competing biographies of the Brontes (every student will read
and report on one). Subjects for discussion will include the Brontes' own mythmaking; the aesthetic trans-
formation of their childhood experiences in their adult fiction; and the myths generated by contending bio-
graphical accounts. Three, two-hour class meetings per week, with substantial readings for each.
Requirements and evaluation: regular attendance and active participation; one-page journal entries for each
class; two short papers; panel presentation on a Bronte biography.
Prerequisite: any English 100-level course except 103 or 150. Enrollment limited to 15, with preference
given to English and language majors.
Cost to student: approximately $40 for books and xerox packet.
Meeting time: mornings.
S. GRAVER
ENGL 016 Paintings, Pictures and Prose
This is a workshop for students interested in writing short fiction with the visual arts as a starting point. The
tradition of writing to and/or from visual work is a long one, and we will begin the course by talking about
the relationship between the visual arts and fiction, while looking at examples--common in poetry, rarer in
fiction--from the work of contemporary writers.
Requirements: the majority of the course will be spent creating, revising and workshopping student fiction
that engages in a dialogue with specific works of visual art. The course also requires active class participa-
tion and one exercise; 10-20 pages of fiction with substantial revisions.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 14.
Cost to student: printed materials.
Meeting time: mornings.
KAREN SHEPARD (Instructor)
FIX (Sponsor)
Karen Shepard is Part-Time Lecturer in English and a member of the Williams College class of 1987.
ENGL 017 Environmental Journalism (Same as Environmental Studies 014)
(See under Environmental Studies for full description.)
ENGL 018 English Rhymes and Rhythms
Blest be all metrical rules that forbid automatic responses,
Force us to have second thoughts, free from the fetters of self
--W.H. Auden
This course is designed to increase awareness of the expressive possibilities of the traditional sounds of En-
glish verse, those established patterns of rhyme and rhythm from which "free verse" is free. We will not
only read verse, but listen to it, speak it, and write it, in pursuit of a fuller experience of past and present
poetry. Each student will also create a "memory anthology" of individually chosen poems. Our goal is to
awaken the ear as well as the mind. Though the course should improve the ability to recognize and analyze
poetic forms and prosodic effects, it will proceed through practical exercises rather than analytical essays,
with a strong tilt toward the actual writing of verse. We will examine poems by such versifiers as Dr. Seuss,
Shakespeare, Hopkins and Larkin, with others suggested by the class, and verse written by class members.
We'll end with a reading of Vikram Seth's brilliantly formal (and informal) novel in verse, The Golden
Gate.
Requirements: students will be evaluated on the basis of their verse exercises, their regular and active atten-
dance, and the care and commitment with which they present their anthologies, to be spoken from memory
in the presence of the instructor.
No prerequisite. Enrollment limited to 15.
Cost to student: approximately $25.
Meeting time: afternoons.
CLARA PARK(Instructor)
FIX (Sponsor)
Clara Park is Senior Lecturer Emerita at Williams.
ENGL 019 Directed Reading in the Victorian Novel
This tutorial-format course is intended for students who have had some exposure to British Victorian nov-
els and would like to pursue individual interests through further reading. Students will meet with me in ad-
Winter Study Program
­ 369 ­
vance of Winter Study to work out a selection of related novels they will read and the questions they will
address, either individually or in groups of 2-3, depending on enrollments and on interests expressed.
Groupings can be based on an author or group of authors (a selection of Dickens's works, Trollope's Bar-
setshire novels, early or late George Eliot, etc.) a subgenre (Bildungsroman, sensation or condition-of-En-
gland novels, early detective fiction), a particular theme (heroines with professional ambitions, insanity),
or, in short, any grouping with a defensible basis. Students need not have a clearly defined list of novels in
mind in advance to sign up--in fact, some flexibility will be an advantage in forming groups.
Requirements: during Winter Study, the course will be conducted tutorial-style, with short papers due in
tutorial meetings during the term. At the end of the term, there will be a large group meeting during which
students will do presentations based on their work in the course.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 10 (with no more than 5 different groups). If the class is overen-
rolled, selection will be based on consultation with the instructor, with preference generally given to those
with prior coursework in the field.
Cost to student: books.
Meeting time: by individual arrangement.
CASE
ENGL 020 Journalism
In this introduction to journalism, students will learn reporting, writing and editing skills through written
assignments and in-class exercises. We will examine how different styles of writing serve different needs,
and the practical and legal limits within which journalists work. Assignments will include writing a news
story, a feature article, and an editorial. Students will also practice the essential art of rewriting.
Requirements: each student will submit articles on deadline; read and discuss current newspapers and
magazines; and attend all classes.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 15, with preference given to first-year students.
Cost to students: approximately $20.
Meeting time: mornings, four two-hour sessions each week.
SALLY WHITE (Instructor)
FIX (Sponsor)
Sally White worked at Time Inc. magazines in New York and Washington for thirteen years. She is now a
freelance magazine writer.
ENGL 022 Hamlet
This course is entirely dedicated to Shakespeare's Hamlet. We will read the play aloud and discuss its beau-
ties and complexities, with special attention to Shakespeare's language, characterization, and theatricality.
Though actors are warmly invited, you need not be an experienced performer to participate. We will also
discuss several critical essays about Hamlet, and watch and discuss several film versions, by Branagh,
Olivier, Mel Gibson, and others.
Requirements: each student is responsible for regular attendance, active participation, and several brief re-
ports.
Prerequisite: English 101 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limited to 15, no particular preference
given.
Cost to student: the text.
Meeting time: mornings--meets daily for an hour and a half.
R. BELL
ENGL 023 Putting on a Show: Film About Film and Theater
A course on the cinematic complexities of the attempt to make Art in two specific media: film and theater.
Films to be studied include Kelly and Donen's Singin' in the Rain, Malle's Vanya on 42nd Street, Yates'
The Dresser, Madden's Shakespeare in Love, Fellini's 8 1/2, and Leigh's Topsy-Turvy.
Requirements: one 10-page paper.
Prerequisite: English 204 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limited to 20.
Meeting time: afternoons.
J. SHEPARD
ENGL 024 Documentary Photography: Public Documents and Personal Narratives (Same as
Special 021)
This course combines a survey of the twentieth-century documentary and narrative traditions in photogra-
phy with the creation of documentary narrative photographic projects by the students. Topics include Ed-
ward Weston's Daybooks, Walker Evans, Cartier-Bresson, Robert Frank, Diane Arbus, and the new gener-
ation document makers including Gilles-Peress, Josef Koudelka, Nicholas Nixon, and Sally Mann. We
will also explore the gray areas between photographic fact and personal fiction through the work of Grego-
ry Grewdson, Jeff Wall, Philip Lorca diCorcia, Duane Michaels and others. The students' daily ritual of
exploring a documentary topic with their cameras and then processing and editing their work into a formed
document will give the students insight into the core issues of documentary photography as well as into
their personal photographic vision.
Students will be expected to work for two sessions each week in the darkroom. They will be encouraged to
work on individual projects of their own choice provided that their attention to the documentary narrative
process is engaged.
Students will be evaluated on classroom and lab participation and their photographic course work. Each
Winter Study Program
­ 370 ­
student will be required to complete a documentary project portfolio of photographs and journal entries re-
flecting on fieldwork and lab work experiences.
No prior photographic experience required. Enrollment limited to 8. Priority will be given to upperclass
students.
Cost to student: $75. Students must also supply their own manual option 35mm camera.
Meeting time: two mornings a week for three hours.
KEVIN BUBRISKI (Instructor)
Winter Study Committee (Sponsor)
Kevin Bubriski has received photography fellowships from the John Simon Guggenheim Foundation, the
Fulbright Foundation, the Asian Cultural Council, and the National Endowment for the Arts. His photo-
graphic prints are in the permanent collections of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Museum of Mod-
ern Art, the International Center of Photography in New York, and the Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris.
ENGL 030 Honors Project: Specialization Route
Required during Winter Study of all seniors admitted to candidacy for honors via the specialization route.
ENGL 031 Honors Project: Thesis
Required during Winter Study of all seniors admitted to candidacy for honors via the thesis route.
ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES
ENVI 010 Writing and Drawing--The Naturalist's Journal
This course will explore the tools for studying the natural world through various uses of writing, literature,
and drawing. Students will spend time outdoors learning the ecosystem of the Williamstown area and time
indoors doing observational drawing, reflective writing, and reading and discussions of nature literature.
The month's work will be contained in a nature journal, to be displayed and discussed as part of a final
project.
Designed for students with interests in environmental studies, natural history writing, and drawing.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 12.
Cost to student: $50 for books and art supplies.
Meeting time: mornings.
WALKER LESLIE and CHRISTIAN MCEWEN (Instructors)
ART (Sponsor)
Clare Walker Leslie has written many books on nature drawing including Nature Journaling, which she
co-authored with Charles Roth. She illustrated Professor William T. Fox's "At the Sea's Edge." Christian
McEwen is the editor of "Jo's Girls: Tomboy Tales of High Adventure," "True Grit" and "Real Life" (Bea-
con Press, 1997).
ENVI 011 Science for Kids (Same as Chemistry 011 and Special 011)
(See under Chemistry for full description.)
ENVI 012 Greenhouses: Defying Winter (Same as Biology 012)
(See under Biology for full description.)
ENVI 013 Genetically Modified Organisms--Friend or Foe? (Same as Biology 013)
(See under Biology for full description.)
ENVI 014 Environmental Journalism (Same as English 017)
Absurd, but nevertheless true: The future of our planet's ecosystem will depend less on how well scientists
understand it than on how much voters and policy-makers do. As environmental issues grow more critical,
so will the need for compelling environmental journalism. This course is designed for both 1) environmen-
tal studies students who want to make their concerns and specialized research accessible to the general
public, and 2) students interested in writing or journalism who wish to develop skills in communicating
about science and the environment.
Through reading and discussing writings by the instructor and other professionals, participants will learn
techniques in research, story structure, and narrative approaches to environmental journalism. They will at-
tend field trips to a nearby area of particular environmental interest and to at least one news or publishing
organization specializing in environmental issues (e.g., National Public Radio's Cambridge-based weekly
program, "Living On Earth").
Students will be evaluated on completion of either one magazine-length article, 2-3 newspaper-length fea-
tures, or a documentary radio or video script. Students will have the option of choosing their own topics or
participating in a team-reporting project chosen by the class and the instructor.
No prerequisites; if demand exceeds capacity, prospective students will be asked to describe their goals in a
short e-mail to the instructor. Enrollment is limited to 15.
Cost to student: approximately $50 for books.
Classes will meet four mornings a week for two hours. At least one book will be assigned to be read prior
to the first class meeting.
ALAN WEISMAN (Instructor)
ART (SPONSOR)
Journalist Alan Weisman is the author of four books of nonfiction. His reports from the United States,
Mexico, Central and South America Antarctica, Europe, the former Soviet Union, and the Middle East
Winter Study Program
­ 371 ­
have appeared in The New York Times Magazine, The Los Angeles Times Magazine,Harper's, The Atlantic
Monthly, Audubon, Mother Jones, Condé Nast Traveler, and many others, as well as on National Public
Radio and Public Radio International.
ENVI 019 Introduction to Research in Environmental Science (Same as Chemistry 019)
(See under Chemistry for full description.)
ENVI 021 The Winter Landscape (Same as Biology 019 and Geosciences 021)
(See under Biology for full description.)
ENVI 031 Senior Research and Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Environmental Studies 493-494.
GEOSCIENCES
GEOS 010 Natural Disasters
The earth is a hazardous place to live. Plate tectonic motions and a turbulent atmosphere-ocean system pro-
duce volcanic eruptions, violent storms, temblors, landslides, floods, and a host of other catastrophes and
cataclysms which cause death and destruction throughout the world. Have you ever wondered why the
earth quakes? Why hurricanes happen? What causes giant village-burying mudslides? This course will ex-
amine the geology and climatology of natural disasters. As a group, we will examine why, where, when,
and how they occur, as well as methods of prediction and prevention. Each student will also pick a specific
natural phenomenon to study in depth, using web-based satellite data and journalistic resources as well as
library research.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, a 10-page writeup of research results, and an oral presenta-
tion.
Enrollment limited to 15, with preference to first-year students.
Meeting time: mornings.
No prerequisites.
Cost to student: approximately $50 for textbook.
COX
GEOS 012 Science of Jurassic Park
The movie Jurassic Park was one of the biggest hits in American film history and it sparked renewed in-
terest in dinosaurs. What are the paleontological facts and theories behind the story and the dinosaur recon-
structions used in this movie? The course will analyze the movie and the book it was based on by Michael
Crichton. We will also read Raptor Red a novel by a "real paleontologist" to learn more of the world of
dinosaurs. Through discussion, we will consider the feasibility of DNA recombination for recreating dino-
saurs. Also, we will consider the various facts and their interpretations of dinosaurs' reproduction, digestive
system, metabolism, locomotion, defense and attack systems, and their intelligence. Required reading: Mi-
chael Crichton's Jurassic Park, Robert T. Bakker's Raptor Red, selected passages from DeSalle and Lind-
ley's The Science of Jurassic Park and The Lost World, and a small selection of other scientific dinosaur
articles.
Students are expected to do research from the paleontological literature on one type of dinosaur or another
Mesozoic animal and present the result as a 10-page paper for evaluation and group discussion.
Evaluation will be based on the submission of the 10-page paper and oral presentation, as well as participa-
tion in group-discussions.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 12.
Cost to student: approximately $20 for books and a reading package.
Meeting time: The class will meet three times a week for 120 minute sessions.
B. GUDVEIG BAARLI (Instructor)
M. JOHNSON (Sponsor)
Gudveig Baarli is a research associate in the Geosciences Department at Williams College. She received
her Doctor of Philosophy degree from the University of Oslo in 1988.
GEOS 019 Service Learning Internships (Same as EXPR 019 and Political Science 019)
(See under Political Science for full description.)
GEOS 021 The Winter Landscape (Same as Biology 019 and Environmental Studies 021)
(See under Biology for full description.)
GEOS 025 Baja California Field Geology
This course provides practical field experience in paleontology, stratigraphy, and tectonics as focused on
the geological history of the Gulf of California. The present-day pattern of tectonics found in the gulf de-
fines the adjacent peninsula as a mobile terrane that progressively shifted northward along a divergent plate
boundary during the last 3.5 million years. Prior to that time, however, the protogulf opened by simple ex-
tension that involved only east-west expansion comparable to the Basin and Range Province of the Ameri-
can southwest. The Pliocene Epoch (from 5-1.8 million years ago) is a critical time interval during which
the regional style of tectonics was altered to its present status. The gulf's evolution is well represented in
Baja California by coastal deposits spanning much of the Pliocene. Large tracts of Pliocene shore deposits
Winter Study Program
­ 372 ­
(studied by previous research teams from Williams College) show no signs of structural adjustment to this
transformation in tectonic regime. Instead, coastal accommodation appears to have occurred at specific
loci marked by the development of volcanic centers that are spaced well apart. Participants in this project
will learn how to identify fossils, measure stratigraphic sections, and map fault zones in Pliocene sedimen-
tary rocks associated with the Cerro Mencenares volcanic center near Loreto, in Baja California Sur (Mex-
ico).
Participants will assemble in Los Angeles for a group flight to Loreto (Capitol of the Californias), where
orientation will take place. The ensuing field course will be organized as a camping expedition to El Man-
gle on the gulf coast about 25 km north of Loreto. Participants should expect primitive conditions and
should be willing to contribute to the duties of communal camp life. The final goal will be accomplished as
a group exercise leading to a geological map of Pliocene relationships on the south and east flanks of Cerro
Mencenares. Time permitting, other geological localities in Baja California Sur may be visited.
Course evaluation will be based on completion of a daily journal and a geological map with explanatory
text (10-page equivalent).
Prerequisite: preference to those with Geosciences 201; any 100-level geosciences course. Enrollment lim-
ited to 4 students by permission of the instructor with priority to sophomores and juniors.
Cost to student: food contribution ($200) plus airfare to and from Loreto (cost will vary with departure
point, generally between $250 and $700). All other expenses will be absorbed by the project.
M. JOHNSON
GEOS 031 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Geology 493-494.
GERMAN
GERM S.P. Sustaining Program for German 101-102
Something new and different for students enrolled in German 101-102. Practice in the use of German for
everyday purposes; creation and performance of short dramatic sketches through group collaboration;
games; songs; storytelling; reading. No homework.
Class meets three times a week for 50 minutes.
Requirements: active participation and regular attendance earn a "Pass" grade.
Prerequisite: German 101 or equivalent. Limited to German 101-102 students.
Cost to student: approximately $5 for photocopied materials.
Meeting time: 9:00-9:50 a.m.
GERM 010 Marx and Nietzsche
Though radically opposed in their basic world views, Karl Marx (1818-83) and Friedrich Nietzsche
(1844-1900) exhibited striking similarities in their critiques of modern bourgeois society as it was emerg-
ing in the nineteenth century. Their analyses of the religious, economic, political, sexual and linguistic pre-
dilections of the rising middle-class continue to exert enormous influence on social critics today, even as
the middle class reigns triumphant. We will compare and contrast their ideas in the context of German so-
ciety from the final defeat of Napoleon (1815) to the start of the First World War (1914). We will also con-
sider whether their relevance today is more than academic. Among works to be read: by Marx, "Early
Writings," "The Communist Manifesto," "Capital" (selections), and by Nietzsche, "On the Use and Abuse
of History," "The Gay Science" (selections), and "The Anti-Christ."
Evaluation will be based on participation, one presentation and one five-page paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 15.
We will meet three times a week for two-hour sessions.
Cost to student: $60 for books.
Meeting time: mornings.
B. KIEFFER
GERM 025 German in Germany
Begin or continue study of the German language at the Goethe Institute in Prien, Germany. The Goethe
Institute program attracts students from all over the world. A typical course meets for four weeks, 18 hours/
week, generally providing the equivalent of one semester courses at Williams.
To earn a pass, the student must receive the Goethe Institute's Teilnahme-Bestätigung which denotes regu-
lar attendance at classes, completion of homework, and successful completion of a final test.
Students wishing to apply must fill out an application, obtainable in the office of the Center for Foreign
Languages, Literatures, and Cultures in Weston, and return it to the Goethe Institute as soon as possible
(admission is on a first-come, first-served basis). It is also possible to apply online at www.goethe.de.
No prerequisites, but any student interested in beginning German with this course and then entering Ger-
man 102 at Williams should contact Professor Kieffer by December 1, at the latest. Enrollment limited to
15. Not open to first-year students.
Cost to student: from approximately $1300 to approximately $1800 for tuition and room and board, plus
round trip travel costs. The Goethe Institute arranges for room and board at various levels upon request, but
students must make their own travel arrangements. This course is not defined as a "trip" for financial aid
purposes. The maximum reimbursement to financial aid students is $300.
B. KIEFFER
Winter Study Program
­ 373 ­
GERM 030 Honors Project
To be taken by honors candidates following other than the normal thesis route.
GERM 031 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for German 493-494.
HISTORY
HIST 010 Discovering the Twentieth-Century South
In the present century, black and white observers from both inside and outside the South have been fasci-
nated by the region--by the land, the people, the institutions, the culture, and the complex problems that lie
at the core of southern society. We will read some of the best of the books written about the twentieth-cen-
tury South, works like William Alexander Percy's Lanterns on the Levee, Carl Rowan's South of Freedom,
Marshall Frady's Southerners, and Eddy Harris's South of Haunted Dreams. We will discuss these works
in class, and each student will select one additional book to read as the basis for an interpretative 10-page
essay. Class will meet three times a week.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 20.
Cost to student: $30 for books and Xeroxes.
Meeting time: afternoons.
DEW
HIST 012 American Strategy in World War II: War Plans and Execution
During the Second World War, the United States fought a global conflict. By late 1943, for example,
American forces were in combat in Italy, New Guinea, the Solomon Islands and the Central Pacific. The
war against the U Boat threat and the air war against Germany continued with increasing intensity, and the
allied staffs were engaged in planning the 1944 invasion of France. To achieve the nation's basic political
objective--the unconditional surrender of Germany and Japan--the United States devised a series of stra-
tegic and operational war plans for both the European and Pacific areas of operation. A number of factors
including inter-allied and inter-service disputes, logistics and enemy actions frequently led to results that
were quite different from the planner's expectations. The course will examine the major U.S. war plans us-
ing selected readings and a number of actual plans. The seminar will then explore the realities of battle and
the differences between plans and execution.
Requirements: class participation and attendance. Class will meet twice a week for three hours. A 10-page
essay will be required.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 20.
Cost to student: $30 for books and Xeroxes.
Meeting time: afternoons.
STEVEN ROSS (Instructor)
W. WAGNER (Sponsor)
Steven Ross '59, holds the Admiral William V
. Pratt Chair of Military History at the Naval War College in
Newport, Rhode Island.
HIST 013 Rockin' the Shtetl: Klezmer Music as a Mirror of Modern Jewish Civilization
For centuries up until today, klezmer music has been the soundtrack of Jewish celebration. Yet in spite of its
Old World Hasidic roots, klezmer has always had a decidedly modern, secular aspect, showing the influ-
ence of the prevailing popular music of its time and space. Just as musicians of old mixed Polish waltzes,
Romanian horas, and Ukrainian kozachoks with klezmer, today it is not uncommon to hear klezmer mixed
with jazz, rock, reggae, hip-hop, and electro-beat. With reference to recordings, documentary films, and
other resources, we will explore the evolution of klezmer and how its journey from Old World shtetls to
New World nightclubs parallels changes in Jewish life and culture.
Evaluation will be based on in-class participation and one, 10-page, critical paper or equivalent project.
Class meets three times a week for two hours.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 20.
Cost to student: approximately $80.
Meeting time: afternoons.
SETH ROGOVOY (Instructor)
W. WAGNER (Sponsor)
Seth Rogovoy '82 is a music critic and author of The Essential Klezmer: A Music Lover's Guide to Jewish
Roots and Soul Music.
HIST 014 What Was Funny?
The history of humor is a fascinating lens on American society. Jokes are a fairly exact measure of histori-
cal change, social conflict, and political culture. Our national sense of humor has always been textured by
region, race, gender, and ethnicity. This class examines humor in these different contexts in order to reveal
our historical capacity to distinguish, divide, and unite ourselves by laughing at what was funny.
Winter Study Program
­ 374 ­
Requirements for the course include an oral presentation and a 10-page research essay. Classes will meet
twice a week for three hours.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 20.
Cost to student: $30 for books and Xeroxes.
Meeting time: mornings.
WILDER
HIST 015 Hands-On Investigative Reporting
So, you've always wanted to be an investigative reporter--or at least wondered how they dig up all that
stuff.
Students will learn how to obtain information - confidential and otherwise - in a moral, responsible and ef-
fective fashion. First, the course will provide a hands-on approach to how investigative reporters gather in-
formation. What methods are actually used? Second, this course will take a hard look at investigative re-
porting in the U.S. Increasingly, American journalists are delving into topics in politics, in business, and in
the lives of individuals that previously have been off-limits. At what point will the media have gone too
far? Do prying journalists make for a better or worse American society? The course will include case stud-
ies, outside readings, visits from working investigative journalists, and an assignment to "go out there and
dig up your own information in the real world."
Requirements: one 10-page paper. Each student will be required to go out and search for hard-to-locate in-
formation in Williamstown. The two-part paper will discuss both the reporting techniques used and the ac-
tual information discovered by the student.
Prerequisites: an insatiably curious mind. No experience required. Enrollment limited to 20.
Cost to student: $30 for reading packet.
Meeting time: mornings.
WILLY STERN '83 (Instructor)
W. WAGNER (Sponsor)
Willy Stern, the Nashville Scene's investigative reporter, is a former staff writer at Business Week and
Forbes magazines. Stern's investigative reports have won numerous national awards. A 1983 graduate of
Williams College, Stern has lived and worked as a journalist throughout the U.S., Asia, Africa and Austra-
lia/New Zealand.
HIST 022 American Wars: Directed Independent Reading and Research
An independent reading and research course on American wars from colonial times to the present. All par-
ticipants will share a few common readings, but there will be no formal classes. Instead, each participant
will meet individually with the instructor to develop a unique reading list on a topic of their choice. Once
their topic is decided, they will spend the rest of the WSP researching and writing a substantial paper (at
least 25 pages) on their topic.
Grade will depend on the quality of their paper.
Prerequisites: none, except interest in American military history. Enrollment limited to 20.
Cost to student: $40 for books.
Meeting time: no formal classes.
WOOD
HIST 031 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for History 493-494.
LEADERSHIP STUDIES
EXPR 010 Corporate Leadership and Social Responsibility
This course considers the responsibilities of leadership in corporate life through the perspectives of visiting
alumni who hold leadership positions in American corporations. It examines the social obligations created
by success in business, the risks versus rewards of corporate leadership, the benefits and the costs of fulfil-
ling or exceeding expectations, and the range of professional, social, and personal dilemmas faced by lead-
ing figures in modern corporations and institutions. Readings will include material from philosophy and
psychology, as well as relevant biography and autobiography.
Evaluation will be based on attendance and participation in class discussions and a final 10-page paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 22.
Cost to student: approximately $30 for books.
Meeting time: mornings.
(This course is part of the Leadership Studies cluster.)
G. GOETHALS and GEORGE KENNEDY '48
George Kennedy '48 is retired chairman and chief executive officer of International Minerals and Chemi-
cals, and Mallinckrodt Group, Inc., both Fortune 250 companies. Mr. Kennedy chaired the 50th reunion
fund for Williams in 1998 when the class of 1948 designated significant support to underwrite the Leader-
ship Studies program.
EXPR 011 Leadership in Astronomy: From Copernicus to Hubble and the Age of the
Universe (Same as Astronomy 011)
(See under Astronomy for full description.)
(This course is part of the Leadership Studies cluster.)
Winter Study Program
­ 375 ­
EXPR 012 The Roosevelt Century (Same as Political Science 011)
How did three members of a wealthy New York "Knickerbocker" family rise above the narrow, elitist in-
terests of their own social class to become the great political and moral leaders of the century? In this
course we will focus on the political careers and lives of Theodore Roosevelt, his niece Eleanor, and his
fifth-cousin Franklin. Theodore and Franklin both graduated from Harvard to become lawyers, assistant
secretaries of the Navy, governors of New York, and American presidents of unusual ability and accom-
plishments. Eleanor Roosevelt, a tireless advocate for the rights of working men and women of all races,
led in the drafting of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Again and again the three
Roosevelts demonstrated political courage and a deep commitment to an inclusive, egalitarian, and pro-
gressive democracy. Through readings, documentary films, guest lectures, and class discussions, we will
explore the intertwining lives and ideas of the Roosevelts.
Requirements: in addition to three class meetings per week, students will write one 15-page paper. If any
students are interested in working in original documents at the FDR Library in Hyde Park, New York, we
will help them make arrangements.
Enrollment limited to 12.
Cost to student: $60 for books and $24 for luncheons with the guest lecturers.
Meeting time: afternoons.
(This course is part of the Leadership Studies cluster.)
DUNN and JAMES MACGREGOR BURNS
Professor Burns, Woodrow Wilson Professor Emeritus of Government, Williams College, is the Pulitzer
Prize winning author of "Roosevelt: The Lion and the Fox," and also "Roosevelt: Soldier of Freedom."
Dunn and Burns are co-authors of "Three Roosevelts: Class Traitors, Progressive Leaders."
EXPR 013 Managing Non-Profits: An Insider's Look
This course will focus on the study of the particular skills needed to run a successful non-profit organiza-
tion, which include administration, creative vision, financial management, fund raising, and public ac-
countability. It will also consider, absent the profit motive, what spurs a non-profit's pursuit of excellence.
The syllabus will be built upon a series of guest lectures from administrators and directors representing arts,
social service, educational, and environmental organizations, including notable organizations such as the
New York City Ballet, Carnegie Hall, the National Gallery of Art, and EcoTrust. Class discussion will be
informed by assigned readings and case studies. A two- or three-day mid-week trip to New York City to
visit non-profits and to attend performances by non-profit companies is also planned.
Evaluation will be based on class attendance and participation as well as a 10-page final paper.
No prerequisites, but preference is given to former Citigroup Arts Interns and to seniors and juniors. En-
rollment limited to 15.
Cost to student: $50 for books and prepared materials.
Meeting time: afternoon (except for NYC field trip).
(This course is part of the Leadership Studies cluster.)
ROBERT I. LIPP '60 and MARY ELLEN CZERNIAK (Instructors)
G. GOETHALS (Sponsor)
Robert I. Lipp '60 is the chairman and CEO of the Global Consumer Business of Citigroup. He is president
of the New York City Ballet, chairman of Dance-On, a director of MASS MoCA, and a trustee of Williams
College. Mary Ellen Czerniak is director of corporate and foundation relations at Williams.
EXPR 018 Wilderness Leadership
This Winter Study project is for students who would like to participate in an off-campus experiential
education opportunity. Students will be required to research an accredited program--such as those offered
by the National Outdoor Leadership School or Outward Bound--that will provide a suitable learning envi-
ronment and be at least 22 days in length. The Director of the Williams Outing Club will assist students in
their search if necessary. Upon choosing a program and being accepted, students will meet with the Direc-
tor in a pre-program meeting in December to create a framework for monitoring the development of group
dynamics and for studying a variety of leadership styles. There will be a follow up class meeting in the first
week of February when students return from their experience. At that time, students will give an oral pre-
sentation of their journals.
Requirements: daily journal writing with a focus on leadership and group dynamic experience and a final
10-page paper.
Student assessment will be made based on an oral presentation of the journal and the final paper.
No prerequisites. Not open to first-year students. Interested sophomores, juniors, and seniors must consult
with WOC Director before registration. Enrollment limited to 20.
Cost to student will vary depending on the program selected. Students should consult with the Director of
the Outing Club.
(This course is part of the Leadership Studies cluster.)
S. LEWIS
EXPR 019 Service Learning Internships (Same as Geosciences 019 and Political Science 019)
(See under Political Science for full description.)
Winter Study Program
­ 376 ­
EXPR 021 Public Affairs Internships: Power, Authority and Decisionmaking in the Public
Sector (Same as Political Science 021)
(See under Political Science for full description.)
EXPR 025 Williams in Washington: Leadership in Our Nation's Capitol
An on-site study of leadership in America's leading city. Students travel to Washington, DC to experience
leadership in an urban context, meeting with leaders in government, business, and the not-for-profit world.
Participants may also have the opportunity to attend the Presidential inauguration while there. The course
will provide a foundation for understanding how leadership influences public policy. Prior to their depar-
ture, students will meet with their instructor at Williams. The group will then travel together to accom-
modations near the University of Maryland in College Park and commute into the city regularly by metro.
While in DC, the course will be team-taught with a faculty member from the James MacGregor Burns
Academy of Leadership at the University of Maryland, where classroom sessions are held. An equal num-
ber of Williams students and students from the University of Maryland College Park Scholars Program
will participate in the class, and care will be given to integrate the two groups.
Requirements: there will be a 10-page paper on leadership in Washington due at the end of Winter Study.
Grades will also be based on active participation in all sessions.
No prerequisites. Enrollment is limited to 10. Preference will be given to students completing the Leader-
ship Studies cluster. Interested students must consult the instructor before registration.
Cost to student: (estimated)$ 1,100.00***
***Prices may vary depending on lodging arrangements (single or double occupancy) and an individual's
cost for meals each day. Students should consult with the Leadership Programs Coordinator early in the fall
semester to discuss options.
(This course is part of the Leadership Studies cluster.)
DONALD R. CARLSON '83 and HUGH O'DOHERTY (Instructors)
G. GOETHALS (Sponsor)
Dr. Hugh O'Doherty is the Director of the Ireland-U.S. Public Leadership Program and the College Park
Scholars Program in Public Leadership at the James MacGregor Burns Academy of Leadership at the Uni-
versity of Maryland. Dr. O'Doherty's research had focused on the evaluation of conflict resolution pro-
grams, curriculum programs in prejudice reduction, and characteristics of intractable conflict. Donald R.
Carlson is a 1983 graduate of Williams College and later taught courses in public policy, environmental
law and microeconomics as a faculty member. He is now responsible for stewarding the growth strategy of
the Corporate Executive Board (CEB) based in Washington D.C. In 1999, he was responsible for the
launch of the Marketing Leadership Council--a membership comprised of the chief marketing officers of
125 of the world's leading brand goods companies. Prior to joining CEB, he served as a trial lawyer in at a
D.C.-based law firm.
EXPR 021 Public Affairs Internships: Power, Authority and Decisionmaking in the Public
Sector (Same as Political Science 021)
(See under Politcal Science for full description.)
(This course is part of the Leadership Studies cluster.)
LITERARY STUDIES
LIT 010 The Ayn Rand Cult (Same as ANSO 010)
The broad, often "underground" influence of publicist-novelist Ayn Rand stands as one of the more curi-
ous sociocultural phenomena to have emerged out of post-War America. Examples: a youthful Alan
Greenspan was a dedicated disciple of Rand's in the 1940s and 50s; Michael Milken was reported to have
kept twenty-six copies of Atlas Shrugged in his jail cell while serving time for insider trading; each year to
this day, Rand's books sell hundreds of thousands of copies; and, in a crowning recent instance of "canon-
ization," the U.S. Postal Service issued a commemorative stamp in Rand's honor (as part of its "Great
American Authors" series) in April 1999. This course will examine the nature and origins of the Rand phe-
nomenon through reading of relevant works of journalism, fiction, and philosophy. Titles to be studied: Jef-
frey Walker, The Ayn Rand Cult; Mary Gaitskill, Two Girls: Fat and Thin; Gene H. Bell-Villada, The Pia-
nist Who Liked Ayn Rand (selections); and John Locke, Second Treatise of Government. We will also view
a few films, such as the movie version of The Fountainhead (1949). Note: no books by Rand will be read
in this class! It is a course not "about" Rand but rather about the cultural sociology and anthropology of
Randism.
Evaluation will be based on class attendance and participation, short weekly journal entries, and a final
10-page paper.
We will meet three times a week for two-hour sessions. There will also be an evening lecture by novelist
Mary Gaitskill (attendance required).
Prerequisite: some previous acquaintance with Rand's work. Enrollment limited to 30.
Cost to student: about $60 for books.
Meeting time: mornings.
BELL-VILLADA
LIT 011 Renewal and Transformation (Same as Classics and Theatre 012)
(See under Classics for full description.)
Winter Study Program
­ 377 ­
LIT 012 Surrealist Women (Same as French 012)
(See under Romance Languages--French for full description.)
LIT 031 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Literary Studies 493, 494.
MATHEMATICS
MATH 010 Scene Studies--Comedy (Same as Theater 010)
In this course, students will be introduced to the area of contemporary comedy in the theater. Students will
read humorous plays and literary works from various recent historical periods, with emphasis on perfor-
mance. They will participate in improvisation and scene studies from comedic theater.
Evaluation will be based on a final performance of scenes.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 15.
Cost to student: $40.
Meeting times: mornings--two hours a day, three times a week.
AMELIA ADAMS (Instructor)
O. BEAVER (Sponsor)
Amelia Adams is a regional actor who has performed in a variety of theatrical and commercial venues over
the last ten years. She is a member of the Actor's Equity Association and the American Federation of Ra-
dio and Television actors.
MATH 012 Taoism and Body Movement
This course will consist of regular discussions and readings from Taoism, with particular focus on the Tao
Te Ching, and body movement work in classic Chinese Tai Chi and modern western sports. While we will
discuss the roots, facets, and practice of Taoism, our main focus will be on reading and discussing the Tao
Te Ching, central document of Taoism. We will be concerned with content, translation, interpretation, and
historical context of the document. Taoism is integral to the practice of Tai Chi in China, and in fact, Tai Chi
may be thought of as Taoist meditation. Students in the course will be introduced to the long Yang form of
Tai Chi Chuan, including practice in stretching, breathing, and body movement. These ancient practices
will be brought into a modern western setting in the practice of snowboarding. Stance, balance, hip move-
ment, and feeling connected to the earth from practice of Tai Chi directly translate into the basics skills
needed to snowboard well. The Tao Te Ching teaches us to find the groove, go with the flow, and feel your-
self in harmony with the beauty of nature that surrounds you. We will explore such wisdom in the Berk-
shire mountains once a week, where each student will be required to take snowboarding lessons at Brodie
Mountain.
Evaluation will be based on a 10-page paper on some aspect of Taoism, ability to perform a portion of the
Tai Chi form, and completion of four snowboarding lessons.
Requirements (per week): 3 hours of discussion, 3 hours of Tai Chi practice, at least 2 hours of snowboard-
ing.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 12
Cost to student: approximately $50 for books, and $120 for snowboard lessons.
Meeting time: mornings--8 hours a week.
S. JOHNSON
MATH 013 Sports and Stats
Who is the greatest center fielder of all time? Do basketball players get a hot hand? Will women's mara-
thon times eventually equal or exceed men's times? In this course, we address sports questions like these
using statistical analyses. Course participants do not need a formal statistical background, since many anal-
yses require only general statistical concepts that can be easily learned in the course. A large part of the
course will be devoted to course members' oral presentations of analyses of sports questions of their
choosing. Additionally, there will be reading assignments and several short projects.
Evaluation: three written projects, one oral presentation, and class participation
Requirements: meet for two hours on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday to discuss readings and hear oral
presentations. There will be three weekly projects and readings for every class.
Prerequisites: a love of sports and comfort with numbers. Enrollment limited to 12 to allow sufficient time
for students' presentations.
Cost to students: approximately $25 for copying.
Meeting time: Monday, Wednesday, and Friday mornings.
REITER
MATH 016 Reaching the Underrepresented: Math Software Development for Grade School
(Same as Biology 016)
(See under Biology for full description.)
MATH 018 Modern Dance--Muller Technique
This dance class will be based on the modern dance technique developed by Jennifer Muller, with whom I
danced professionally for 5 years in New York City and in Europe. Jennifer Muller was a soloist in the
dance company of José Limòn before she started her own company in 1974. She has added her own style
of movement to the Limòn technique, creating an expansive, free-flowing dance that is wonderful to do
Winter Study Program
­ 378 ­
and to watch.
The class is open to beginners as well as to those who have previous experience with modern dance or bal-
let. It will be multi-leveled and open to both men and women alike. Students will have the opportunity to
choreograph a short piece either as a soloist or in small groups.
We will finish the course with a short lecture-demonstration illustrating what we have learned.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 24.
Cost to student: under $20.
Meeting time: mornings--six hours per week.
SYLVIA LOGAN (Instructor)
O. BEAVER (Sponsor)
Sylvia Logan received her B.A. in Slavic Literature from Stanford University. She danced professionally
with the Jennifer Muller Dance Company, a modern company based in New York, for five years.
MATH 022 Color Photography: People and Places (Same as Special 022)
This will be an introductory course in color photography. The main themes will be portraiture and the land-
scape. No previous knowledge is assumed, but students are expected to have access to a 35mm camera,
preferably with manual override or aperture priority. The topics covered will include composition, expo-
sure, camera use and properties of film, direction and properties of light, and digital imaging (scanning and
printing). Students will develop their eye through the study of the work of well-known photographers and
the critical analysis of their own work. We will discuss the work of photographers such as Joel Meyero-
witz, Constantine Manos, and Philip-Lorca diCorcia. Students will be expected to spend a considerable
amount of time practicing their own photography outside of class (using 35mm color slide film). There
will be one required local half-day field trip. Students will also be introduced to the program Photoshop
used to manipulate images digitally, and will work on their own pictures with this program. The film used
will be color slide film, but students will learn to scan their slides and produce prints using a digital printer.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, two quizzes and a final project.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 10.
Cost to student: $120 for purchase and processing of film and a text.
Meetings time: afternoons.
SILVA
MATH 030 Senior Project
To be taken by candidates for honors in Mathematics other than by thesis route.
MATH 031 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Mathematics 493-494.
MUSIC
MUS 010 Chamber Vocal Ensemble
An intensive performance Winter Study project, the vocal ensemble will consist of interested members of
the current Chamber Choir and from other interested students by audition with Professor Wells. Repertoire
will be eclectic, sophisticated and demanding and rehearsals will occur daily for two hours between 10
a.m. and 4 p.m. in Bernhard Music Center. A final performance at the end of the semester will conclude the
study.
Evaluation will be based on attendance and successful completion of assigned performance projects.
Enrollment limited to 30. Open to all students by audition, to be waived for current members of the Cham-
ber Choir.
Cost to student: none.
WELLS
MUS 012 Music Composition
Learning about music through the creation of original composition (not a music theory course). Class can
accommodate both beginners and students who have taken one or more semesters of composition. At least
one semester (Music 103 or 104) of theory is highly desirable. The structure of the course will be deter-
mined in part by the experience level of those who register. For beginners, there will be specific assign-
ments. For more advanced students short projects can be designed in consultation with the instructor. There
will be two meetings per week with the entire class and one private session per week as appropriate to the
level of the student. To the extent possible, assignments and projects will be performed in class using both
those registered for the class and guest performers as needed.
Enrollment limited to 30.
Cost to student: none.
Meeting time:?.
PEREZ VELAZQUEZ
MUS 013 Jazz Ensemble Intensive
This jazz performance Winter Study will consist of a month of intensive rehearsals and workshops of a jazz
ensemble. Open to all students by audition and to current members of the Williams Jazz Ensemble without
audition. All rehearsals will be held during the daytime in Bernhard Music Center.
Evaluation will be based on attendance, participation, progress in performance of assigned music, and an
informal end of semester performance.
Winter Study Program
­ 379 ­
Enrollment limited to 30. New talent strongly encouraged to audition. Please contact Andy Jaffe during
registration period to schedule an audition.
Cost to student: none.
Meeting time: ?.
JAFFE
MUS 014 Nights at the Opera
In January 2001, the Metropolitan Opera will commemorate the 100th anniversary of Giuseppi Verdi's
death. In this course, we'll also observe this anniversary by considering Verdi's musical achievement.
We'll explore three of his most popular operas: La Traviata, Il Trovatore, and Aida. We will study each of
these works in class and see each of them live at the Metropolitan Opera.
Requirements: there will be one 2-3 hour class meeting on the day before each opera, and a shorter meeting
on a day following the performance. In the pre-performance meetings I will lecture on the work we will
attend, and in the post-performance meetings we will discuss what we have seen. There may also be short
readings for the post-performance meetings. Class will meet for the first time on January 3rd and our first
trip will take place on January 4th. Students are expected to attend all the classes and all the opera perform-
ances; the details of the schedule will be announced at the first class meeting.
Evaluation will be based on three 5-page concert reports.
Enrollment limited to 10.
Cost to student: approximately $300 for tickets and partial cost of travel.
Meeting time: afternoons for classes; field trips to Metropolitan Opera for nighttime or Saturday afternoon
performances in New York, NY.
MCGRADE
MUS 031 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Music 493, 494.
NEUROSCIENCE
NSCI 031 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Neuroscience 493-494.
PHILOSOPHY
PHIL 010 Philosophy of Romantic Love
What is love? What is the connection between romantic love and morality, power, gender and society?
This Winter Study course explores these questions through a critical reading and discussion of some of the
key philosophical texts from Plato to Freud and more contemporary thinkers. These ideas will be applied
to film, poetry and literature.
Evaluation will be based on a 10-page essay due at the end of the course, and one class presentation.
No prerequisites. Preference to first-year and second-year students. Attempts will be made to gender bal-
ance this course. Enrollment limited to 18.
Cost to student: $25.
Meeting time: mornings.
PAUL VOICE (Instructor)
WHITE (Sponsor)
PHIL 031 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Philosophy 493-494.
PHYSICS
PHYS 010 Light and Holography
This course will examine the art and science of holography. It will introduce modern optics at a level ap-
propriate for a non-science major, giving the necessary theoretical background in lectures and discussion.
Demonstrations will be presented and students will make several kinds of holograms in the lab. Thanks to
a grant from the National Science Foundation, we have 7 well-equipped holography darkrooms available
for student use.
At the beginning of WSP, the class will meet for lecture and discussion three times a week and for lab twice
a week. Later classes will be mainly laboratory. Students will be evaluated on the basis of regular atten-
dance, completion of 4 laboratory exercises, and a holography laboratory project or a 10-page paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 30. Preference will be given to students with no previous college
course in physics more advanced than Physics 100.
Cost to student: about $50 for holographic film, chemicals, and photocopies.
K. JONES
PHYS 012 Meet the Right Side of Your Brain: Drawing as a Learnable Skill
Representational drawing is a not merely a gift of birth or a magical ability granted by angels, but a learn-
able skill. If you ever wanted to draw, but doubted you had the ability or believed you could not learn, then
this course is for you. This intensive course utilizes discoveries in brain research to teach representational
drawing. By using simple techniques and extensive exercises you will discover and develop the perceptual
Winter Study Program
­ 380 ­
shift from your symbol based left hemisphere to your visually based right hemisphere. This cognitive shift
enables you to accurately see and realistically represent the physical world. You will learn to draw a con-
vincing portrait, self-portrait, and still life. This course is designed to develop your powers of observation
and enhance your innate creative problem solving abilities, which are applicable in any field. Students need
no previous artistic experience, just the willingness and desire to learn a new skill. Students will be ex-
pected to attend and participate in all sessions. They will also be required to keep a sketchbook recording
their progress and complete a final project.
Evaluation will be based on participation, effort, and development. The class will meet three times per
week (about 10 hours lecture and group group drawing exercises). In addition, every week students are re-
quired to complete 2-3 drawing assignments of approximately 3-4 hours each.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 30, with preference given to juniors and seniors. The course will
meet in two sections of 15.
Cost to student: text and drawing materials (approximately $30).
WILLIAM ZIEMER (Instructor)
K. JONES (Sponsor)
William Ziemer is a multimedia artist living in Williamstown and in Berkeley, California.
PHYS 013 Automotive Mechanics
The purpose of this course will be to provide an understanding of the basic function of the major compo-
nents of the modern automobile. Through lectures, demonstrations, and hands-on experience, individuals
will learn basic maintenance of an automobile. In addition, students will be expected to study in depth one
of the major automotive systems which include carburetor or fuel-injection systems, the lubrication and
cooling system, the electrical system, the steering, brake and suspension system, and the power train for
both manual and automatic transmissions.
The course will meet two hours a day, three times a week for classroom instruction. In addition, students
will meet at the Flamingo Motors in Williamstown one evening each week for practical demonstrations
and hands-on activity. Students will be required to attend class regularly, read assigned material from the
text, actively participate in work at the garage, and pass written midterm and final examinations.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 30. The class will be broken into three sections for lab work. Prefer-
ence given to seniors.
Cost to student: approximately $45 for text.
MICHAEL FRANCO (Instructor)
K. JONES (Sponsor)
Michael Franco is the owner of Flamingo Motors in Williamstown.
PHYS 014 Experiences of Women in Science (Same as Women's and Gender Studies 014)
Do women do science differently from men? Will science change as more women enter it? Why do some
scientific fields continue to attract very few women? Science has had relatively few women practitioners in
the past. Although this situation is now changing in some fields, in others women continue to be very rare.
Our course will focus on the experiences of women scientists, both past and present. We will study the
writings of Evelyn Fox Keller and others to gain an understanding of the complexities of being a woman in
a predominantly male profession. We will also explore possible causes for women's continued under rep-
resentation in science, extending from childhood through professional life. Student projects can follow any
number of routes. Examples include studying the experiences of girls and boys in science education, re-
searching the life of a forgotten or not so forgotten woman scientist, interviewing a contemporary woman
scientist, or researching recent events such as the finding and subsequent correction of systematic bias at
MIT. A symposium of prominent women in several fields of science will be presented in conjunction with
this course.
Requirements: three meetings (discussions and informal lectures) per week, participation in the sympo-
sium of visiting scientists, and a 10 page paper or alternative project approved by the instructor.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 30.
Cost to student: readings (approximately $30.)
S. BOLTON
PHYS 015 Electronics
Electronic instruments are an indispensable part of modern laboratory work throughout the sciences. This
course will cover the basics of analog electronic circuits, including transistors and operational amplifiers,
and will briefly introduce digital circuits. Students will build and test a variety of circuits chosen to illustrate
the kinds of electronic devices and design problems a scientist is apt to encounter. Class will meet after-
noons for a mixture of lab, lecture, and discussion, providing ample opportunity for hands-on experience.
In the last week, students will design and build a final project, or will write a 10-page paper.
Evaluation will be based on participation, completion of both laboratory work and occasional homework,
and the quality of the final project or paper.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 104 or equivalent calculus. No prior experience with electronics is required.
Enrollment limited to 16.
Cost to student: $95 for two textbooks.
Meeting time: afternoons.
MAJUMDER
Winter Study Program
­ 381 ­
PHYS 022 Research Participation
Several members of the department will have student projects available dealing with their own research or
that of current senior thesis students. Approximately 35 hours per week of study and actual research partic-
ipation will be expected from each student.
Students will be required to keep a notebook and write a five-page paper summarizing their work. Those
interested should consult with members of the department as early as possible in the registration period or
before to determine details of projects then expected to be available.
Prerequisite: permission of specific instructor. Enrollment limited to 1 or 2 per project.
Cost to student: none.
Meeting time: to be arranged with instructor.
K. JONES and members of the department
PHYS 031 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Physics 493, 494.
POLITICAL ECONOMY
POEC 031 Honors Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Political Economy 493.
POLITICAL SCIENCE
PSCI 010 Daoism (Same as Asian Studies 010)
We will read two classics of the ancient Chinese naturalist philosophy of Daoism: the inner chapters of the
Zhuang Zi and the Dao Dejing. We will contemplate such notions as: "do nothing and nothing will be left
undone"; and "no one lives longer than a child who dies young, and the seven-hundred-year-old man died
an infant.
Requirements: students will write two 5- to 7- page papers applying the sensibilities gleaned from these
texts to the world at large.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 15.
Cost to student: two books.
Meeting time: mornings.
CRANE
PSCI 011 The Roosevelt Century (Same as EXPR 011)
(See under Leadership Studies for full description.)
PSCI 012 Judicial Biography
One of the great uncertainties about the nature and growth of the law concerns the influence of personality
and personal experience in explaining legal development. That judges are a part of the law-making process
is now generally, if grudgingly, accepted. Yet the democratic presumption that the formation of law should
be directly constrained by a process of electoral accountability means that the legitimacy of this judicial ac-
tivity will always remain in some doubt. This in turn means that we must examine closely the lives of the
judges who govern us through their constitutional and statutory interpretations. How much of judicial be-
havior follows directly from the life experiences of the judges? How accurately can we predict judicial out-
comes from judicial biography? What biographical details are related to judicial greatness? In this course
we examine the genre of judicial biography for the insights that can be generated about the evolution of law
in this and other societies. Among the many judicial biographies in print are wonderful studies of such
giants as Oliver Wendell Holmes, John Marshall, Benjamin Cardozo, William Brennan, Learned Hand,
and Joseph Story. But lesser known jurists have also been amply chronicled, and their stories will be just as
important in assisting us in formulating impressions about the work of appellate judges and its impact on
the nature and growth of the law.
Requirements: evaluation will be based on a 10-page paper and on participation in class.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 15.
Cost to student: books and offset packet.
Meeting time: mornings.
JACOBSOHN
PSCI 013 Justice in America: Race Relations, Sexual Harassment and the Role of the Courts
The U.S.Constitution has changed little; yet at fifty-year intervals, the Supreme Court upheld slavery, ruled
that the law requires equal public facilities that can be racially separate, required integration, and now pro-
hibits consideration of race as a factor. What has caused this changing interpretation of the law? In recent
years, the courts have interpreted laws to prohibit sexual harassment. Why have the courts ruled that gen-
der-based harassment is illegal only if the harassment is sexual? In America, the judicial system is available
to individuals and groups asserting claims that their rights have been violated and that they have been in-
jured by injustice or inequality. With an emphasis on race relations and sexual harassment, this course will
examine the strengths and limits of the American court system in addressing adversarial positions ex-
pressed as rights and claims for justice. We will consider the following questions: Are judicial decisions
shaped by the Constitution and statutes, judicially-created rules of law, political concerns, social norms, the
"facts" as proven through litigation, or the beliefs of judges? Is the judicial branch primarily an enforce-
Winter Study Program
­ 382 ­
ment mechanism for the executive branch, a defense against the tyranny of the majority, or a neutral arbi-
trator of disputes? Is the judicial branch an agent for social change, a force for societal stability, a defender
of the status quo, or a dispenser of justice? The course will have a seminar format. Students are responsible
for reading the material and preparing for class discussion.
Evaluation will be based on submitted papers and class participation.
Requirements: three (3- to 4-page) papers and class participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 20. Selection criteria is by random draw.
Cost to student: books and a reading packet.
Meeting time: mornings.
ALAN M. KATZ, J.D. (Instructor)
MACDONALD (Sponsor)
Alan Katz is a practicing civil rights attorney with more than twenty years experience representing claim-
ants in discrimination cases.
PSCI 017 The Politics of New England Food: Why New Englanders Eat What They Eat
Have you ever wondered why the food of New England is bland: is it the people, the land, the economy?
Do New Englanders like their diets or are they forced into them? This course will investigate these kinds of
questions by looking at the political, economic, cultural, and climactic factors that have shaped the diet and
culture of New Englanders.
We will begin our course by learning about the ecology and culture of food developed by Native Ameri-
cans: how did they hunt, gather and farm, and how did their methods of procuring food form their relation-
ship to nature and the division of labor? Then we will consider the diet of the first white settlers, the interac-
tion between Puritan and Native American cultures of food, the role of Puritan asceticism in shaping diets,
and the consequent impact on family and social structures. Next we will examine how food was used to
socialize Catholic immigrants from Europe, looking particularly at the pioneers of nutritional science
(home economics), such as Fannie Farmer and her Boston Cooking School, and why they struggled to
convince immigrants to reject their traditional foods in favor of their less nutritional --but more bland
--"American" substitutes. Finally, we will conclude with a look at how the change in the production of
food from the family farm to agribusiness has touched families, communities, and the role of women. We
will enjoy an historically accurate demonstration of life in the 1700's at Historic Deerfield, a tour of the
Bennington Museum and farm life in the 1800's, a visit to a community supported farm in our time, a guest
speaker and several movies.
Requirements: a 10-page paper, reading and class participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 15.
Cost to student: $20 for museum entrance fees.
Meeting time: afternoons.
ROBIN LENZ MACDONALD (Instructor)
MACDONALD (Sponsor)
Robin MacDonald received her B.A. and M.A. in Political Science from UC Berkeley. She has written
several articles about "food and its history" and has extensive experience in her field. She owns "Robin's
Restaurant" on Spring Street, Williamstown.
PSCI 019 Service Learning Internships (Same as Geosciences 019 and EXPR 019)
This course is designed to help students look beyond Williams to observe first-hand how service organiza-
tions help communities and to examine questions of volunteerism, interactions between agencies and cli-
ents, and definitions of communities. A student works closely with an organization dedicated to improving
the quality of life within a community. The organization may be located near Williams College or in the
student's home community. Examples include: child care centers; nursing homes and hospitals; shelters for
the homeless or victims of domestic violence; schools and youth centers; conservation and environmental
advocacy groups.
Internship arrangements are made in advance of the Winter Term during which the student serves as an in-
tern. The instructor works with each student to arrange an internship. Students are expected to spend the
better part of the day, five days a week, with the organization. Each student's internship mentor sends a
confirmation letter to the instructor verifying the internship and describing the nature of the work to be per-
formed by the intern. Students with Berkshire area internships will read a few short reading assignments in
common and meet with the instructor once a week as a group to compare and analyze their experiences.
Students whose internships are in their home community will meet as a group before and after Winter
Study to discuss their experiences. During Winter Study, they are expected to maintain weekly contact with
the instructor. Finally, students will write a 10-page paper on their experience.
Requirements: internship work and a 10-page paper discussing the organization's relationship with and
contributions to the community. Grades will be based on the mentor's evaluations, participation in group
discussions (or weekly contacts for students away from Williams), and the 10-page paper.
No prerequisites. At the time of registration, interested students should send a brief resume and a letter of
interest. Materials should be sent to the Leadership Programs Coordinator. Enrollment limited to 15.
Cost to students: none except for transportation.
C. JOHNSON and KARABINOS
Winter Study Program
­ 383 ­
PSCI 021 Public Affairs Internships: Power, Authority and Decisionmaking in the Public
Sector (Same as EXPR 021)
This course is an internship experience in which students both work in and analyze government and related
nongovernmental organizations. The goal of the course is to develop student ability to analyze power, au-
thority and decisionmaking in public organizations; in short, to better understand leadership. Students may
have internships in government and nonprofit organizations. They may have internships in for-profit orga-
nizations if the internship involves significant involvement with public issues. Examples include: town
government offices; state or federal administrative offices such as TANF, WIC, housing authorities; inter-
est groups that lobby government such as Chamber of Commerce, NOW, or the Sierra Club; nonprofit
agencies such as Parenting Partners.
Internship arrangements are made in advance of the Winter Term during which the student serves as an in-
tern. The instructor works with each student to arrange an internship. Students are expected to spend the
better part of the day, five days a week, with the organization. Each student's internship mentor sends a
confirmation letter to the instructor verifying the internship and describing the nature of the work to be per-
formed by the intern. Students with Berkshire area internships will read a few short reading assignments in
common and meet with the instructor once a week as a group to compare and analyze their experiences.
Students whose internships are in their home community will meet as a group before and after Winter
Study to discuss their experiences. During Winter Study, they are expected to maintain weekly contact with
the instructor. Finally, students will write a 10-page paper on their experience.
Requirements: internship work and a 10-page paper analyzing issues of power, authority, and decision-
making in the organization. Grades will be based on the mentor's evaluations, participation in group dis-
cussions (or weekly contacts for students away from Williams), and the 10-page paper.
No prerequisites. At the time of registration, interested students should send a brief resume and a letter of
interest. Materials should be sent to the Leadership Programs Coordinator. Enrollment limited to 15.
Cost to students: none except for transportation.
PAULA CONSOLINI and C. JOHNSON
Paula Consolini (PhD., Berkeley) teaches and manages local government internships at Union College in
Schenectady.
PSCI 025 Experiencing Guatemala: Politics, and Society
The course explores the complex political and social realities of contemporary Guatemala. The signing of
peace accords in 1996 brought four decades of large-scale political violence and civil war to an end, but the
social struggle over the nation's future continues. Our class will study that struggle, particularly the basic
problem of vast inequalities of wealth, the question of human rights, and the efforts of indigenous people to
claim a larger share of political, economic, and cultural power. Although we will do some readings in Gua-
temalan history, politics, and literature before and during our travels, our primary approach for our 21 days
in the country will be the field study method: the course aims to provide an intense educational encounter
with the material conditions of everyday Guatemalan life, to foster critical reflections on the paths to "de-
velopment" available in this culturally and socially diverse country, and to come to terms with the experi-
ences and effects of tourism. Most of the course will take place in the Mayan highlands: after a brief
introduction to Guatemala City and Antigua, the bulk of our time will be spent in Panajachel, Quetzalte-
nango (Xela), and the villages surrounding these two towns. Early on, each student will spend several days
living with a Mayan family and studying in an intensive Spanish program. We will then extend our inqui-
ries through a combination of seminar discussions, field exercises (e.g. observation and analysis at local
markets), and scheduled meetings with some of the activists who are seeking to shape Guatemala's future.
Small teams of students will also investigate one significant issue or local organization, and will make an
oral presentation to the whole group. Our schedule will also provide sufficient unstructured time for enjoy-
ing the remarkable natural and cultural environment of the highland region. To conclude the course, we
will visit the lowland rainforest and explore several archeological sites, including Tikal, the most remark-
able of ancient Mayan cities.
Requirements: students must attend all class meetings and site visits,participate in and write up several ex-
ercises in the field, keep a travel journal, and make one oral presentation.
Evaluation will be based upon performance in these areas.
Prerequisites: at least one semester of college-level Spanish, or equivalent. Enrollment limited to 12 stu-
dents.
Cost to student: $1,200 (in-country transportation, meals, lodging, incidental fees, and language instruction
included) plus airfare to and from Guatemala City (approximately $400 to $750, depending on point of de-
parture). In addition to the standard trip financial aid provided by the College, some additional aid may be
available, through the Gaudino Fund, in cases of special need.
REINHARDT and MOLLY MAGAVERN (Instructors)
Molly Magavern, Coordinator of Special Academic Programs at Williams, has lived and taught in Central
America.
PSCI 030 Senior Essay
To be taken by students registered for Political Science 491 or 492.
Winter Study Program
­ 384 ­
PSCI 031 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Political Science 493-494.
PSCI 032 Individual Project
To be taken by students registered for Political Science 495 or 496.
PSCI 033 Advanced Study in American Politics
To be taken by students registered for Political Science 481-482.
PSYCHOLOGY
PSYC 010 Biographical Story Telling
In this course, we will learn about famous people's biographies by methods of conducting research, acting,
and story telling. During class time, students will assume the personality of their chosen historical figure
and will be expected to share their personal and cultural histories with the rest of the group (e.g., by reading
from actual and made-up diaries, etc.). We will meet twice a week at the instructor's house from 1PM to
4PM. Costumes and props will be strongly encouraged. The goals of this course are to develop (a) bio-
graphical research skills by doing library research; (b) writing skills by devising a biographical sketch and
or a fictitious diary etc. (c) acting skills through the enactment of a chosen persona; and (d) insights into
oneself, through a process, which is a form of psychodrama.
Requirements: each student will have to write two biographical sketches a week and be prepared to enact
them with costume and dialogue. At the end of the course, participants will be asked to hand in a 10-page
paper that will provide an in depth analysis of one or more of the characters they have chosen to enact. This
paper will require historical and literary scholarship.
Prerequisite: willingness to work hard. Enrollment limited to 15.
Cost to student: none.
Meeting time: afternoons--1-4 p.m.--twice a week.
BEN-ZEEV
PSYC 012 Play
The meaning of play in the young child's life will be considered, both through readings and practical ex-
perience. The group will discuss several theoretical approaches to play, and each student will work morn-
ings or afternoons with children in natural play settings, e.g. nursery school or day-care center.
A journal relating readings and experience will be kept, and a final 10-page paper, relating theories of play
to the student's observations of children at play will be written.
No prerequisites, but interested students must consult with the instructor prior to registration. Enrollment
limited to number of available placements in children's programs.
Cost to student: none.
Meeting time: mornings or afternoons.
CRAMER
PSYC 013 Mental Illness in Film
This course examines the depiction of mental illness and the therapeutic process on the silver screen. How
do films influence our perceptions of normality and abnormality? How do they shape our beliefs about the
causes of mental illness, as well as our expectations about the content and process of treatment? Films have
the potential to serve a variety of functions, ranging from a form of advocacy for the mentally ill to a mech-
anism for furthering stigma and intolerance. In this course, we will sample a variety of powerful films (both
contemporary and classic) representing multiple perspectives on mental illness. During the first half of the
course we will view films as a group, explore their explicit and implicit messages about mental illness, and
contrast their media portrayal with empirically based clinical research. In the second half of the course, stu-
dents will focus their attention on a clinical disorder of personal interest. Students will view two films that
pertain to that disorder, and compare the cinematic depiction with more "real-world" clinical manifesta-
tions as described in current research literature. Students will present their projects to the larger group dur-
ing the final week of Winter Study.
Requirements: class participation, project presentation, 10-page paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 15.
Cost to student: none.
Meeting time: mornings.
M. SANDSTROM
PSYC 015 Principles of Psychotherapy
Outlining the principles underlying the "talking cure," this course represents the kind of overview of psy-
chotherapy the instructor wishes he had received as an undergraduate. Topics covered will include indica-
tions for treatment, the particular arrangements for therapy, how they differ from other social situations, the
initiation of therapy, and principles of transference, counter-transference, personal history investigation,
and interpretation. Of particular interest will be to describe how, during psychotherapy, persons change. By
using both imagined therapy dialogues and published student autobiographies, efforts will be made at each
stage to illustrate ways in which the general principles work out in practice. For the course paper, students
Winter Study Program
­ 385 ­
will be asked to describe an issue of concern in the student's own experience and to imagine how a thera-
pist might collaborate in working on that issue. At the end of the course the instructor will discuss each pa-
per individually with each student.
Requirements: readings, class discussion, and a 10-page paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 10. Preferences given to juniors and seniors.
Cost to student: approximately $25.
Meeting time: mornings.
RICHARD Q. FORD (Instructor)
G. GOETHALS (Sponsor)
Richard Q. Ford received his Ph.D. in Clinical Psychology from the University of Chicago in 1970. He
was for twelve years on the medical staff on the Austen Riggs Center in Stockbridge, Massachusetts and
has for the past eighteen years been in the private practice of psychotherapy in Williamstown. He is co-au-
thor with Sidney J. Blatt of "Therapeutic Change: An Object Relations Perspective."
PSYC 016 Gender in Psychology and Society (Same as Women's and Gender Studies 016)
This coursewillbeginwithseveraltheoriesofgenderidentity development.Fromthere,wewillmovetoan
exploration ofsocio-cultureaspectsofgender,includingstereotypes,expectationsof"masculinity"and
"femininity," and current controversies. Through class discussion, readings, experiential activities, and films,
we willcreatedialogueonthemeaningsof gender.Studentswill beexpected toconducttheirowncreativeob-
servational study of gender and present findings during a classroom poster presentation session. The presen-
tation willfocusonarelevantcentralquestionofinteresttothestudent,arationaleforaskingthequestion,
method of observation, findings, and discussion. Observations may consist of human behavior, or perhaps an
analysis ofsomeaspectofourpopularculture,medica,etc.
Requirements:readings,classparticipation,observationalresearchstudywithaccompanyingresearchpaper.
Noprerequisites,thoughPsychology101isrecommended.Enrollmentlimitedto20.
Costtostudent:approximately$40forbooksandmaterials.
Meetingtime:mornings.
DARIA PAPALIA (Instructor)
G. GOETHALS (Sponsor)
Daria Papalia received her Ph.D. in Clinical Psychology from the State University of New York at Buffalo.
She is Director of Counseling at Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts in North Adams, Massachusetts.
PSYC 017 Teaching Practicum
Students interested in teaching may submit applications for a Winter Study assignment as a teacher's aide
at Mt. Greylock Regional High School or at the Williamstown Elementary School. Those accepted will
work under the supervision of a regular member of the teaching staff and submit a report on their work at
the end of the Winter Study Period. This project involves a four-week commitment to full-time affiliation
with the school. Interested students should consult before Winter Study registration with Professor Fein,
376 Bronfman. He will assist in arranging placements and monitor students' progress during the four-week
period.
Requirements: full-time affiliation with the school and a final 10-page report. The final report should sum-
marize the student's experiences and reflections as drawn from a daily journal.
Prerequisite: approval of Professor Fein required. Enrollment limited to number of places available at the
two participating schools.
Cost to student: none.
FEIN
PSYC 018 Institutional Placement
Students interested in a full-time January placement in a mental health, social service or applied psycholo-
gy (e.g., advertising, law) setting may consult with members of the Psychology Department to make ap-
propriate arrangements. Students should first make their own contacts with an institution or agency. They
should also arrange to obtain a letter from a sponsor at the institution who will outline and supervise the
student's duties during January. The student must agree to keep a journal and to submit a final paper sum-
marizing and reflecting upon the experiences outlined in the journal.
Requirements for a passing grade are a satisfactory evaluation from the institutional sponsor and a 10-page
final paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 20.
Cost to student: none.
FEIN
PSYC 031 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Psychology 493-494.
RELIGION
REL 010 Training the Body-Mind: Introduction to Traditional Karate
This course will introduce students to the basic routines and movements of traditional Okinawan Karate
(Shohei-ryu/Uechi-ryu) and will also explore the history, theory, and philosophy behind the routines and
movements. Class will meet three times a week for two hours. One session each week will include discus-
sion, video viewing, and experiments in learning styles. Readings to be assigned will cover martial arts his-
Winter Study Program
­ 386 ­
tory, Zen thought and Eastern energy theory. Handouts will also be included with Japanese terminology
and sequences. The other two will be dojo (training hall) sessions, focused on learning and practicing the
techniques and routines. One of the eight sessions will take place at the dojo in Pittsfield so that students
will experience a karate class in a more traditional setting and interact with students on other levels. By the
end of the month, all students should be ready for the first promotion; some may be ready for promotion to
the second level. Final class will be a performance and exhibit.
Evaluation based on regular attendance, active participation, completion of assigned readings, submission
of three journal entries of 2 or more pages, participation in final performance, contribution to final display.
Enrollment limited to 20.
Cost to student: a small fee for photocopies; purchase of gi (uniform) optional ($30-35)
Meeting time: mornings--three times a week, for two hours each session.
LISKEN VAN PELT DUS (Instructor)
DARROW (Sponsor)
Lisken Van Pelt Dus began her own training in karate twenty years ago as a first-year student at Williams.
She is now co-owner of the Okinawan Karate School in Pittsfield, Massachusetts, where she teaches full-
time. She holds the rank of Renshi Rokudan (1st degree master, 6th degree black belt) and is a certified
Shikan Master Instructor.
REL 012 Women and Religion in Contemporary Chinese Society (Same as Asian Studies 012
and Women's and Gender Studies 012)
(See under Asian Studies for full description.)
REL 014 Language of the Holocaust
How name what is unnameable, unthinkable, unimaginable? Is silence the only response to unspeakable
acts? Or, if you can articulate a name, an authority, an identity, a reason for genocide, for the annihilation of
the Jewish people, how do you express or represent the experience without the luxury of artifice? What are
the terms of such expression? What claims does the experience make on those who wish to define it? Is
there an ultimate fiction greater than fact that such an event requires? This course will concentrate on the
relationships between historical/recorded (mimetic) interpretations (i.e., first person accounts, religious and
historical texts, documentary footage) and constructed (poesis) interpretation of the Holocaust. The latter
will include a sampling of films, novels, poems, art of victims and survivors and others using the material
of genocide as primary source for the creation of a work of art. Within this framework questions regarding
both the particular and universal nature of the Holocaust will be addressed. Course readings and material
will offer provocative pairings to sharpen and question the necessary yet paradoxically unstable distinction
between the mimetic and poetic mode: These might include Wiesel's Night; selections from the Old Testa-
ment (Akidah and Book of Job ) and the Zohar, Borowski's This Way to the Gas Chambers, Ladies and
Gentlemen and Scrap of Time and Other Stories; Charles Reznicoff's Holocaust and Artie Spiegelman's
Maus I and Maus II ; Expressionistic and concentration camp art; various historical accounts; and selec-
tions form the work of Paul Celan, Nelly Sachs, A. Sutzkever, Edmund Jabes, Aharon Appelfeld, Andre
Schwarz-Bart, Terrence Des Pres and Daniel Goldhagen. Films might include Europa Europa, Nasty Girl,
Shop on Main Street, Shoah and Schindler's List.
Requirements: a 10-page paper, class participation and regular attendance.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 25.
Cost to student: $60 for books and xeroxes.
Meeting time: mornings--three times a week, two hours per class.
DAVID RAFFELD (Instructor)
DARROW (Sponsor)
A poet and writer, Williamstown resident David Raffeld has written widely on the themes to be developed
in this course. In addition to offering this course several times, Raffeld has taught Winter Study term
courses at Williams in the Departments of Religion, Philosophy, and English. He has also been a Writer-in-
Residence in the Department of Theater for the production of hisIsaac Oratorio, which was written in part
in response to the Holocaust.
REL 024 The Ramayana, Epic in Art (Same as Art History 024)
(See under Art History for full description.)
REL 025 Israel and Jordan:InterculturalInterchange,AncientandModern(SameasClassics
025)
(See under Classics for full description.)
REL 026 God and the Gods in the City of the Angels
Los Angeles is the Disneyland of the Gods; in no other city in the world do they have so much room to
play. According to recent polls, some 95 percent of the American population profess belief in God. But in
Los Angeles only 55 percent of the population identifies itself as Protestant, Catholic, or Jewish. The birth-
place of both pentecostalism and Scientology, the city boasts over 120 Buddhist temples, 70 Mosques and
other Islamic Institutions, 25 Hindu temples, and innumerable spirituality centers. In LA, one finds San-
tería supply shops and kosher restaurants on the same block, a Zoroastrian fire temple in the heart of Little
Saigon, an ornate Chola-style Hindu temple complex in the Malibu hills, and the largest evangelical mega-
church in the world. But LA is not totally unique: thanks to increasing globalization, every major US city is
becoming similarly diverse. Los Angeles is a microcosm of America's future.
Winter Study Program
­ 387 ­
In this class, a field course in religious pluralism, we will examine the social processes that will determine
the trajectory of religion in the United States: assimilation, fundamentalism, syncretization, and social dif-
ferentiation. Joined by veteran religion reporter Monique Parsons, we will travel every day from our base
at the California State University to meet adherents of religious communities throughout LA county: Pen-
tecostal preachers, Zen monks, Thai priests, Kabbalah instructors, and devotees of Krishna, Ogun, Ra-
Hoor-Khuit, and the Virgin of Guadalupe. Throughout, we'll ask a single overarching question: how do
individuals forge their religious identities in an increasingly complex spiritual landscape?
Requirements: students will be responsible for at least 20 hours of class meetings and site visits per week in
Los Angeles (roughly January 3 to January 19). Upon return, class will meet three times a week to discuss
the trip. Each student must also attend two planning meetings to be held in the fall. Persons who fail to at-
tend those meetings will not be accepted into the course.
Evaluation will be based on class participation and attendance, and a 10-page final paper or multimedia
project.
No prerequisites; Religion 101, 221, 225, or 273 recommended.Enrollment limited to 13.
Cost to student: $1400 plus airfare to and from Los Angeles.
VERTER and MONIQUE PARSONS
Monique Parsons is an award-winning journalist who has covered the religion beat for the a number of
newspapers, including the Chicago Tribune, the Home News Tribune, and beliefnet.com. She is writing a
book on religion in Hollywood.
REL 031 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Religion 493 or 494.
ROMANCE LANGUAGES
FRENCH
RLFR S.P. Sustaining Program for French 101-102
Students registered for 101-102 are required to attend and pass the sustaining program during the Winter
Study period. There are three 50-minute meetings per week.
Meeting time: 9:00-9:50 a.m.
Teaching Associates NGUYEN and RAHBAR
RLFR 012 Surrealist Women (Same as Literary Studies 012)
Before the advent of modern feminism there were, from the 1920s to the 1960s, surrealist women, who as
writers, painters, photographers, and filmmakers contributed to the revolt against rationalism, order, sexual
constraint, and bourgeois values that became the mission of the surrealist movement. Women artistsand
writers in concert with--and sometimes in opposition to--their male surrealist counterparts fought to privi-
lege dream experience, to insist on the creative power of sensuality and the unconscious, and to give pride of
place tointuition,imagination,andtheirrationalinartisticexperienceandsocialaction.Thecoursewillex-
amine the central place of women in avant-garde surrealism. It will focus on the representation of love by fe-
male and male surrealists, the formative influence of surrealist theory on women's surrealism, the reality of
surrealist misogyny, the image of the female body in surrealist works of literary and visual art, the unique na-
ture of women's surrealist writing, the experience of madness, the differences in point-of-view and imagistic
figuration between male and female artists and photographers, and the sense of otherness so evident in dream
images and dream narratives created by the female imagination. Authors and artists to be studied will include
Joyce Mansour, Unica Zurn, Leonora Carrington, Kay Sage, Dorothea Tanning, Frida Kahlo, Claude Ca-
hun, LeeMiller,AndréBreton,PaulEluard,Max Ernst,RobertDesnos,and others.Thecoursewillbecon-
ducted in English and the reading will be in English. However, students wishing to read the texts in the origi-
nal Frenchshould indicatetheir desireto theinstructorso that French textscan beordered fortheiruse.
Requirements:classparticipation, oneclass oral presentation, one 15-pagefinal paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollmentlimited to 12.
Costtostudent: $50-$60for booksandareading packet.
Meeting time:three2-hourmeetingsperweek, in themornings.
STAMELMAN
RLFR 030 Honors Essay
To be taken by candidates for honors other than by thesis route.
RLFR 031 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for French 493-494.
ITALIAN
RLIT S.P. Sustaining Program for Italian 101-102
Students registered for 101-102 are required to attend and pass the sustaining program during the Winter
Study Period. Three 50-minute meetings per week.
Meeting time: 9:00-9:50
NICASTRO
Winter Study Program
­ 388 ­
SPANISH
RLSP S.P. Sustaining Program for Spanish 101-102
Students registered for 101-102 are required to attend and pass the sustaining program during the Winter
Study Period. Three 50-minute meetings per week.
Meeting time: 9:00-9:50
Teaching Associates AGUILERA and YÁÑEZ
RLSP 030 Honors Essay
To be taken by candidates for honors other than by thesis route.
RLSP 031 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Spanish 493-494.
RUSSIAN
RUSS 025 Williams in Georgia (Same as Special 025)
Williams has a unique program in the Republic of Georgia, which offers students the opportunity to engage
in three-week-long internships in any field. Last year's students worked in the Georgian Parliament, helped
in humanitarian relief organizations like Save the Children, interned in journalism at The Georgian Times,
taught unemployed women computer skills at The Rustavi Project, studied with a Georgian sculptor, did
rounds at the Institute of Cardiology, and learned about transitional economies at the Georgian National
Bank. In addition to working in their chosen fields, students experience Georgian culture through museum
visits, concerts, lectures, meetings with Georgian students, and excursions. Visit the sacred eleventh-centu-
ry Cathedral of Sueti-tskhoveli and the twentieth-century Stalin Museum, take the ancient Georgian Mili-
tary Highway to ski in the Caucasus Range, see the birthplace of the wine grape in Kakheti and the region
where Jason sought the Golden Fleece. Participants are housed in pairs with English-speaking families in
Tbilisi, Georgia's capital city.
Evaluation: at the end of the course students write a 10-page paper assessing their internship experience.
No prerequisites but students interested in participating should contact Professor Goldstein by September
30. Knowledge of Russian or Georgian is NOT required. Enrollment limited to 8.
Cost to student: approximately $2000.
GOLDSTEIN
RUSS 030 Honors Project
May be taken by candidates for honors other than by thesis route.
RUSS 031 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Russian 493-494.
SOCIOLOGY--See under ANTHROPOLOGY AND SOCIOLOGY
THEATRE
THEA 010 Scene Studies--Comedy (Same as Mathematics 010)
(See under Mathematics and Statistics for full description.)
THEA 012 Renewal and Transformation (Same as Classics 012 and Literary Studies 011)
(See under Classics for full description.)
THEA 017 Introduction to Theatrical Mask-making (Same as ArtS 017)
This course offers an introduction to theatrical mask-making. Students will begin by creating casts of their
own faces, in both plaster bandage and prosthetic alginate. These casts form the base for sculpted molds
using plasticine clay, from which masks will be built using two techniques: 1) Millinery buckram (a
starched mesh fabric) draped over a positive mold, and 2) liquid neoprene (a synthetic latex) poured into a
negative mold. All materials are non-toxic and require no previous experience. Students will also receive
instruction in sculpting and creating characters through mask design. We will also address theatrical mask
traditions and techniques of physical acting to bring masks to life. Class will meet three times a week for
two hours, with extra supervised studio sessions available as per student request. The instructor will be
sculpting in the studio outside of class, and will welcome students to observe or work on their own projects.
We will also be showing films and videos that use masks. These screenings will be outside of regular class
hours and will be open to students not enrolled in the class.
A successful "pass" will be based on attendance, participation in presentations and workshops, and
completion of two masks. A final exhibition will display students' work. Effort and enthusiasm will be the
criteria for evaluation as opposed to sculpting ability.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 15.
Cost to student: $50.
Meeting time: afternoons.
BECKIE KRAVETZ (Instructor)
EPPEL (Sponsor)
Beckie Kravetz received her B.A. in Theater from Williams in 1982. She then studied mask-making at
the Yale School of Drama, the Centro Maschere e Strutture Gestuali in Italy, the Taller de Madera in
Winter Study Program
­ 389 ­
Guatemala and the Instituto Allende in San Miguel, Mexico. In 1989, she became the resident mask-
maker for the Los Angeles Opera, where she also works as the assistant wig master and a principal
makeup artist. She has created masks for numerous regional and university theaters, and for interna-
tional Pepsi, Nike, and Max Factor commercials. Her fine art sculptures have been exhibited at the
Tucson Museum of Art, The Dorothy Chandler Pavilion in Los Angeles and other national galleries
and museums. Beckie has recently been named a Fulbright Fellow to study mask carving in Spain this
coming year.
THEA 030 Senior Production
May be taken by students registered for Theatre 491, 492 but is not required.
THEA 031 Senior Thesis
May be taken by students registered for Theatre 493, 494 but is not required.
WOMEN'S AND GENDER STUDIES
WGST 010 Hollywood Feminism
How has feminism been represented in Hollywood cinema? We attempt to answer this question by analyz-
ing the continuities and discontinuities in cinematic representations of women's roles and cinematic narra-
tive strategies in selected films from the 1940's through the 1990's. Images (proto-feminist?) of femme fa-
tales, strong mothers, independent women, working women, and lesbians from the pre-Second Wave (c.
1968) will be compared to their counterparts in the post-Second Wave U.S. We may also address changing
representations of the victimized woman. Films may include: His Girl Friday, Mildred Pierce, Adam's Rib,
Faster Pussycat, Kill, Kill, Kill, The Stepford Wives, Gloria, She's Gotta Have It, Waiting to Exhale, 9 to 5,
The Accused, Thelma and Louise, and Bound.
Final evaluations will be based upon class participation and a final paper or project.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 20.
Meeting time: students will attend morning screenings of three feature length films each week and attend
three afternoon discussions (75 minutes each). They will also be assigned readings from classic feminist
texts that represent the era or issue being addressed. Students must screen all films and attend all discus-
sions.
CASSIDAY and SAWICKI
WGST 012 Women and Religion in Contemporary Chinese Society (Same as Asian Studies
012 and Religion 012)
(See under Asian Studies for full description.)
WGST 014 Experiences of Women in Science (Same as Physics 014)
(See under Physics for full description.)
WGST 016 Gender in Psychology and Society (Same as Psychology 016)
(See under Psychology for full description.)
WGST 030 Honors Project
To be taken by candidates for honors other than by thesis route.
SPECIALS
SPEC 010 Quest for College: Early Awareness in Berkshire County Schools
Today's extremely competitive higher education market places significant pressure on students nationwide
to start planning for college at an increasingly early age while simultaneously demanding ever-higher stan-
dards of excellence for admission to top schools. "Early Awareness" initiatives aim to educate middle
school students as to what lies ahead on the college horizon, empowering them to make sound academic
and extracurricular choices that will keep open a maximum of options.
The first week of this course will be spent in the classroom, exploring and discussing problems and issues
germane to the national trends towards greater (and earlier) college-related pressures. Students will re-
spond to a series of readings dealing with such issues as tracking, paid test preparation and untimed testing,
early decision, parental and peer pressures, special interests, misrepresentation of information, independent
counseling, and others. Class time will also be devoted to familiarizing students with both the nuances of
the college admission process and the administration of the early awareness game, Quest for College. Stu-
dents will spend the next two weeks visiting 10-12 Berkshire County middle schools, administering the
game and inviting students to the culminating College Day. All 8 students will then work together to plan
and run College Day activities for students and their parents. This day will include a) campus tours, b) gen-
eral higher education info sessions, and c) financial aid/scholarship info for the parents. If student and com-
munity interest is sufficient, the course may culminate in a public presentation and open forum early sec-
ond semester.
Evaluation will be based on completion of field work (school visits), organization and execution of project
to bring local middle school students to the Williams Campus for a day of early-awareness related activities
and a final paper (approxiamately 10 pages) reflecting on a course-related issue of the student's choosing.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 8. Preference given to a) students with prior education/admission
Winter Study Program
­ 390 ­
experience, b) students with access to transportation c) juniors and seniors. Interested students must con-
sult with instructors prior to registration. Students will be selected according to the following criteria: a)
experience in teaching or admission, b) access to transportation, and c) seniority. Provision will be stated
that interested students must consult the instructors before registration, that instructors may determine
depth of experience and focus of interest.
Cost to students includes transportation to field work sites and purchase of text.
Meeting time: afternoons.
GINA COLEMAN and MATTHEW SWANSON (Instructors)
DARROW (Sponsor)
Gina Coleman '90, is Associate Director of Admission, Director of Multicultural Recruitment, and in her
fifth year as women's rugby coach. Coleman, who holds an MA in education from MCLA, designed the
game, Quest for College.
Matthew Swanson '97 is in his third year as Assistant Director of Admission. Swanson has spent the past
seven summers teaching/leading in various educational environments.
Both Gina and Matthew have been involved with Early Awareness initiatives in Berkshire County schools.
SPEC 011 Science for Kids (Same as Chemistry 011 and Environmental Studies 011)
(See under Chemistry for full description.)
SPEC 012 Reporting and Writing About Science and Technology (Same as Chemistry 012 and
English 012)
(See under Chemistry for full description.)
SPEC 014 Winter Emergency Care, CPR, Ski Patrol Rescue Techniques
The course is in three parts. When successfully completed it can lead to a certification as a National Ski
Patrol member and certification in Professional Rescue CPR. It will also be designed to teach wilderness
and outdoor emergency techniques.
The Winter Emergency Care Course designed by the National Ski Patrol is the main ingredient. It will be
supplemented by the Red Cross CPR for the Professional Rescuer. An additional 18-hour outdoor course
in Ski Patrol rescue techniques will be taught. Passing all three courses will certify the student as a National
Ski Patrol member if he/she is a competent skier.
The course will deal with and teach how to treat wounds of all types, shock, respiratory emergencies, poi-
soning, drug and alcohol emergencies, burns, frostbite and other exposures to cold, also bone, joint, and
back injuries, and sudden illnesses such as heart attacks, strokes, convulsions, etc. It will also teach the use
of all splints, backboards, bandages, and other rescue equipment. It will teach extrication and unusual
emergency situations and the use of oxygen. The outdoor course will include rescue toboggan handling,
organization of rescues, and outdoor practical first aid.
Classroom work will include lectures, seminars, and practical work.
Requirements: there will be a mid-term and a final exam which will be both written and practical. Each
week there will be 17 hours of classroom work plus 8 hours of practical outdoor work at Jiminy Peak ski
area. Attendance at all classes is mandatory.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 18, chosen on the basis of skiing interest and ability and prior first
aid experience.
Cost to student: $100 which will include all materials, books and registration fees.
Meeting time: mornings and afternoons.
JAMES BRIGGS (Instructor)
PECK (Sponsor)
Jim Briggs was the Outing Club director at Williams for many years. He has led trips to the Alps on a
number of occasions. He is both a certified OEC instructors and a certified CPR instructor.
SPEC 015 Deaf and Proud: An Introduction to Deaf Language and Culture
The aim of this course is to introduce students to the language and community/culture of deaf people. Rep-
resentations of deafness as a disability will be challenged from the perspective of those who argue that deaf
people comprise a linguistic minority. Students should expect to develop a basic understanding of the lin-
guistic status of American Sign Language (A.S.L.), a language in which the grammar is expressed on the
face and which does not share the grammatical structures of English. We will give specific attention to the
social and economic status of the deaf community at large and to the social and political constraints im-
posed upon them by a hearing community which denies them education in their own language. Three ap-
proaches to deaf education will be addressed: oral, signed English, and A.S.L. Several native signers will
be invited to lecture on ASL and to engage in dialogue with students about deaf politics and culture.
The course will be taught by an instructor with extensive experience as an interpreter in the deaf communi-
ty. In addition to exploring deafness from the perspectives of deaf people, students will learn about the role
of the interpreter in both deaf and hearing communities.
Major texts for the course may include the following: In This Sign by Joanna Greenberg, a child of deaf
adults, The Mask of Benevolence by Harlan Lane, Voices from a Culture by Padden and Humprhies, and a
collection of articles and videos.
Evaluations will be based on the following: brief journal entries which record responses to videos, discus-
sions and readings following each class, a 5-page critical response essay to an assigned topic, class partici-
pation, and a final project (i.e., oral presentation, performance, essay, etc.).
Winter Study Program
­ 391 ­
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 15.
Cost to student: $30 for books.
Meeting time: Students will be required to attend two afternoon class meetings per week from 1 p.m. to
3:30 and to attend an all day field trip.
LAURIE BENJAMIN (Instructor)
SAWICKI (Sponsor)
Laurie Benjamin is a graduate from the University of Massachusetts in multicultural and international
education. Ms. Benjamin has taught deaf students at the secondary level. She is a nationally certified
A.S.L. interpreter for the deaf with extensive experience in a wide range of interpreter settings including
mental health and performance interpreting.
SPEC 019 Medical Apprenticeship
A student is assigned to a local physician, dentist, or veterinarian to observe closely his or her practice in the
office and/or at the North Adams Regional Hospital, Berkshire Medical Center (Pittsfield, MA), or South-
western Vermont Medical Center (Bennington, VT). It is expected that a student will spend the better part
of the day, five days a week, with the physician or a period mutually agreed upon by the student and the
physician as being educationally significant. The program has proven to be extremely successful in giving
interested students a clear picture of the practice of medicine in a non-urban area. An effort is made to
expose the student to a range of medical specialties.
A 10-page report written on some aspect of the month's experience is required.
Prerequisite: interested students must attend a mandatory information meeting in early October, prior to
applying for this course. Preference is given to juniors, and then sophomores, whose course work has been
suggestive of a firm commitment to preparation for medical school. Enrollment limited to 44.
Cost to student: none, except for local transportation and vaccinations.
TEACHING ASSOCIATES (Instructors)
DEBORAH AUGUST, M.D. JOSHUA KLEEDERMAN, D.M.D.
TIM J. BAISCH, M.D. JONATHAN KRANT, M.D.
DANIEL I. BECKER, M.D. ANDRE LANGLOIS, M.D.
JACQUES BLANCHET, M.D. IRA LAPIDUS, D.M.D.
JAMES BOVIENZO, D.O. JOAN E. LISTER, M.D.
PEGGY CARON, D.V.M. PAUL MAHER, M.D.
VICTORIA R. CAVALLI, M.D. JEFFREY MATHENY, M.D.
BRIAN CUNNINGHAM, M.D. RONALD S. MENSH, M.D.
RUTLEDGE CURRIE, M.D. STEVE NELSON, M.D.
MICHAEL R. DEMATTEO, M.D. CHARLES O'NEILL, M.D.
PAUL DONOVAN M.D. JUDY H. ORTON, M.D.
STUART DUBUFF, M.D. NORMAN PARADIS, M.D.
DAVID ELPERN, M.D. MICHAEL C. PAYNE, M.D.
ROBERT FANELLI, M.D. FERNANDO PONCE, M.D.
STUART FREYER, M.D. RICHARD PROVENZANO, M.D.
ERIC SCOTT FROST, M.D. HENRY RICHMOND, M.D.
MICHAEL L. GERRITY, M.D. DANIEL S. ROBBINS, M.D.
CYNTHIA GEYER, M.D. OSCAR RODRIQUES, M.D.
HENRY M. GOLD, M.D. CHARLES SILBERMAN, M.D.
DAVID M. GORSON, M.D. JULIE SILBERSTEIN, M.D.
AMY GRIFFIN, M.D. ANTHONY M. SMEGLIN, M.D.
BONNIE H. HERR, M.D. ERWIN A. STUEBNER, JR., M.D.
DOUGLAS V. HERR, M.D. DANIEL M. SULLIVAN, M.D.
ROBERT HERTZIG, M.D. KATHERINE URANECK, M.D.
JUDITH HOLMGREN, M.D. KATHRYN WISEMAN, M.D.
ROBERT C. JANDL, M.D. RICHARD WISEMAN, M.D.
LAURA JONES, D.V.M. CHARLES I. WOHL, M.D.
THOMAS KAEGI, M.D. JEFFREY A. YUCHT, M.D.
COLLEEN KELLEY, M.D. MARK ZIMPFER, M.D.
SUSAN SALKO
Health Professions Advisor
SPEC 021 Documentary Photography: Public Documents and Personal Narratives (Same as
English 024)
(See under English for full description.)
SPEC 022 Color Photography: People and Places (Same as Mathematics and Statistics 022)
(See under Mathematics and Statistics for full description.)
SPEC 025 Williams in Georgia (Same as Russian 025)
(See under Russian for full description.)
SPEC 027 Teaching and Writing at Theodore Roosevelt High School
Students choosing this Winter Study project will live in New York and travel daily to Roosevelt, a large
comprehensive high school in the Bronx. A typical day includes: conducting small group work in selected
classes (mostly English and Social Studies, but others are possible), working one-on-one with selected stu-
dents, working in school departments (e.g., college guidance office, tutoring center), and seminar-style
Winter Study Program
­ 392 ­
meetings in which we discuss and write on issues that emerge from the work with students and teachers.
Requirements: Active and reliable participation in tutoring and discussion during January; participation in
several brief orientation meetings before January (possibly including a half-day trip to TRHS), a journal
during the program, a written report in a format of the student's choice at the end.
Prerequisites: Strong interest in working with young people. Enrollment limited to approximately 15 soph-
omores, juniors and seniors.
Cost to student: Approximately $350 for transportation and food. We will attempt to provide housing for
tutors. Consult with instructor.
G. NEWMAN
Sponsored by the German and Russian Departments
SPEC 028 Teaching Practicum, the Bronx and Manhattan
Participating sophomores, juniors and seniors will be expected to pursue a full day's program of observing,
teaching, tutoring, and mentoring at Christopher Columbus HS in the Bronx or at A. Philip Randolph HS
in Manhattan. Each of the schools will provide a resident supervisor for the Williams teaching interns who
will meet regularly to assist with questions and to monitor individual schedules.
Criteria for a pass include full-time affiliation with the school for the entire winter study, keeping a daily
journal, participating in the weekly after school seminars held for all of the NYC teaching practicums, and
submitting a 5- to l0-page report at the end of Winter Study reflecting upon and summarizing the month's
learning experience. Orientation meetings and a visit to the high school prior to the start of winter study will
be arranged.
Cost to student: approximately $400 for food and transportation. Housing in NYC will be arranged where
necessary.
P. SMITH
Coordinator of High School/College Partnerships
SPEC 029 Junior High School Teaching Practicum, the Bronx and Manhattan
Participating sophomores, juniors, and seniors will be expected to pursue a full day's program of observ-
ing, teaching, tutoring and mentoring at PS 45 in the Bronx (a feeder school to Roosevelt HS) or at Roberto
Clemente Junior High School in Manhattan (a feeder school to A. Philip Randolph HS). Each of the
schools will provide a resident supervisor for the Williams teaching interns who will meet regularly to as-
sist with questions and to arrange individual schedules.
Criteria for a pass include full-time association with the school for winter study, keeping a daily journal,
participating in the weekly meetings for all of the Williams Teaching Interns, and submitting a 5- to l0-page
report at the end of Winter Study reflecting upon and summarizing the month's learning experience. An
orientation program and a visit to the school will be arranged prior to January.
No prerequisites.
Cost to student: approximately $400. for food and transportation while in NYC. Housing will be arranged
for those needing it.
P. SMITH
Coordinator of High School/College Partnerships
SPEC 034 The Contemporary Singer/Songwriter
This course will focus on learning how to write and perform songs in a contemporary style. Topics ad-
dressed will include song structure, how to create a lyric that communicates, vocal and instrument presen-
tation, performing techniques, publicity for events, and today's music industry. This class will culminate in
a public performance of material written during the course.
In order to pass this course, each student will be expected to complete a minimum of two songs, both music
and lyrics. One of these songs will be presented during the final performance, preferably by the student. If
not, the student must arrange for someone else in the class to assist him or her. Also, a 2-page paper will be
passed in on the last day of class.
There are no prerequisites for this course, although students with musical backgrounds and the ability to
play instruments may be given preference for entry. Enrollment limited to 15.
Cost to student: approximately $75 for books and xeroxing costs.
Meeting time: afternoons (Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursdays for two-hour sessions).
BERNICE LEWIS (Instructor)
KECHLEY (Sponsor)
Bernice Lewis is an accomplished singer and songwriter who has performed her work throughout the
country. She lives in Williamstown.
SPEC 035 Making Pottery on the Potter's Wheel (Same as ArtS 035)
(See under Art for full description.)
SPEC 036 Teaching Practicum: St. Aloysius School, Harlem
An opportunity for up to five sophomore, junior or senior students to observe, tutor, teach and mentor at St
Aloysius School in Harlem under the direction of Principal Laurel Senger. An orientation session and a vi-
sit to the school in December will be arranged prior to Winter Study.
Criteria to pass include full-time participation at St Aloysius for the month, keeping a daily journal, partici-
pating in the weekly meetings of all NYC practicum students, and submitting a 5- to l0-page report at the
end of WSP reflecting upon and summarizing the month's learning experience.
Winter Study Program
­ 393 ­
Enrollment limited to 5 sophomores, juniors or seniors interested in teaching
Cost to student: approximately $400. for food and transportation. Housing in NYC will be arranged where
necessary.
P. SMITH
Coordinator of High School/College Partnerships
SPEC 039 Composing A Life: Finding Success and Balance in Life After Williams
To be at Williams you have learned to be a successful student, but how do you learn to be successful in life?
What will be your definition of a successful career? What will be your definition of a successful personal
life? How will you resolve the inevitable tradeoffs between your personal and professional lives? In short,
what will constitute the "good life" for you? We borrow the concept of "composing a life," from a book of
that title by Mary Catherine Bateson, as a very apt metaphor for the counterpoint and resolution of issues in
defining success and in balancing a personal and a professional life. This course is designed: (1) To offer
college students, on the threshold of entering adulthood, an opportunity to examine and define their beliefs,
values, and assumptions about their future personal and professional lives, in the broader context of life
planning and composition, and to consider how they might achieve a successful balance; (2) To encourage
students to gain a better understanding of how culture, ideology, and opportunity affect their life choices;
and 3) To provide an opportunity for students to "try on" different models of success and balance. An em-
phasis on case studies and "living cases" (in the form of guests from various professions who have made
different life choices) will enable students to simulate real life without the actual risks of reality. We will
look at the choices and tradeoffs, the consequences, and adaptations to the various models with the as-
sumption that there is no one right answer to the dilemmas one might face in life after Williams. Through
the use of selected readings, case studies, guest speakers and field interviews, we will explore both the pub-
lic context of the workplace and institutions as well as the private context of individuals and their personal
relationships in determining life choices.
Evaluation: students will complete a survey at the beginning of the course to explore their attitudes about
defining success and balancing a personal and a professional life in the future. They will also conduct one
field interview with a couple who has dealt with career/family issues to explore further the life choice deci-
sionmaking process and its consequences. A major requirement of the course will be to write a final paper
(10 pages) where students will be asked to discuss how the course materials, class discussions, interviews,
and guest speakers have informed, validated, or challenged their personal thinking on defining success and
achieving balance in life after Williams. The final paper, we would hope, might become the foundation of a
personal decisionmaking framework for future life choices.
Requirements: regular attendance, class participation, field interview, and a 10-page final paper
No prerequisites. Enrollment limited to 20. Questions about the course: please contact Michele Moel-
ler Chandler at 458-8106 or by e-mail at chandler@bcn.net.
Cost to student: photocopied articles, cases, and/or books.
Meeting time: mornings.
MICHELE MOELLER CHANDLER and CHIP CHANDLER (Instructors)
TOOMAJIAN (Sponsor)
Michele Moeller Chandler '73 and Chip Chandler '72 have taught this Winter Study course for the past
four years. They have been both personally and professionally engaged in the course topic. Michele's ca-
reer has been in college administration, and she has an M.A. from Columbia, and a Ph.D. from Northwest-
ern. Her Ph.D. dissertation focused upon the career/family decisionmaking of professional women who
altered their careers because of family obligations. Chip is a senior partner with McKinsey & Company, an
international management consulting firm, and he has an M.B.A. from Harvard. He will share the teaching
load on a part-time basis. Guest speakers will address related topics.
SPEC 040 Reading in the Content Area
This course focuses on how to teach students literacy through specific subject matter. Through a combina-
tion of seminar activities and discussions as well as student teaching in local schools, participants will learn
how to help middle and high school students develop reading and critical thinking skills in the context of
specific topics: social studies, science, and literature for instance. This course is required for those students
hoping to gain teacher certification.
Enrollment limited to 15. Questions about the course, please contact Susan Engel at x4522 or sengel@wil-
liams.edu.
Cost to student: none.
SHARON TOOMEY CLARK (Instructor
SUSAN ENGEL (Sponsor)
Susan Toomey Clark is a lecturer at California State University, San Bernardino. She has fifteen
years of teaching experience in junior high, high school, community college and university settings. She
also serves on the Education Issues and Practices Committee for the Governor's School-to-Career
Advisory Council as the nominee of the Association of Independent California Colleges and Universities.
Winter Study Program
­ 394 ­
WILLIAMS PROGRAM IN TEACHING
Students interested in exploring one or more of the following courses related to teaching and/or working
with children and adolescents should contact Susan Engel, Director of Education Programs, who will be
able to help you choose one that best suits your educational goals.
ANSO 012 Children and the Courts: Internship in the Crisis in Child Abuse
(See under Anthropology/Sociology for full description.)
ARTH 016 Museums and Culture
(See under Art History for full description.)
CHEM 011 Science for Kids (Same as Environmental Studies 011 and Special 011)
(See under Chemistry for full description.)
PSCI 019 Service Learning Internships (Same as Geosciences and EXPR 019)
(See under Political Science for full description.)
PSYC 012 Play
(See under Psychology for full description.)
PSYC 017 Teaching Practicum
(See under Psychology for full description.)
SPEC 010 Quest for College: Early Awareness in Berkshire County Schools
(See under Special for full description.)
SPEC 015 Deaf and Proud: An Introduction to Deaf Language and Culture
(See under Special for full description.)
SPEC 027 Teaching and Writing at Theodore Roosevelt High School
(See under Special for full description.)
SPEC 028 Teaching Practicum, the Bronx and Manhattan
(See under Special for full description.)
SPEC 029 Junior High School Teaching Practicum, the Bronx and Manhattan
(See under Special for full description.)
SPEC 036 Teaching Practicum: St. Aloysius School, Harlem
(See under Special for full description.)
SPEC 040 Reading in the Content Area
(See under Special for full description.)
WILLIAMS-MYSTIC PROGRAM IN
AMERICAN MARITIME STUDIES
An interdisciplinary one-semester program co-sponsored by Williams College and Mystic Seaport
which includes credit for one winter study. Classes in maritime history, literature of the sea, marine ecolo-
gy, oceanography, and marine policy are supplemented by field seminars: offshore sailing, Pacific Coast,
Nantucket Island, and New York harbor. For details, see "Williams-Mystic Maritime Studies Program" or
our website: www.williamsmystic.org.
­ 395 ­
PRESIDENTS OF WILLIAMS
Ebenezer Fitch, D.D., 1793-1815
Zephaniah Swift Moore, D.D., 1815-1821
Edward Dorr Griffin, D.D., 1821-1836
Mark Hopkins, M.D., D.D., LL.D., 1836-1872
Paul Ansel Chadbourne, D.D., LL.D., 1872-1881
Franklin Carter, Ph.D., LL.D., 1881-1901
John Haskell Hewitt, LL.D., Acting President, 1901-1902
Henry Hopkins, D.D., LL.D., 1902-1908
Harry Augustus Garfield, L.H.D., LL.D., 1908-1934
Tyler Dennett, Ph.D., Litt.D., LL.D., 1934-1937
James Phinney Baxter, 3rd, Ph.D., Litt.D., L.H.D., D.Sc., LL.D., 1937-1961
John Edward Sawyer, M.A., LL.D., Litt.D., L.H.D., 1961-1973
John Wesley Chandler, Ph.D., LL.D., L.H.D., 1973-1985
Francis Christopher Oakley, Ph.D., L.H.D., Litt.D., LL.D., 1985-1993
Harry Charles Payne, Ph.D., Litt.D., LL.D., 1994-1999
Carl William Vogt, LL.B., LL.D., 1999-2000
Morton Owen Schapiro, M.A., Ph.D., LL.D., 2000-
TRUSTEES 2000-2001
Morton Owen Schapiro, M.A., Ph.D., LL.D., President
Raymond F. Henze III '74, B.A., Greenwich, Connecticut
Allan W. Fulkerson '54, B.A., Boston, Massachusetts
Dustin H. Griffin II '65, Ph.D., Englewood, New Jersey
Joseph L. Rice III '54, LL.B., New York, New York
William G. Ouchi '65, M.B.A., Ph.D., Litt.D., Santa Monica, California
Cecily E. Stone '73, M.B.A., Armonk, New York
John B. McCoy '65, M.B.A., LL.D., Chicago, Illinois
Lucienne S. Sanchez '79, M.D., Weston, Massachusetts
William E. Simon, Jr. '73, J.D., A.M.P., Los Angeles, California
Peter M. Wege II '71, Ph.D., Brookline, Massachusetts
Paul Neely '68, M.S., M.B.A., Chattanooga, Tennessee
Robert I. Lipp '60, M.B.A., J.D., New York, New York
Laura Estes '71, M.B.A., West Hartford, Connecticut
E. David Coolidge III '65, M.B.A., Kenilworth, Illinois
Michael B. Keating '62, LL.B., Boston, Massachusetts
Tod R. Hamachek '68, M.B.A., Patterson, New York
Peter D. Kiernan III '75, M.B.A., New York, New York
Carl W. Vogt '58, LL.B., LL.D., Potomac, Maryland
John S. Wadsworth, Jr. '61, M.B.A., Hong Kong
Preston R. Washington '70, M.Div., Ph.D., D.D., New Rochelle, New York
Laurie J. Thomsen '79, M.B.A., Westwood, Massachusetts
Clarence Otis, Jr. '77, J.D., Orlando, Florida
Mary T. McTernan '76, B.A., Swarthmore, Pennsylvania
Brent E. Shay '78, B.A., Boston, Massachusetts
­ 396 ­
TRUSTEE COMMITTEES 1999-2000
Reported below are the committee appointments for 1999-2000. Changes in the
2000-2001 assignments will be presented in the fall.
Executive Committee: The President*, Raymond F. Henze III, Chair, Allan W. Fulker-
son, Dustin H. Griffin II, Joseph L. Rice III, William G. Ouchi, Cecily E. Stone, John B.
McCoy, Lucienne S. Sanchez, William E. Simon, Jr., Paul Neely, Michael B. Keating,
Tod R. Hamachek.
Finance Committee: Allan W. Fulkerson, Chair, Raymond F. Henze III, Joseph L. Rice
III, William E. Simon, Jr., Peter D. Kiernan III, Laura Estes, Robert J. Lipp; Non-Trustee
Members: E. David Coolidge III, Stephen A. Lieber, James E. Moltz, Howard B.
Schow.
Committee on Instruction: William G. Ouchi, Chair, Dustin H. Griffin II, Michael B.
Keating, Preston R. Washington, Robert I. Lipp, Laurie J. Thomsen, Mary T. McTernan.
Buildings and Grounds Committee: Paul Neely, Chair, Joseph L. Rice III, Cecily E. Stone,
John B. McCoy, Lucienne S. Sanchez, William E. Simon, Jr., Peter M. Wege II, Michael
B. Keating, Tod R. Hamachek, John S. Wadsworth, Jr., Clarence Otis, Jr.
Committee on Degrees: Dustin H. Griffin II, Chair, William G. Ouchi, John B. McCoy,
William E. Simon, Jr., Preston R. Washington, Peter D. Kiernan III, Robert I. Lipp.
Budget and Financial Planning Committee: Joseph L. Rice III, Chair, Raymond F. Henze
III, Allan W. Fulkerson, Dustin H. Griffin II, William G. Ouchi, Cecily E. Stone, John B.
McCoy, William E. Simon, Jr., Paul Neely, Peter D. Kiernan III, John S. Wadsworth, Jr.,
Laura Estes, Robert I. Lipp.
Committee on Alumni Relations and Development: Cecily E. Stone, Chair, Raymond F.
Henze III, Allan W. Fulkerson, Joseph L. Rice III, John B. McCoy, William E. Simon,
Jr., Michael B. Keating, Tod R. Hamachek, Peter D. Kiernan III, John S. Wadsworth, Jr.,
Preston R. Washington, Clarence Otis, Jr., Laurie J. Thomsen, Mary T. McTernan.
Committee on Campus Life: Lucienne S. Sanchez, Chair, Dustin H. Griffin II, Peter M.
Wege II, Michael B. Keating, Tod R. Hamachek, John S. Wadsworth, Jr., Laura Estes,
Preston R. Washington, Clarence Otis, Jr.
Audit Committee: William E. Simon, Jr., Chair, Allan W. Fulkerson, Laura Estes, Laurie
J. Thomsen.
Committee on Trustees: The President*, Raymond F. Henze III, Chair, Allan W.
Fulkerson, William G. Ouchi, Cecily E. Stone, Lucienne S. Sanchez, Paul Neely.
Public Affairs Committee: John B. McCoy, Chair, Peter M. Wege II, Paul Neely, Michael
B. Keating, Mary T. McTernan. Non-Trustee Members: Charles R. Alberti, W. Thomas
Costley, George D. Kennedy, William E. Sperry.
Committee on Admission and Financial Aid: Tod R. Hamachek, Chair, Cecily E. Stone,
Lucienne S. Sanchez, Peter M. Wege II, Paul Neely, John S. Wadsworth, Jr., Laura
Estes, Laurie J. Thomsen, Clarence Otis, Jr., Mary T. McTernan.
______________
*The President is an ex-officio member of all Trustee committees.
­ 397 ­
FACULTY EMERITI
William H. Pierson, Jr., M.F.A., Ph.D. 107 South Street
Massachusetts Professor of Art, Emeritus
Alex J. Shaw, M.A. 91 Baxter Road
Assistant Professor of Physical Education, Emeritus
George H. Hamilton, Ph.D., LITT.D. 121 Gale Road
Professor of Art, Emeritus
S. Lane Faison, Jr., M.A., M.F.A., LITT.D. 145 Scott Hill Road, Box 631
Amos Lawrence Professor of Art, Emeritus
Charles Compton, Ph.D. Palmetto, Florida
Ebenezer Fitch Professor of Chemistry, Emeritus
Robert C. L. Scott, Ph.D. Lenox, Massachusetts
J. Leland Miller Professor of American History,
Literature and Eloquence, Emeritus
Eunice C. Smith, Ph.D. Concord, New Hampshire
Directrice des Cours du Premier Cycle, Emerita
Whitney S. Stoddard, Ph.D. Sweetwood, 1611 Cold Spring Road
Amos Lawrence Professor of Art, Emeritus
H. William Oliver, Ph.D. 61 Ide Road
Thomas T. Read Professor of Mathematics, Emeritus
Frederick Rudolph, Ph.D. 234 Ide Road, Box 515
Mark Hopkins Professor of History, Emeritus
Lawrence E. Wikander, B.S. in L.S., M.A. 21 Cluett Drive
College Librarian, Emeritus
John A. MacFadyen, Jr., Ph.D. Stonington, Connecticut
Edna McConnell Clark Professor of Geology, Emeritus
Richard O. Rouse, Jr., Ph.D. 85 Harmon Pond Road
Mary A. and William Wirt Warren Professor of Psychology, Emeritus
Fred H. Stocking, Ph.D. 464 North Street, Box 181
Morris Professor of Rhetoric, Emeritus
Vincent M. Barnett, Jr., Ph.D., LL.D., LITT.D., L.H.D., D.C.L. 1251 Main Street
James Phinney Baxter, 3rd, Professor of History and Public Affairs, Emeritus
Harold H. Warren, Ph.D. Sarasota, Florida
Halford R. Clark Professor of Natural Science, Emeritus
James MacGregor Burns, Ph.D. High Mowing, 604 Bee Hill Road
Woodrow Wilson Professor of Government, Emeritus
Philip K. Hastings, Ph.D. 156 Bulkley Street
Professor of Psychology and Political Science, Emeritus
Anson C. Piper, Ph.D. 70 Baxter Road
William Dwight Whitney Professor of Romance Languages, Emeritus
Robert H. Odell, B.A. Lewisburg, Pennsylvania
Assistant Professor of Physical Education, Emeritus
Dudley W. R. Bahlman, Ph.D. 39 Sabin Drive
James Phinney Baxter, 3rd, Professor of History and Public Affairs, Emeritus
Nicholas Fersen, B.S. P. O. Box 125
Professor of Russian, Emeritus
Robert M. Kozelka, Ph.D. Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Professor of Mathematics, Emeritus
David A. Park, Ph.D. 29 Hoxsey Street
Webster Atwell-Class of 1921 Professor of Physics, Emeritus
Guilford L. Spencer II, Ph.D. 70 Hamel Avenue
Frederick Latimer Wells Professor of Mathematics, Emeritus
John D. Eusden, Ph.D. 75 Forest Road
Nathan Jackson Professor of Christian Theology, Emeritus
William E. McCormick, M.A. 5346 Leather Saddle Lane, Brooksville, Florida
Assistant Professor of Physical Education, Emeritus
Russell H. Bostert, Ph.D. 280 Syndicate Road, Box 83
Stanfield Professor of History, Emeritus
Faculty Emeriti
­ 398 ­
Henry J. Bruton, Ph.D. 300 Syndicate Road
John J. Gibson Professor of Economics, Emeritus
William C. Grant, Jr., Ph.D. 155 Sweetbrook Road
Samuel Fessenden Clarke Professor of Biology, Emeritus
Thomas E. McGill, Ph.D. Tiverton, Rhode Island
Hales Professor of Psychology, Emeritus
Irwin Shainman, M.A. 88 Baxter Road
Premier Prix Conservatoire de Paris, Class of 1955 Professor of Music, Emeritus
Edson M. Chick, Ph.D. Proctorsville, Vermont
Professor of German, Emeritus
Benjamin W. Labaree, Ph.D. Amesbury, Massachusetts
Professor of Environmental Studies and History, Emeritus
George Pistorius, Ph.D. 54 Cluett Drive
Frank M. Gagliardi Professor of Romance Languages, Emeritus
James R. Briggs, B.A. Waitesfield, Vermont
Assistant Professor of Physical Education, Emeritus
Fielding Brown, Ph.D. Boston, Massachusetts
Charles L. MacMillan Professor of Physics, Emeritus
Robert W. Friedrichs, Ph.D. 33 Whitman Street
Professor of Sociology, Emeritus
Fred Greene, Ph.D. 135 South Street
A. Barton Hepburn Professor of Government, Emeritus
Kurt P. Tauber, Ph.D. 94 Southworth Street
Class of 1924 Professor of Political Science, Emeritus
MacAlister Brown, Ph.D. 57 Sabin Drive
Fairleigh S. Dickinson, Jr., Professor of Political Science, Emeritus
Andrew Crider, Ph.D. 770 Hancock Road
Mary A. and William Wirt Warren Professor of Psychology, Emeritus
Clara Claiborne Park, M.A., Litt.D. 29 Hoxsey Street
Senior Lecturer in English, Emerita
C. Ballard Pierce, Ph.D. Los Alamos, New Mexico
Professor of Physics, Emeritus
John B. Sheahan, Ph.D. 320 Syndicate Road, Box 751
William Brough Professor of Economics, Emeritus
G. Lawrence Vankin, Ph.D. 88 Cole Avenue
Professor of Biology, Emeritus
John M. Hyde, Ph.D. 20 Jerome Drive, Box 145
Brown Professor of History, Emeritus
William T. Fox, Ph.D. 51 Moorland Street, Box 247
Edward Brust Professor of Geology and Mineralogy, Emeritus
Lawrence S. Graver, Ph.D. 117 Forest Road
John Hawley Roberts Professor of English, Emeritus
H. Ganse Little, Jr., Ph.D. Amherst, Massachusetts
Cluett Professor of Religion, Emeritus
Phyllis L. Cutler, M.S.L.S. Milton, Massachusetts
Librarian, Emerita
David A. Booth, M.A. 44 Willshire Drive
Lecturer In Political Science, Emeritus
J. Hodge Markgraf, Ph.D. 104 Forest Road
Ebenezer Fitch Professor of Chemistry, Emeritus
Daniel D. O'Connor, Ph.D. 36 Hawthorne Road
Mark Hopkins Professor of Intellectual and Moral Philosophy, Emeritus
Richard H. Sabot 1331 Oblong Road
John J. Gibson Professor of Economics, Emeritus
John F. Reichert 40 Waterman Place
John W. Chandler Professor of English, Emeritus
Carl R. Samuelson 575 Water Street
Assistant Professor of Physical Education, Emeritus
­ 399 ­
FACULTY 2000-2001
*On leave 2000-2001
**On leave first semester
***On leave second semester
****On leave calendar year (January-December 2001)
* Daniel P. Aalberts Assistant Professor of Physics
B.S. (1989) M.I.T.; Ph.D. (1994) M.I.T.
* Colin C. Adams Francis Christopher Oakley Third Century Professor of Mathematics
B.S. (1978) M.I.T.; Ph.D. (1983) University of Wisconsin
Elizabeth M. Adler Assistant Professor of Biology
B.S. (1975) Antioch College; Ph.D. (1986) University of Pennsylvania
* Laylah Ali Assistant Professor of Art
B.A. (1991) Williams; M.F.A. (1994) Washington University
Marsha I. Altschuler Associate Professor of Biology
B.S. (1972) University of Rochester; Ph.D. (1979) Indiana University
Rachael Aráuz Visiting Assistant Professor of Art
B.A. (1991) Wellesley; M.A. (1995) University of Pennsylvania
Henry W. Art Samuel Fessenden Clarke Professor of Biology and
Director of the Center for Environmental Studies
A.B. (1966) Dartmouth; Ph.D. (1971) Yale
Jennifer Austin Assistant Professor of Romance Languages
B.A. (1991) Earlham College; M.A. (1996) Cornell University
Michael Awkward Sterling A. Brown '22 Visiting Professor of English, Fall Semester
Jean L. Bacon Assistant Professor of Sociology
B.A. (1983) Wesleyan; Ph.D. (1993) University of Chicago
Duane A. Bailey Associate Professor of Computer Science
B.A. (1982) Amherst College; Ph.D. (1988) University of Massachusetts
Jon Bakija Assistant Professor of Economics
B.A. (1990) Wesleyan; Ph.D. (1999) University of Michigan
Lois Banta Visiting Associate Professor of Biology
B.A. (1983) Johns Hopkins; Ph.D. (1990) California Institute of Technology
David E. Barnard Assistant Professor of Physical Education
B.A. (1981) Wesleyan M.A.L.S. (1989) Wesleyan
Annemarie Bean Assistant Professor of Theatre
B.A. (1988) Wesleyan; M.A. (1991) UCLA
Donald deB Beaver Professor of History of Science
A.B. (1958) Harvard; Ph.D. (1966) Yale
Olga R. Beaver Professor of Mathematics
B.A. (1968) University of Missouri; Ph.D. (1979) University of Massachusetts
* Ilona D. Bell Professor of English
and Fellow of the Oakley Center for the Humanities and Social Sciences, First Semester
B.A. (1969) Radcliffe; Ph.D. (1977) Boston College
Robert H. Bell Professor of English
B.A. (1967) Dartmouth; Ph.D. (1972) Harvard
Gene H. Bell-Villada Professor of Romance Languages
B.A. (1963) University of Arizona; Ph.D. (1974) Harvard
Ben Benedict Part-Time Lecturer in Art
B.A. (1973) Yale; M.Arch. (1976) Yale School of Architecture
Talia Ben-Zeev Assistant Professor of Psychology
B.A. (1991) Rhode Island College; Ph.D. (1997) Yale
* Elaine M. Beretz Assistant Professor of History
B.A. (1974) University of Toledo; Ph.D. (1989) Yale
M. Jennifer Bloxam Professor of Music and Director of the Williams-Oxford Program
B.M. (1979) University of Illinois; Ph.D. (1987) Yale
Roger E. Bolton William Brough Professor of Economics
A.B. (1959) Franklin & Marshall; Ph.D. (1964) Harvard
Sarah R. Bolton Assistant Professor of Physics
B.S. (1988) Brown; Ph.D. (1995) University of California, Berkeley
Bryan L. Bonner Visiting Assistant Professor of Psychology
B.S. (1995) University of Oregon; Ph.D. (2000) University of Illinois-Urbana-Champaign
Ralph M. Bradburd David A. Wells Professor of Political Economy
B.A. (1970) Columbia; Ph.D. (1976) Columbia
** Elizabeth Brainerd Assistant Professor of Economics
B.A. (1985) Bowdoin; Ph.D. (1996) Harvard
Faculty
­ 400 ­
Deborah A. Brothers Costume Designer of the Adams Memorial Theatre
and Lecturer in Theatre
B.A. (1976) University of New Orleans; M.F.A. (1979) California Institute of the Arts
Ernest D. Brown Associate Professor of Music
B.A. (1969) Harvard; Ph.D. (1984) University of Washington
Michael F. Brown James N. Lambert '39 Professor of Anthropology and
Latin American Studies
A.B. (1972) Princeton; Ph.D. (1981) University of Michigan
Kim B. Bruce Frederick Latimer Wells Professor of Computer Science
B.A. (1970) Pomona; Ph.D. (1975) University of Wisconsin
Henry J. Bruton Visiting Professor of Economic
B.A. (1943) Texas; Ph.D. (1952) Harvard
Jean-Bernard Bucky William Dwight Whitney Professor of Theatre
B.S. (1958) Queens, C.U.N.Y.; M.F.A. (1966) Carnegie-Mellon
* Denise Kimber Buell Assistant Professor of Religion
A.B. (1987) Princeton; Ph.D. (1995) Harvard
David Bullwinkle Visiting Assistant Professor of Philosophy
B.A. (1989) Brown; Ph.D. (2000) Northwestern
Lynda K. Bundtzen Herbert H. Lehman Professor of English
B.A. (1968) University of Minnesota; Ph.D. (1972) University of Chicago
Edward B. Burger Associate Professor of Mathematics
B.A. (1985) Connecticut College; Ph.D. (1990) University of Texas, Austin
Sandra L. Burton Assistant Professor of Physical Education
B.A. (1976) C.U.N.Y.; M.F.A. (1987) Bennington College
** James T. Carlton Director of Williams-Mystic Program and
Professor of Marine Science and Adjunct Professor of Biology
B.A. (1971) University of California, Berkeley; Ph.D. (1979) University of California, Davis
Kristin Carter-Sanborn Assistant Professor of English
A.B. (1987) Stanford; Ph.D. (1995) U.C.L.A.
Alison A. Case Associate Professor of English
B.A. (1984) Oberlin; Ph.D. (1991) Cornell
Edward S. Casey Visiting Assistant Professor of Religion, Second Semester
B.A. (1961) Yale; Ph.D. (1967) Northwestern
Julie A. Cassiday Assistant Professor of Russian
B.A. (1986) Grinnell; Ph.D. (1995) Stanford
Cosmo A. Catalano, Jr. Production Manager of the Adams Memorial Theatre and
Lecturer in Theatre
B.A. (1976) University of Iowa; M.F.A. (1979) Yale
Tess Chakkalakal Visiting Lecturer in English
Cecilia Chang Lecturer in Chinese
B.A. (1981) Fu-Jen University; M.A. (1986) U.C.L.A.
* Raymond Chang Halford R. Clark Professor of Natural Sciences
B.S. (1962) London University; Ph.D. (1966) Yale
Joseph Chihade Assistant Professor of Chemistry
B.A. (1989) Oberlin; Ph.D. (1996) Columbia
Mikhail Chkhenkeli Assistant Professor of Mathematics
M.S. (1990) Tbilisi State University; Ph.D. University of Pennsylvania
Kerry A. Christensen Associate Professor of Classics and Associate Dean
B.A. (1981) Swarthmore; Ph.D. (1993) Princeton
Christian Churchill Visiting Assistant Professor of Sociology, First Semester
B.A. (1991) Marlboro College; Ph.D. (2000) Brandeis
Cassandra J. Cleghorn Lecturer in English and Lecturer in American Studies
B.A. (1983) University of California, Santa Cruz; Ph.D. (1995) Yale
Michael P. Conforti Part-time Lecturer in the Graduate Art Program, First Semester
B.A. (1968) Trinity College; Ph.D. (1977) Harvard
** Jonathan H. Conning Assistant Professor of Economics
B.A. (1986) Swarthmore; Ph.D. (1995) Yale
Jill M. Constantine Assistant Professor of Economics
B.A. (1986) Smith; Ph.D. (1994) University of Pennsylvania
*** Timothy E. Cook Fairleigh S. Dickinson, Jr. Professor of Political Science
B.A. (1976) Pomona; Ph.D. (1982) University of Wisconsin, Madison
** Ronadh Cox Assistant Professor of Geology
B.S. (1985) University College Dublin; Ph.D. (1993) Stanford
Phebe Cramer Professor of Psychology
B.A. (1957) University of California, Berkeley; Ph.D. (1962) New York University
Faculty
­ 401 ­
* Stuart J. B. Crampton Barclay Jermain Professor of Natural Philosophy
B.A. (1958) Williams; Ph.D. (1964) Harvard
George T. Crane Associate Professor of Political Science
B.A. (1979) S.U.N.Y., Purchase; Ph.D. (1986) University of Wisconsin, Madison
Eileen Crist Assistant Professor of Sociology
B.A. (1982) Haveford; Ph.D. (1994) Boston University
Joseph Cruz Assistant Professor of Philosophy
B.A. (1991) Williams; Ph.D. (1999) University of Arizona
Robert F. Dalzell, Jr. Ephraim Williams Professor of American History
B.A. (1959) Amherst; Ph.D. (1966) Yale
Andrea Danyluk Assistant Professor of Computer Science
A.B. (1984) Vassar; Ph.D. (1992) Columbia
William R. Darrow Jackson Professor of Religion
B.A. (1970) University of California, Santa Barbara; Ph.D. (1981) Harvard
Alan de Gooyer Visiting Assistant Professor of English
B.A. (1991) Colorado State; Ph.D. (1994) University of Virginia
Marek Demianski Visiting Professor of Astronomy
B.A. (1962) University of Warsaw; Ph.D. (1966) University of Warsaw
Richard D. De Veaux Associate Professor of Mathematics
A.B. (1973) Princeton; Ph.D. (1986) Stanford
David J. DeSimone Part-time Lecturer in Geology and Environmental Studies
B.S. (1976) R.P.I.; Ph.D. (1985) R.P.I.
Nicole S. Desrosiers Part-time Lecturer in Romance Languages
C.A.P.E.S. (1970) Clermont-Ferrand; Ph.D. (1980) University of Massachusetts
David P. Dethier Edward Brust Professor of Geology and Mineralogy
and Director of the Hopkins Forest
B.A. (1972) Dartmouth; Ph.D. (1977) University of Washington
Monique Deveaux Assistant Professor of Political Science
B.A. (1989) McGill; Ph.D. (1997) Cambridge
Charles B. Dew W. Van Alan Clark 1941 Third Century Professor in the Social Science
B.A. (1958) Williams; Ph.D. (1964) Johns Hopkins
William DeWitt C. Carlisle and Margaret Tippit Professor of Biology
B.A. (1961) Williams; Ph.D. (1966) Princeton
* Margaret Diggs Part-time Lecturer in Art
B.A. (1968) George Washington; M.F.A. (1975) Cranbrook Art Academy
* Georges B. Dreyfus Associate Professor of Religion and Fellow of the Oakley
Center for the Humanities and Social Sciences, Second Semester
Bachelors (1969) La Chaux-de-Fonds; Ph.D. (1991) University of Virginia
** Helga Druxes Associate Professor of German and Fellow of the Oakley
Center for the Humanities and Social Sciences, First Semester
A.M. (1985) Brown; Ph.D. (1987) Brown
William Dudley Assistant Professor of Philosophy
B.A. (1989) Williams; M.A. (1995) Northwestern
Susan Dunn Professor of Romance Languages
A.B. (1966) Smith; Ph.D. (1973) Harvard
Tomas Dvorak Assistant Professor of Economics
B.A. (1994) Prague School of Economics; Ph.D. (2000) University of Maryland
Samuel Y. Edgerton, Jr. Amos Lawrence Professor of Art
B.A. (1951) University of Pennsylvania; Ph.D. (1965) University of Pennsylvania
David B. Edwards Professor of Anthropology
B.A. (1975) Princeton; Ph.D. (1986) University of Michigan
Holly Edwards Part­time Lecturer in Art
B.A. (1975) Princeton; Ph.D. (1990) New York University Institute of Fine Arts
* Joan Edwards Washington Gladden 1859 Professor of Biology and College Marshal
B.A. (1971) University of Michigan; Ph.D. (1978) University of Michigan
Susan Engel Lecturer in Psychology and Director of Education Program
B.A. (1980) Sarah Lawrence; Ph.D. (1986) City University of New York
David Eppel Professor of Theatre
B.A. (1971) University of Cape Town; M.F.A. (1986) Columbia
* Edward A. Epping Alexander D. Falck Class of 1899 Professor of Art
B.A. (1970) Western Illinois University; M.F.A. (1973) University of Wisconsin
Richard J. Farley Assistant Professor of Physical Education
B.S. (1968) Boston University; M.Ed. (1974) Boston University
*Grant Farred Assistant Professor of English
B.A. (1987) University of Western Cape; Ph.D. (1996) Princeton
Faculty
­ 402 ­
Peter K. Farwell Assistant Professor of Physical Education
B.A. (1973) Williams; M.A. (1990) Central Michigan
Kaye Husbands Fealing Associate Professor of Economics
B.A. (1981) University of Pennsylvania; Ph.D. (1990) Harvard
Steven Fein Associate Professor of Psychology
A.B. (1986) Princeton; Ph.D. (1991) University of Michigan
Zirka Z. Filipczak Massachusetts Professor of Art
B.A. (1964) Barnard; Ph.D. (1973) Harvard
Robert L. Fisher, Jr. Assistant Professor of Physical Education
B.A. (1970) St. Lawrence; M.Ed. (1974) St. Lawrence
Stephen E. Fix Robert G. Scott '68 Professor of English
A.B. (1974) Boston College; Ph.D. (1980) Cornell
* Antonia E. Foias Assistant Professor of Anthropology
B.A. (1987) Harvard/Radcliffe; Ph.D. (1996) Vanderbilt University
Kevin R. Forkey Part-time Lecturer in Physics
B.A. (1981) Cornell
Jennifer Frankl Assistant Professor of Economics
B.A. (1987) Princeton; Ph.D. (1996) University of California, Berkeley
Elliot M. Friedman Assistant Professor of Psychology
A.B. (1985) Columbia; Ph.D. (1993) University of Wisconsin, Madison
Peter K. Frost Frederick L. Schuman Professor of International Relations
B.A. (1958) Harvard; Ph.D. (1966) Harvard
Kyoko Fujimoto Visiting Lecturer in Japanese
B.A. (1994) Shizuoka University, Japan
Charles J. Fuqua Garfield Professor of Ancient Languages
A.B. (1957) Princeton; Ph.D. (1964) Cornell
James A. Ganz Part-time Lecturer in the Graduate Program in the
History or Art, First Semester
* Thomas A. Garrity Professor of Mathematics
B.S. (1981) University of Texas; Ph.D. (1986) Brown
Chris R.A. Geiregat Assistant Professor of Economics
B.A. (1991) Universiteit Ghent-Belgium; M.A. (1996) Johns Hopkins University
* Steven B. Gerrard Associate Professor of Philosophy and Fellow of the Oakley
Center for the Humanities and Social Sciences
B.A. (1978) Amherst; Ph.D. (1987) University of Chicago
* Antonio Giménez Professor of Romance Languages
Lic. in Law (1960) University of Madrid; Ph.D. (1974) Ohio State
Michael A. Glier Assistant Professor of Art
B.A. (1976) Williams; M.A. (1979) Hunter
Louise E. Glück Preston S. Parish '41 Third Century Senior Lecturer in English
George R. Goethals II Webster Atwell--Class of 1921 Professor of Psychology
A.B. (1966) Harvard; Ph.D. (1970) Duke
Marion Goethals Part-time Lecturer in Art
Eric Goldberg Assistant Professor of History
B.A. (1991) University of Pennsylvania; Ph.D. (1998) University of Virginia
Darra J. Goldstein Professor of Russian
B.A. (1973) Vassar; Ph.D. (1983) Stanford
** Douglas Gollin Assistant Professor of Economics
A.B. (1983) Harvard; Ph.D. (1990) University of Minnesota
Lawrence S. Graver Visiting Professor of English
B.A. (1954) C.U.N.Y.; Ph.D. (1961) University of California, Berkeley
Suzanne L. Graver John Hawley Roberts Professor of English
B.A. (1958) Queens, C.U.N.Y.; Ph.D. (1976) University of Massachusetts
Julia A. Greenwood Assistant Professor of Physical Education
B.A. (1996) Williams
*Edward S. Grees Assistant Professor of Physical Education
B.A. (1975) Windham; M.S. (1982) University of Massachusetts
** Eva U. Grudin Senior Lecturer in Art
B.A. (1969) Boston University
Sabrina Hamilton Assistant Professor of Theatre
B.A. (1978) Hampshire College; M.F.A.. (1996) University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Charles W. Haxthausen Faison-Pierson-Stoddard Professor of Art History,
Director of the Graduate Program in the History of Art
B.A. (1966) University of St. Thomas, Houston; Ph.D. (1976) Columbia
Faculty
­ 403 ­
Laurie Heatherington Professor of Psychology
B.A. (1976) Miami University, Ohio; Ph.D. (1981) University of Connecticut
Guy M. Hedreen Associate Professor of Art
B.A. (1981) Pomona; Ph.D. (1988) Bryn Mawr
Steven Heim Visiting Assistant Professor of Religion, Second Semester
B.A. (1988) University of California
Nancy O. Heins Part-time Lecturer in Biology
B.A. (1969) Emmanuel; M.Ed. (1973) Fitchburg State
Cheryl Hicks Assistant Professor of History, Second Semester
B.A. (1993) University of Virginia; Ph.D. Princeton (1999)
Catharine B. Hill John J. Gibson Professor of Economics and Provost of the College
B.A. (1976) Williams; Ph.D. (1985) Yale
Victor E. Hill IV Thomas T. Read Professor of Mathematics
B.S. (1961) Carnegie-Mellon; Ph.D. (1966) University of Oregon
Wan-Li Ho Visiting Lecturer in Chinese
B.A. (1978) Tunghai University; M.A. (1984) Taiwan Theological College
Michael Ann Holly Visiting Part-time Lecturer in the Graduate Program in Art History, First Semester
Meredith C. Hoppin Frank M. Gagliardi Professor of Classics
B.A. (1972) Carleton; Ph.D. (1976) University of Michigan
** G. Robert Jackall Class of 1956 Professor of Sociology and Social Thought
B.A. (1963) Fordham; Ph.D. (1976) New School of Social Research
Frank Jackson Visiting Associate Professor of Art
B.F.A. (1984) Virginia Commonwealth University; M.F.A. (1990) University of California, Davis
Gary J. Jacobsohn Fred Greene Third Century Professor of Jurisprudence and Politics
B.A. (1967) City College, C.U.N.Y.; Ph.D. (1972) Cornell
William K. Jaeger Associate Professor of Economics
B.A. (1976) Washington State; Ph.D. (1985) Stanford
Andrew Jaffe Part-time Lecturer in Music
B.A. (1973) Saint Lawrence; M.M. (1977) University of Massachusetts
Ju-Yu Scarlett Jang Associate Professor of Art
B.A. (1969) Nat'l Cheng-Chih University, Taipei; Ph.D. (1989) University of California, Berkeley
Cathy M. Johnson Associate Professor of Political Science
B.A. (1979) Dartmouth; Ph.D. (1986) University of Michigan
David C. Johnson Assistant Professor of Physical Education
B.A. (1971) Williams
Eugene J. Johnson III Class of 1955 Professor of Art
B.A. (1959) Williams; Ph.D. (1970) New York University Institute of Fine Arts
Liza Johnson Assistant Professor of Art
B.A. (1992) Williams; M.F.A. (1995) University of California, San Diego
Markes E. Johnson Charles L. MacMillan Professor of Geology
B.A. (1971) University of Iowa; Ph.D. (1977) University of Chicago
Stewart D. Johnson Associate Professor of Mathematics
B.A. (1979) Ft. Lewis College; Ph.D. (1985) Stanford
Kevin M. Jones Professor of Physics
B.A. (1977) Williams; Ph.D. (1983) Stanford
Peter Just Associate Professor of Anthropology
B.A. (1972) University of Chicago; Ph.D. (1986) University of Pennsylvania
Shinko Kagaya Assistant Professor of Japanese
B.A. (1989) Aoyama Gakuin University; Ph.D. (1998) Ohio State University
Frederick J. Kaijage Visiting Professor of History, Second Semester
B.A. (1969) University of East Africa; Ph.D. (1975) University of Warwick
William R. Kangas Assistant Professor of Physical Education
B.A. (1982) University of Vermont; M.Ed. (1994) North Adams State College
Lawrence J. Kaplan Professor of Chemistry
B.S. (1965) University of Pittsburgh; Ph.D. (1970) Purdue
*** Paul M. Karabinos Professor of Geology
B.S. (1975) University of Connecticut; Ph.D. (1981) Johns Hopkins
* Saul M. Kassin Professor of Psychology
B.A. (1974) Brooklyn College; Ph.D. (1978) University of Connecticut
Robert D. Kavanaugh Hales Professor of Psychology and Director of the Oakley
Center for the Humanities and Social Sciences
B.A. (1967) Holy Cross; Ph.D. (1974) Boston University
David S. Kechley Professor of Music
B.Mus. (1970) University of Washington; D.M.A. (1979) Cleveland Institute of Music
Faculty
­ 404 ­
* Kathryn R. Kent Assistant Professor of English
B.A. (1988) Williams; Ph.D. (1996) Duke
* Bruce Kieffer Professor of German
B.A. (1973) Columbia; Ph.D. (1979) Princeton
Elizabeth A. Kieffer Part-time Lecturer in German
B.A. (1977) Rutgers
** Sung Ho Kim Assistant Professor of Political Science
A.B. (1988) Yonsei University; Ph.D. (1997) Illinois University of Chicago
*** Kris N. Kirby Associate Professor of Psychology
B.A. (1985) Marshall; Ph.D. (1991) Harvard
Roger A. Kittleson Assistant Professor of History
B.A. (1985) Northwestern University; Ph.D. (1997) University of Wisconsin, Madison
John E. Kleiner Associate Professor of English
B.A. (1983) Amherst; Ph.D. (1991) Stanford
Sherron E. Knopp Professor of English
A.B. (1971) Loyola; Ph.D. (1975) U.C.L.A.
Birgit G. Koehler Assistant Professor of Chemistry
A.B. (1985) Dartmouth; Ph.D. (1990) Stanford
Thomas A. Kohut Sue and Edgar Wachenheim III Professor of History
and Dean of the Faculty
B.A. (1972) Oberlin; Ph.D. (1983) University of Minnesota
Leon Kojen Visiting Professor of Philosophy
B.A. (1970) Belgrade University; D. Phil. (1978) Oxford
Yukiko Koshiro Visiting Assistant Professor of Japanese
B.A. (1982) Tokyo University; Ph.D. (1992) Columbia
Ross Kraemer Croghan Visiting Professor of Religion, First Semester
B.A. (1970) Smith; Ph.D. (1976) Princeton
Matthew A. Kraus Assistant Professor of Classics
B.A. (1985) Harvard; Ph.D. (1995) University of Michigan
Cornelius C. Kubler Stanfield Professor of Asian Studies and Deputy Marshall of the College
B.A. (1972) Cornell; M.A. (1978) National Taiwan University; Ph.D. (1981) Cornell
* Regina G. Kunzel Associate Professor of History
B.A. (1981) Stanford; Ph.D. (1990) Yale
Steven Kuster Assistant Professor of Physical Education
B.A. (1993) University of Pennsylvania; M.A. (1999) Harvard
*** Karen B. Kwitter Ebenezer Fitch Professor of Astronomy
B.A. (1972) Wellesley; Ph.D. (1979) U.C.L.A.
*** Aida Laleian Associate Professor of Art
B.F.A. (1978) Art Institute of Chicago; M.F.A. (1980) University of California, Davis
Renzie W. Lamb Assistant Professor of Physical Education
B.A. (1959) Hofstra
Marta J. Laskowski Assistant Professor of Biology
B.S. Indiana University; Ph.D. (1990) Stanford
Kai N. Lee Rosenburg Professor of Environmental Studies
A.B. (1966) Columbia; Ph.D. (1971) Princeton
*** William J. Lenhart Professor of Computer Science
B.A. (1977) St. Joseph's; Ph.D. (1983) Dartmouth
Andre Lepecki Visiting Part-time Assistant Professor in Theatre, First Semester
B.A. (1990) Universidade nova de Lisboa; M.A. (1995) New York University
Barbara Lerner Assistant Professor of Computer Science
B.S. (1981) Moravian College; Ph.D. (1989) Carnegie Mellon University
Nancy Levene Assistant Professor of Religion
B.A. (1991) York University; Ph.D. (2000) Harvard
Steven P. Levin Associate Professor of Art
B.A. (1976) Reed; M.F.A. (1980) University of California, Davis
* Michael J. Lewis Associate Professor of Art
B.A. (1979) Haverford; Ph.D. (1989) University of Pennsylvania
Scott A. Lewis Assistant Professor of Physical Education
B.S. (1980) Springfield College; M.Ed. (1995) Springfield College
John K. Limon Professor of English
B.A. (1974) Harvard; Ph.D. (1981) University of California, Berkeley
Susan Loepp Assistant Professor of Mathematics
B.A. (1989) Bethel College; Ph.D. (1994) University of Texas, Austin
* Charles M. Lovett, Jr. Philip and Dorothy Schein Professor of Chemistry and
Director of the Bronfman Science Center
B.S. (1979) California State Poly.; Ph.D. (1985) Cornell
Faculty
­ 405 ­
Peter Low Assistant Professor of Art
B.A. (1994) University of Toronto; M.A. (1995) Johns Hopkins
Daniel V. Lynch Professor of Biology
B.S. (1979) University of Lowell; Ph.D. (1983) University of Texas, Austin
Marc Lynch Assistant Professor of Political Science
B.A. (1990) Duke; Ph.D. (1997) Cornell
Michael D. MacDonald Woodrow Wilson Professor of Political Science
A.B. (1972) University of California, Berkeley; Ph.D. (1983) University of California, Berkeley
Jenna MacIntire Part-time Instructor in Biology
B.A. (1992) University of Vermont
James E. Mahon, Jr. Associate Professor of Political Science
A.B. (1977) Dartmouth; Ph.D. (1989) University of California, Berkeley
Protik Kumar Majumder Assistant Professor of Physics
B.S. (1982) Yale; Ph.D. (1989) Harvard
Harry F. Mallgrave Robert Sterling Clark Visiting Professor of Art History, First Semester
B.S. (1973) University of Detroit; Ph.D. (1983) University of Pennsylvania
Patricia M. Manning Assistant Professor of Physical Education
B.S. (1977) Cortland; M.S. (1988) Smith
George E. Marcus Professor of Political Science
A.B. (1964) Columbia; Ph.D. (1968) Northwestern
Stephan Martin Part-time Instructor in Astronomy
B.A. Colgate; M.A. University of Wyoming
Maryann E. Martone Visiting Associate Professor of Psychology
B.A. (1982) Wellesley; Ph.D. (1990) University of California, San Diego
* Christine L. Mason Assistant Professor of Physical Education and
Athletic Insurance Coordinator
Nancy Mowll Mathews Part-time Lecturer in Art, Second Semester
B.S. (1978) Pennsylvania State; Ed.M. (1986) Boston University
Irma Mayorga Gauius Charles Bolin Fellow in Theatre
B.A. (1988) College of St. Benedict; M.F.A (1992) University of Wisconsin-Madison
* James McAllister Assistant Professor of Political Science and
Fellow of the Oakley Center for the Humanities and Social Sciences
B.A. (1986) S.U.N.Y., Buffalo; M.Phil. (1994) Columbia
Ann K. McCallum Part-time Lecturer in Art
B.A. (1974) McGill University; M.Arch. (1980) Yale
George McCormack Assistant Professor of Physical Education
B.S. (1987) Ithaca College
* Earl L. McFarland, Jr. Professor of Economics
B.A. (1958) Columbia; Ph.D. (1974) Columbia
Elizabeth P. McGowan Associate Professor of Art
B.A. (1979) Princeton; Ph.D. (1993) New York University Institute of Fine Arts
Michael McGrade Visiting Assistant Professor of Music
B.A. (1987) S.U.N.Y., Stony Brook; Ph.D. (1998) University of Chicago
James McKenna Assistant Professor of Marine Science at the Williams-Mystic Program and
Adjunct Assistant Professor of Geosciences
Stephen J. Meardon Assistant Professor of Economics
B.A. (1993) Bowdoin; Ph.D. (1998) Duke
Lisa M. Melendy Assistant Professor of Physical Education and
Assistant Athletic Director
A.B. (1982) Smith; M.S. (1985) University of Massachusetts
Joseph Milan Assistant Professor of Physical Education
B.S. (1980) University of Massachusetts, Amherst
* Bojana Mladenovic Assistant Professor of Philosophy and Herbert H. Lehman Fellow of
the Oakley Center for the Humanities and Social Sciences
B.A. (1984) University of Belgrade; Ph.D. (1995) University of California, Berkeley
Gilliane Monnier Visiting Assistant Professor of Anthropology
B.A. (1991) University of Pennsylvania; M. Phil. (1992) University of Cambridge UK
Peter Montiel James Phinney Baxter III Professor of Public Affairs and
Chair of the Center for Development Economics
B.A. (1973) Yale; Ph.D. (1978) M.I.T.
* Douglas B. Moore Mary A. and William Wirt Warren Professor of Music
B.Mus. (1967) Indiana University; D.M.A (1977) Catholic University
Justin Moore Assistant Professor of Physical Education
B.A. (1990) Rollins College
Frank Morgan Dennis Meenan '54 Third Century Professor of Mathematics
S.B. (1974) M.I.T.; Ph.D. (1977) Princeton
Faculty
­ 406 ­
Keith Moxey Robert Sterling Clark Visiting Professor of Art History, Second Semester
M.A. (1965) University of Edinburgh; Ph.D. (1974) University of Chicago
Jose Muñoz Margaret Bundy Scott Visiting Professor of English, First Semester
* Peter T. Murphy Associate Professor of English and Fellow of the
Oakley Center for the Humanities and Social Sciences
B.A. (1981) Yale; Ph.D. (1986) Johns Hopkins
** Thomas P. Murtagh Professor of Computer Science
A.B. (1974) Princeton; Ph.D. (1983) Cornell
* Kenda Mutongi Assistant Professor of History
B.A. (1989) Coe College; Ph.D. (1996) University of Virginia
Richard S. Myers Visiting Lecturer in Economics, Second Semester
B.A. (1991) University of Virginia; M.Ed. (1993) University of Virginia; Ph.D. (1999) University of Virginia
Gail M. Newman William R. Kenan, Jr. Professor of German
B.A. (1976) Northwestern; Ph.D. (1985) University of Minnesota
Karen Newman Margaret Bundy Scott Visiting Professor of English, Second Semester
B.A. (1970) Randolph Macon; Ph.D. (1978) University of California, Berkeley
Anthony J. Nicastro Visiting Professor of Romance Languages
B.A. (1962) New York University; Ph.D. (1971) Columbia
** James L. Nolan, Jr. Assistant Professor of Sociology and Herbert H. Lehman Fellow of the
Oakley Center for the Humanities and Social Sciences, First Semester
B.A. (1984) University of California; Ph.D. (1995) University of Virginia
*** Glyn P. Norton Willcox B. and Harriet M. Adsit Professor of International Studies
A.B. (1963) University of Michigan; Ph.D. (1968) University of Michigan
Francis C. Oakley Edward Dorr Griffin Professor of the History of Ideas
and President of the College, Emeritus
B.A. (1953) Oxford; Ph.D. (1960) Yale
* Carol J. Ockman Professor of Art
B.A. (1972) Stanford; Ph.D. (1982) Yale
Julian Onderdonk Visiting Assistant Professor of Music, Second Semester
B.A. (1986) Bowdoin; Ph.D. (1998) N.Y.U.
April Overstreet Visiting Assistant Professor of Romance Languages
B.A. (1990) Pacific Lutheran University; Ph.D. (1999) University of Michigan
Eduardo O. Pagán Assistant Professor of History
B.A. (1987) Arizona State University; Ph.D. (1995) Princeton
Charles Palermo Visiting Assistant Professor of Art
Vassiliki Panoussi Assistant Professor of Classics
B.A. (1989) University of Athens, Greece; Ph.D. (1998) Brown University
Lee Y. Park Associate Professor of Chemistry
B.A. (1986) Wellesley; Ph.D. (1991) M.I.T.
Jay M. Pasachoff Field Memorial Professor of Astronomy and
Director of the Hopkins Observatory
A.B. (1963) Harvard; Ph.D. (1969) Harvard
** Enrique Peacock-López Associate Professor of Chemistry
B.S. (1974) University Nac. Autonoma, Mexico; Ph.D. (1982) University of California, San Diego
* Robert R. Peck Lecturer in Physical Education
B.S. (1951) Stetson; Ed.D. (1958) Columbia
James Pethica Visiting Assistant Professor of English
B.S. (1951) Stetson; Ed.D. (1958) Columbia
David M. Pilachowski College Librarian
B.A. (1971) University of Vermont; M.L.S. (1973) University of Illinois
Amy D. Podmore Assistant Professor of Art
B.S. (1982) State University College of Buffalo; M.F.A. (1987) University of California, Davis
David Porter The Harry C. Payne Visiting Professor of Liberal Arts
B.A. (1958) Swarthmore; Ph.D. (1962) Princeton
* Christopher L. Pye Professor of English
B.A. (1975) Oberlin; Ph.D. (1985) Cornell
** Lawrence E. Raab Morris Professor of Rhetoric
B.A. (1968) Middlebury; M.A. (1972) Syracuse
Richard Rand Part-time Lecturer in the Graduate Program in Art History, Second Semester
Wendy Raymond Assistant Professor of Biology
A.B. (1982) Cornell; Ph.D. (1990) Harvard
** Caroline Reeves Assistant Professor of History
B.A. (1984) Harvard; D.S. (1985) University of Paris
Mark T. Reinhardt Associate Professor of Political Science
B.A. (1983) Wesleyan; Ph.D. (1991) University of California, Santa Cruz
Faculty
­ 407 ­
Jerome P. Reiter Assistant Professor of Mathematics
B.S. (1992) Duke; Ph.D. (1999) Harvard
David P. Richardson Professor of Chemistry
B.A. (1979) University of Michigan; Ph.D. (1984) University of California, Berkeley
Kenneth C. Roberts, Jr. A. Barton Hepburn Professor of Music
B.Mus. (1961) University of Michigan; Ph.D. (1965) University of Michigan
Isabel Roche Visiting Lecturer in French
B.A. (1992) Bates; M.Phil. (1998) New York University
Alix H. Rorke Visiting Assistant Professor of Physical Education
B.A. (1993) Williams; M.S. (1996) Smith
Nancy A. Roseman Associate Professor of Biology and Dean of the College
A.B. (1980) Smith; Ph.D. (1987) Oregon State
Frances Rosenfeld Visiting Assistant Professor of History, Second Semester
B.A. (1992) University of Chicago; M.A. (1994) Columbia
Shawn J. Rosenheim Associate Professor of English and Head of the Center
for Technology in the Arts and Humanities
B.A. (1983) Oberlin; Ph.D. (1992) Yale
Leyla Rouhi Associate Professor of Spanish
B.A. (1987) Oxford; Ph.D. (1995) Harvard
T. Michael Russo Assistant Professor of Physical Education and
Coordinator of Physical Education
B.A. (1967) University of Massachusetts; M.S. (1970) University of Massachusetts
* Michael Samson Visiting Associate Professor of Economics
B.A. (1983) Yale; Ph.D. (1994) Stanford
Geoffrey Sanborn Visiting Assistant Professor of English
A.B. (1987) Stanford; Ph.D. (1992) UCLA
Marlene J. Sandstrom Assistant Professor of Psychology
B.A. (1991) Yale; Ph.D. (1996) Duke
Noah J. Sandstrom Lecturer in Psychology
B.A. (1994) Knox College; Ph.D. (1999) Duke
Sean Sandys Gaius Charles Bolin Fellow in Computer Science
B.A. (1994) Williams; M.S. (1997) University of Washington
Sheafe Satterthwaite Lecturer in Art and
Planning Associate in Environmental Studies
B.A. (1962) University of Virginia
* Robert M. Savage Assistant Professor of Biology
B.A. (1987) Bowdoin; Ph.D. (1993) Wesleyan
* Kenneth Savitsky Assistant Professor of Psychology
B.A. (1993) Indiana University; Ph.D. (1997) Cornell
Jana L. Sawicki Professor of Philosophy and Women's and Gender Studies
B.A. (1974) Sweet Briar; Ph.D. (1983) Columbia
Morton Owen Schapiro Professor of Economics and President of the College
B.S. (1975) Hofstra University; M.A. (1976) University of Pennsylvania; Ph.D. (1979) University of Pennsylvania
Ken Schmidt Visiting Assistant Professor of Biology
B.S. (1992) University of Illinois, Chicago; Ph.D. (1997) University of Illinois, Chicago
Mark Schofield Assistant Professor of Chemistry
B.S. (1985) University of Massachusetts, Amherst; Ph.D. (1991) M.I.T.
Sarita See Mellon Postdoctoral Fellow in Asian American Literature
and American Studies in the English Department
B.A. (1991) University of California, Berkeley; Ph.D. (2000) Columbia University
Cheryl L. Shanks Assistant Professor of Political Science
B.A. (1983) University of California, Santa Cruz; Ph.D. (1994) University of Michigan
Hartley Shearer Part-time Lecturer in Art
B.F.A. (1968) New York University
Linda B. Shearer Part-time Lecturer in Art and
Director of the Williams College Museum of Art
B.A. (1968) Sarah Lawrence
Harry C. Sheehy III Chair and Director of Physical Education, Athletics and Recreation
and Lecturer in Physical Education
B.A. (1975) Williams; M.Ed. (1988) University of Washington
James R. Shepard J. Leland Miller Professor of American History, Literature, and Eloquence
B.A. (1978) Trinity; M.F.A. (1980) Brown
Karen L. Shepard Part-time Lecturer in English, First Semester and
Fellow of the Oakley Center for the Humanities and Social Sciences, Second Semester
B.A. (1987) Williams; M.F.A. (1992) University of Houston
Faculty
­ 408 ­
Stephen Sheppard Professor of Economics
B.S. (1977) University of Utah; Ph.D. (1984) Washington University
W. Anthony Sheppard Assistant Professor of Music
B.A. (1991) Amherst; Ph.D. (1996) Princeton
Laura Shore-Sheppard Assistant Professor of Economics
B.A. (1991) Amherst; Ph.D. (1996) Princeton
* Mark V. Siegler Assistant Professor of Economics
B.A. (1988) University of California, Santa Cruz; Ph.D. (1997) University of California, Davis
* Cathy L. Silber Assistant Professor of Asian Studies
B.A. (1980) University of Iowa; Ph.D. (1995) University of Michigan
Cesar E. Silva Professor of Mathematics
B.S. (1977) Catholic University, Peru; Ph.D. (1984) University of Rochester
Scott Silverstone Visiting Assistant Professor of Political Science
Shanti M. Singham Associate Professor of History
B.A. (1980) Swarthmore; Ph.D. (1991) Princeton
Anne R. Skinner Senior Lecturer in Chemistry
B.A. (1961) Radcliffe; Ph.D. (1966) Yale
** David C. Smith Senior Lecturer in Biology
B.S. (1968) Yale; Ph.D. (1977) University of Michigan
* David L. Smith Class of 1961 John W. Chandler Professor of English
B.A. (1974) New College, Florida; Ph.D. (1980) University of Chicago
Thomas E. Smith Assistant Professor of Chemistry
B.A. (1988) Williams; Ph.D. (1996) Stanford
Anita R. Sokolsky Professor of English
B.A. (1974) Oberlin; Ph.D. (1985) Cornell
Ari Solomon Assistant Professor of Psychology
A.B. (1989) Brown; Ph.D. (1997) American University
*** Paul R. Solomon Professor of Psychology
B.A. (1970) S.U.N.Y., New Paltz; Ph.D. (1975) University of Massachusetts
Ardith Spence Visiting Assistant Professor of Economics
B.A. (1993) Carleton; Ph.D. (1999) University of Chicago
Kimberly Springer Mellon Postdoctoral Fellow in Afro-American Studies and
Women's and Gender Studies
B.A. (1992) University of Michigan; Ph.D. (1999) Emory University
Richard H. Stamelman Professor of Romance Languages
B.A. (1963) Hamilton; Ph.D. (1968) Duke
*** Jefferson Strait Associate Professor of Physics
A.B. (1975) Harvard; Ph.D. (1985) Brown
Robert C. Suderburg Class of 1924 Professor of Music and Composer-in-Residence
B.A. (1957) University of Minnesota; Ph.D. (1966) University of Pennsylvania
Arnard V. Swamy Assistant Professor of Economics
B.A. (1983) University of Delhi, India; Ph.D. (1993) Northwestern University
Karen E. Swann Professor of English
B.A. (1975) Oberlin; Ph.D. (1983) Cornell
** Steven J. Swoap Assistant Professor of Biology
B.A. (1990) Trinity; Ph.D. (1994) University of California, Irving
** Barbara E. Takenaga Professor of Art
B.F.A. (1972) University of Colorado; M.F.A. (1978) University of Colorado
Mark C. Taylor Cluett Professor of Humanities and Religion
B.A. (1968) Wesleyan; Ph.D. (1973) Harvard; Doktorgrad (1981) University of Copenhagen
James D. Teresco Assistant Professor of Computer Science
B.S.(1992) Union College; Ph.D. (2000) Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
John W. Thoman, Jr. Professor of Chemistry
B.A. (1982) Williams; Ph.D. (1987) M.I.T.
Stephen J. Tifft Professor of English
B.A. (1975) Harvard; Ph.D. (1984) Cornell
Gilbert B. Tostevin Visiting Assistant Professor of Anthropology
B.A. (1991) Harvard; Ph.D. (1999) Harvard
* Patricia J. Tracy Charles R. Keller Professor of History
A.B. (1969) Smith; Ph.D. (1977) University of Massachusetts
Frances Vandermeer Assistant Professor of Physical Education
B.S. (1987) Southern Connecticut State University
Ileana Perez Velazquez Assistant Professor of Music
B.M. Higher Institute of Arts-Havana, Cuba; D.M. (2000) Indiana University
Faculty
­ 409 ­
Bradford Verter Visiting Assistant Professor in American Religion
B.A. (1989) Columbia; Ph.D. (1997) Princeton
William von Hippel Visiting Associate Professor of Psychology, First Semester
B.A. (1985) Yale; Ph.D. (1990) University of Michigan
William G. Wagner Brown Professor of History
B.A. (1972) Haverford; D.Phil. (1980) Oxford
*** Christopher M. Waters Professor of History and Fellow of the Oakley Center
for the Humanities and Social Sciences, Second Semester
B.A. (1977) California State, Long Beach; Ph.D. (1985) Harvard
Paul Weber Visiting Assistant Professor of Physics
B.S. (1982) Bemidji State; Ph.D. (1990) University of Colorado, Boulder
Valerie Weinstein Visiting Assistant Professor of German, First Semester
B.A. (1993) Harvard; Ph.D. (2000) Cornell
** Deborah L. Weiss Assistant Professor of Chemistry
B.A. (1979) Purdue; Ph.D. (1986) Purdue
Bradley Wells Artist-in-Residence in Choral and Vocal Performance and
Part-time Lecturer in Music
B.A. (1984) Principia College; M.M.A. (1998) Yale
Peter S. Wells Assistant Professor of Physical Education,
Coordinator of Crew Programs, and Head Coach of Men's Crew
B.A. (1979) Williams
Kristen Welsh Visiting Lecturer in Russian
Michael F. Whalen Assistant Professor of Physical Education
B.A. (1983) Wesleyan; M.PE (1986) Springfield College
Alan E. White Mark Hopkins Professor of Philosophy
B.A. (1972) Tulane; Ph.D. (1980) Pennsylvania State
Craig S. Wilder Assistant Professor of History
B.A. (1987) Fordham; Ph.D. (1994) Columbia
** Heather Williams Professor of Biology
B.A. (1977) Bowdoin; Ph.D. (1985) Rockefeller
Alex W. Willingham Professor of Political Science
B.A. (1963) Southern University, Baton Rouge; Ph.D. (1974) U.N.C., Chapel Hill
Gordon C. Winston Professor of Economics and
Orrin Sage Professor of Political Economy
A.B. (1950) Whitman; Ph.D. (1964) Stanford
Janine Wittwer Assistant Professor of Mathematics
B.A. (1993) New York University; Ph.D. (2000) University of Chicago
** Reinhard A. Wobus Edna McConnell Clark Professor of Geology
A.B. (1962) Washington University; Ph.D. (1966) Stanford
K. Scott Wong Associate Professor of History
B.A. (1976) Rutgers; Ph.D. (1992) University of Michigan
James B. Wood The Wilmott Family Third Century Professor of History
B.A. (1968) Florida Presbyterian; Ph.D. (1973) Emory
William K. Wootters Professor of Physics
B.S. (1973) Stanford; Ph.D. (1980) University of Texas
* Reiko Yamada Associate Professor of Japanese
Ph.D. (1988) Cornell
Kasumi Yamamoto Assistant Professor of Japanese
B.A. (1985) Columbia; Ph.D. (1999) Cornell
* Betty Zimmerberg Professor of Psychology
B.A. (1971) Harvard; Ph.D. (1976) C.U.N.Y.
David J. Zimmerman Associate Professor of Economics
B.Comm. (1985) University of Toronto; Ph.D. (1992) Princeton
Steven J. Zottoli Howard B. Schow '50 and Nan W. Schow Professor of Biology
B.A. (1969) Bowdoin; Ph.D. (1976) University of Massachusetts
­ 410 ­
ATHLETIC COACHES
David Barnard Men's Varsity Baseball, Assistant Varsity Football
B.A. (1981) Wesleyan University; M.A. (1989) Wesleyan University
Fletcher A. Brooks Fitness Center Supervisor and Strength and Throws Coach
B.A. (1993) Allegheny College; M.S. (1996) Springfield College
David C. Caputi Women's Softball, Assistant Varsity Football
B.A. (1981) Middlebury; M.Ed. (1995) North Adams State College
TBA Women's Varsity Ice Hockey, Assistant Softball
Richard J. Farley Varsity Football, Assistant Varsity Spring Track
B.S. (1968) Boston University; M.Ed. (1975) Boston University
Peter K. Farwell Men's Varsity and Junior Varsity Cross Country,
Men's and Women's Varsity Winter and Spring Track
B.A. (1973) Williams; M.A. (1990) Central Michigan
Robert L. Fisher, Jr. Men's and Women's Varsity Skiing, Associate Director of Athletics
B.A. (1970) St. Lawrence; M.Ed. (1974) St. Lawrence
Julie Greenwood Women's Varsity Squash, Women's Varsity Tennis
B.A. (1996) Williams College
Edward S. Grees Men's and Women's Varsity Skiing, Assistant Men's and Women's Tennis
B.A. (1975) Windham; M.S. (1982) University of Massachusetts
Robyn Horner Women's Varsity Crew
B.S. (1988) University of Minnesota
David C. Johnson Men's Varsity Tennis, Men's Varsity Squash
B.A. (1971) Williams College; M.A. (1997) Williams College
William R. Kangas Men's Varsity Ice Hockey, Men's Junior Varsity Lacrosse,
Director of Chapman Rink
B.A. (1982) University of Vermont; M.Ed. (1994) North Adams State College
Kathleen Callahan Koch Men's and Women's Diving; Sailing; and Physcial Education Instructor
B.A. (1986) University of Maine, Orono
Renzie W. Lamb Men's Varsity Lacrosse, Assistant Varsity Football,
Coordinator of Intramurals
B.A. (1959) Hofstra
Scott Lewis Assistant Varsity Wrestling, Outing Club Director
B.S. (1980) Springfield College; M.A. (1985) Springfield College
Patricia M. Manning Women's Varsity Basketball and Varsity Volleyball (on leave 1999-2000)
B.S. (1977) Cortland; M.S. (1988) Smith; M.S. (1981) Cortland
Christine Larson Mason Varsity Field Hockey, Women's Varsity Lacrosse
B.S. (1978) Pennsylvania State; M.Ed. (1986) Boston University
Lisa M. Melendy Women's Varsity Soccer, Women's Junior Varsity Lacrosse,
Senior Women's Administrator and Assistant Athletic Director
A.B. (1982) Smith; M.S. (1985) University of Massachusetts
Justin Moore Women's Varsity Crew
B.A. Rollins College
Kristen Morwick Women's Varsity and Junior Varsity Cross-Country,
Assistant Men's and Women's Winter and Spring Track
B.A. (1988) Dartmouth College; M.A. (1996) Tufts University
Richard Pohle Men's Varsity Golf
B.S. (1972) University of Maine­Orono
T. Michael Russo Men's Varsity Soccer, Men's Junior Varsity Lacrosse
B.A. (1967) University of Massachusetts; M.S. (1970) University of Massachusetts
Carl R. Samuelson Men's and Women's Varsity Swimming, Coordinator of Aquatics
B.S. (1957) Springfield; M.S. (1964) Springfield
Harry C. Sheehy III Men's Varsity Basketball, Junior Varsity Men's Soccer
B.A. (1975) Williams; M.Ed. (1988) University of Washington
Peter S. Wells Men's Varsity Crew, Coordinator of Crew
B.A. (1979) Williams
Michael F. Whalen Varsity Wrestling, Assistant Varsity Football
B.A. (1983) Wesleyan; M.Ed. (1986) Springfield College
­ 411 ­
LIBRARIES
David M. Pilachowski College Librarian
B.A. (1971) University of Vermont; M.L.S. (1973) University of Illinois
Sylvia B. Kennick Brown College Archivist/Special Collections Librarian
A.B. (1977) Oberlin; M.S.L.S. (1981) Simmons
Lee B. Dalzell Head of Research and Reference Services
B.A. (1960) Smith; M.S.L.S. (1974) Simmons
Walter Komorowski Head of Library Systems
B.A. (1979) North Adams State College; M.L.S. (1988) S.U.N.Y., Albany
Helena Warburg Head of the Science Library
B.S. (1980) Indiana University; M.L.I.S. (1987) Indiana University
Sandra L. Brooke Head of Acquisitions and Collection Development
B.A. (1979) Northwestern; M.A. (1982) Williams College; M.L.S. (1999) S.U.N.Y., Albany
Rebecca Ohm Spencer Reference and Government Documents Librarian
B.A. (1975) Sagamon State University; M.L.S. (1995) S.U.N.Y., Albany
Peter Giordano Reference Librarian and Instruction Coordinator
B.A. (1980) Brooklyn College; M.L.S. (1986) Simmons
Christine O. Menard Reference and Electronic Resources Librarian
B.A. (1987) University of Tours, France; M.L.S. (1991) S.U.N.Y., Albany
Robin Kibler Head of the Cataloging Department
B.Mus. (1975) Southern Methodist; M.L.S. (1990) S.U.N.Y., Albany
Karen Gorss Benko Catalog Librarian
B.A. (1994) Yale; M.L.S. (1999) S.U.N.Y., Albany
Christine W. Blackman Catalog Librarian
B.A. (1989) Notre Dame; M.L.S. (1999) Simmons College
Jo-Ann Irace Circulation Supervisor
Judy J. Jones Reserve and A/V Supervisor
Robert L. Volz Custodian of the Chapin Library
B.A. (1962) Marquette; M.A.L.S. (1963) University of Wisconsin
Wayne G. Hammond Assistant Chapin Librarian
B.A. (1975) Baldwin-Wallace; M.L.S. (1976) University of Michigan
Elizabeth L. Milanesi Assistant to the College Librarian
Alison R. O'Grady Interlibrary Loan Supervisor
Amy Rupert Presidents' Records Project Archivist
B.A. (1990) S.U.N.Y., Potsdam; M.L.S. (1996) S.U.N.Y., Albany
­ 412 ­
FACULTY-STUDENT COMMITTEES 1999-2000
Academic Standing: John W. Thoman, Jr., Chair, Steven Fein, Ju-Yu Scarlett Jang, Sherron E.
Knopp, Protik K. Majumder, Eduardo O. Pagan, Kerry A. Christensen*, Peter T. Murphy*,
Richard L. Nesbitt*, Charles R. Toomajian, Jr.*.
Appointments and Promotions: Jean-Bernard Bucky, William J. Lenhart, Jana Sawicki, Catharine
B. Hill*, David L. Smith*, Carl W. Vogt*.
Calendar and Schedule: Heather Williams, Chair, Phebe Cramer, David Eppel, Barbara A. Casey*,
Robert R. Peck*, Laura B. McKeon*, Mary B. Cummins '00, Justine R. DeYoung '02, Joshua S.
Easter '01.
Chapin Library: Charles Fuqua, Chair, Donald deB Beaver, Victor E. Hill IV, David M.
Pilachowski*, Robert L. Volz*.
Educational Policy: Michael F. Brown, Chair, Sarah R. Bolton, Kim B. Bruce, Julie A. Cassiday,
Laurie Heatherington, Meridith C. Hoppin, Craig S. Wilder, Peter T. Murphy*, David L. Smith*,
Charles R. Toomajian, Jr.*, Carl W. Vogt*, Haynes A. Cooney '00, Rebecca L. Hinyard '01,
Caren T. Mintz '01, Shirin Shakir'03, Zoe M. Unger '02, Max M. Weinstein '00.
Faculty Review: Denise K. Buell, Kristin Carter-Sanborn, Andrea Danyluk, Richard D. DeVeaux,
Zirka Z. Filipczak, Laurie Heatherington, Roger A. Kittleson, Regina G. Kunzel, Enrique
Peacock-Lopez, Wendy E. Raymond, Leyla Rouhi, James R. Shepard.
Honorary Degrees: Timothy E. Cook, Thomas P. Murtagh, Carol J. Ockman, Joan Edwards*, Carl
W. Vogt*, Haynes A. Cooney '01, Peter J. Eyre '00, M. Porter McConnell '00.
Honor System-Discipline: James R. Shepard, Chair of Discipline Committee and Chair of Honor
Committee, Elizabeth M. Adler, Denise K. Buell, Robert F. Dalzell, Andrea Danyluk, Grant A.
Farred, Robert Jackall, Jefferson Strait, Peter T. Murphy*, Heng J. Cheam '02, Christopher
D. Holmes '03, Jordan N. Goldwarg '03, Krzysztof Piekarski '01, Joseph P. Rogers, Jr. '00,
Moira K. Shanahan '01, Allen Wong '00, Student Chair, Andrew M. Woolf '02.
Information Technology: Shawn J. Rosenheim, Chair, Stewart D. Johnson, Steven P. Levin, Betty
Zimmerberg, Catharine B. Hill*, David M. Pilachowski*, Dinny S. Taylor*, David G. Gilford
'00, Benjamin S. Isecke '02, A. David Ramos '00, Feng Zhu '02.
Lecture: Mark T. Reinhardt, Chair, Aida Laleian, Nancy A. Roseman, K. Scott Wong, Lauren B.
Buckley '02, Joshua D. Kelner '01, Virginia M. Pyle '00, Christopher J. Warshaw '02.
Library: Lynda K. Bundtzen, Chair, Donald deB Beaver, Lawrence J. Kaplan, Catharine B. Hill*,
David M. Pilachowski*, Robert L. Volz*, Jonathan D. Alwais '01, Joseph K. Urwitz '02, Thomas
H. White '02.
Priorities and Resources: William G. Wagner, Chair, Lisa M. Melendy, Wendy E. Raymond, Leyla
Rouhi, Stephen R. Birrell*, Keith C. Finan*, Catharine B. Hill*, Richard S. Myers*, Helen
Ouellette*, Sheraz A. Choudhary '00, Seth M. Earn '01, Robert A. Wiygul '00.
Steering: Thomas A. Kohut, Chair, Robert H. Bell, Kathryn R. Kent, Lee Y. Park, Nancy A.
Roseman, Cheryl Shanks.
Undergraduate Life: William R. Darrow, Chair, Deborah A. Brothers, Peter K. Frost, Julie A.
Greenwood, Thomas E. Smith, Wanda M. Lee*, Thomas D. McEvoy*, Paul J. Friedmann '00,
Judith B. Harvey '03, James G. Moorhead '01, Lauren A. Siegel '00, June H. Yi '02.
Faculty-Student Committees, Special Advisors
­ 413 ­
Winter Study Program: Paul M. Karabinos, Chair, Olga R. Beaver, Jill M. Constantine, Stephen
Fix, Mark H. Schofield, Barbara A. Casey*, Lee B. Dalzell*, Elizabeth C. Cadogan '01, Jessica
C. Robbins '01, Christopher J. Warshaw '02.
________________
* Ex-officio
 Honor Subcommittee
Commission on Diversity and Community: Gail M. Newman, Chair, Nancy J. McIntire, Liaison
with College Council, Annemarie Bean, Kerry A. Christensen, Jill M. Constantine, Steven B.
Gerrard, Regina G. Kunzel, Scott A. Lewis, Eduardo O. Pagan, Alex W. Willingham, Peter T.
Murphy*.
SPECIAL ADVISORS 2000-2001
Architecture: Ann K. McCallum
Business Schools and Business Opportunities: Fatma Kassamali
Divinity Schools: Richard E. Spalding
Engineering: Sarah R. Bolton
Federally Funded Faculty Fellowships (NSF, Fulbright, HIMH, etc.): Nancy J. McIntire
Faculty Fellowships: Thomas A. Kohut
Graduate Schools of Arts and Sciences: Department Heads
Graduate Fellowships and Scholarships: Peter D. Grudin
Churchill Scholarship
Fulbright Predoctoral Grants
Luce Scholars Program
Mellon Fellowship
Rhodes, Marshall Scholarships
International Student Advisor: Amy Pettengill Fahnestock
Law Schools: Mary M. Winston
Medical, Dental and Veterinary Schools: Susan M. Salko
National Science Foundation: Department Chairs
Peace Corps: Fatma Kassamali
Public and International Affairs Schools and Foreign Service: Cheryl Shanks
Special Academic Programs: Molly L. Magavern
Student Writing Tutorial Program: Peter D. Grudin
Study Abroad Programs: Laura B. McKeon
Teaching, M.A.T. Programs: Susan L. Engel, Mary M. Winston
Harry S. Truman Scholarship: Peter D. Grudin
Watson Traveling Fellowship: Peter D. Grudin
Williams College Prizes and Fellowships for Graduate Study: Peter D. Grudin
Winter Study Practice Teaching: Steven Fein
­ 414 ­
SEXUAL HARASSMENT/DISCRIMINATION ADVISORS
Advisors are available to all members of the College community for consultation concerning inci-
dents that could be a form of discrimination. The advisors' role is described in the policy and proce-
dures, printed in the handbooks and available in copies in the Dean's Office, the Human Resources
Office, and the Dean of the Faculty's Office. Persons serving as advisors are health staff and coun-
selors, assistant and associate deans, human resources officers, the Chaplain, and the Affirmative
Action Officer. There are also two faculty, two staff, and two student advisors who have received
training in sexual harassment advising. In 2000-2001, these advisors are:
Peter Grudin, Assistant Dean of the College
Kerry Christensen, Associate Dean for Academic Programs
Laura McKeon, Assistant Dean of the College and Director of International Study
Amy Pettengill Fahnestock, Assistant Dean of the College and International Student Advisor
Stephen Sneed, Associate Dean of the College
Charles Toomajian, Associate Dean for Student and Faculty Services and Registrar
Nancy McIntire, Assistant to the President and Affirmative Action Officer
Richard Spalding, Chaplain to the College
Martha Tetrault, Director of Human Resources
Rosemary Moore, Assistant Director of Human Resources
Ruth Harrison, Director of Health
Donna Denelli-Hess, Health Educator
Felton Booker '01
Healy Thompson '03
Laurie Heatherington, Professor of Psychology
Protik Majumder, Assistant Professor of Physics
Paula Moore Tabor, Associate Director of Alumni Relations
Bruce Wheat, Multimedia Instructional Technician
STANDING PANEL FOR DISCRIMINATION
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES
The grievance committee that hears cases of alleged discrimination is appointed from a standing
panel consisting of thirty-two persons drawn from several College panels and from the College
Council. Its membership also includes a minority faculty and staff representative. Two panel mem-
bers--one a member of the faculty, the other of the staff--stand ready to chair the grievance com-
mittee appointed to hear a particular case. The members of the standing panel are:
Faculty Review Panel: Sarah Bolton, Kristin Carter-Sanborn, Jill Constantine, Andrea Danyluk,
Richard De Veaux, Stephen Fix, Laurie Heatherington, Gary Jacobsohn, Roger Kittleson, Leyla
Rouhi, James Shepard, William Wootters
Provost's Panel: Susan Bernardy, Michael Frawley, Robin Kibler, Richard Nesbitt, Charles Toom-
ajian, Pamela Turton
Vice President's Panel: Helen Aitken, Peter Landry, Kathleen Therrien, Eric Beattie, Ernani
Rosse, Gail King
College Council Panel: Princess Alegre '03, Joshua Feit '03, Rebecca Hinyard '01, Joshua Kelner
'01, Gideon Lee '03, Moira Shanahan '01.
Minority Faculty-Staff Representatives: Sandra Burton, Fatma Kassamali
Faculty Chair: Appointed by President
Staff Chair: Appointed by President
­ 415 ­
OFFICES OF ADMINISTRATION 2000-2001
Office of the President
Morton Owen Schapiro President
B.S.(1975)HofstraUniversity;M.A.(1976)UniversityofPennsylvania;Ph.D.(1979)UniversityofPennsylvania
Nancy J. McIntire Assistant to the President for Affirmative Action and Government Relations
B.A. (1962) New Hampshire; M.A. (1965) Harvard
JoAnn Muir Senior Executive Assistant and Secretary of the College
B.A. (1970) University of Connecticut
Office of the Provost
Catharine B. Hill Provost
B.A. (1976) Williams; M.A. (1978) Oxford University; Ph.D. (1985) Yale
Keith C. Finan Associate Provost and Director of Grant Administration
B.A. (1976) Miami University, Ohio; M.A. (1979) S.U.N.Y., Binghamton
Richard S. Myers Associate Provost and Director of Institutional Research
B.A. (1991) University of Virginia; M.Ed. (1993) University of Virginia; Ph.D. (1999) University of Virginia
TBA Assistant Provost and Director of the Budget
Marianne Congello Executive Assistant to the Provost
Office of the Dean of the Faculty
Thomas A. Kohut Dean of the Faculty
B.A. (1972) Oberlin; Ph.D. (1983) University of Minnesota
Thomas H. Wintner Associate Dean of the Faculty
B.A. (1993) Williams; M.A. (1996) Harvard
Sally L. Bird Assistant to the Dean of the Faculty
Office of the Dean of the College
Nancy A. Roseman Dean of the College
A.B. (1980) Smith; Ph.D. (1987) Oregon State
Stephen D. Sneed Associate Dean
B.S. (1971) Western Michigan University; Ed.D. (1979) West Virginia University
Kerry A. Christensen Associate Dean for Academic Programs
B.A. (1981) Swarthmore; Ph.D. (1993) Princeton
Charles R. Toomajian, Jr. Associate Dean for Student Services and Registrar
A.B. (1965) Bowdoin; Ph.D. (1974) Cornell
Amy Pettengill Fahnestock Assistant Dean and International Student Advisor
B.A. (1985) Colgate; M.A. (1992) School for International Training
Peter D. Grudin Assistant Dean/Director of the Writing Workshop
B.A. (1964) Lehigh; Ph.D. (1971) Harvard
Laura B. McKeon Assistant Dean and Director of International Study
B.A. (1969) University of Chicago; Ph.D. (1980) University of Chicago
Cynthia G. Haley Executive Assistant
Richard C. Kelley Activities Coordinator
B.A. (1989) Slippery Rock University of Pennsylvania; M.A. (1991) Slippery Rock University of Pennsylvania
Office of the Vice President for Administration
Helen Ouellette Vice President for Administration
B.A. (1967) College of St. Teresa; Ph.D. (1971) Harvard
Adriana B. Cozzolino Assistant Vice President for Administration
B.S. (1989) S.U.N.Y., Albany; C.P.A. (1994)
Mireille S. Roy Executive Assistant
A.S. (1969) Berkshire Community College; Certified Paralegal (1998)
Office of the Vice President for Alumni Relations and Development
Stephen R. Birrell Vice President for Alumni Relations and Development
B.A. (1964) Williams; M.A.T. (1966) Wesleyan; M.P.A. (1980) University of New Hampshire, Durham
Bruce H. Begin Director of Planned Giving
B.S. (1966) S.U.N.Y., Buffalo; M.A. (1971) N.Y.U.
Robert V. Behr Alumni Travel Coordinator
B.A. (1955) Williams; Ed.M. (1962) Harvard
Patricia A. Chapman Development Research Specialist
B.A. (1992) Cornell University
Kimberly A. Brown Manager of Mailing Services
B.S. (1982) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
Crystal A. Brooks Director of Research, Development Office
B.A. (1995) Skidmore College
Offices of Administration
­ 416 ­
Mary Ellen Czerniak Director of Corporate and Foundation Relations
B.A. (1972) DePaul University; B.A. (1977) University of Wyoming
Nancy D'Ambrosio Senior Development Officer
B.A. (1974) American International College; M.Ed. (1976) Springfield College; M.B.A. (1979) American
International College
David B. Dewey Director of the 50th Reunion Program
B.A. (1982) Williams
Marilyn P. Ellingwood Development Officer/Alumni Fund
B.A. (1962) University of Massachusetts
Diana M. Elvin Director of Donor Relations
B.A. (1971) Wheaton College; M.A. (1990) Assumption College
Lewis E. Fisher Assistant Director of Alumni Relations
B.A. (1989) Williams
Virginia N. Gaskill Executive Assistant
Joan Gregg Genova Director of Annual Giving
B.A. (1989) Williams
Sara L. Holden Development Research Specialist
B.A. (1969) St. Joseph College
Sally C. Holland Director of Development
B.A. (1972) University of New Hampshire, Durham
Wendy W. Hopkins Director of Alumni Relations and Secretary of the Society of Alumni
B.A. (1972) Williams
Reese W. Hughes Senior Development Officer
B.A. (1985) Williams
Keli A. Kaegi Associate Director of Alumni Relations
B.A. (1988) Wellesley; M.S. (1991) University of Rochester
Amy T. Lovett Editor of Alumni Publications
B.A. (1994) University of Richmond
Catherine P. Malone Alumni Relations Intern
B.A. (1998) Wellesley
Julie J. Menard Programmer/Analyst
B.S. (2000) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
Megan Morey Senior Development Officer
B.A. (1989) Ohio Wesleyan University
Damon Reed Director of Parent Giving
B.A. (1962) Connecticut College
Michael A. Reopell Director of Advancement Information Systems
B.S. (1985) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts; M.B.A. (1994) Western New England College
Christine A. Robare Manager of Gift Administration
B.S. (1994) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts; M.B.A. (1999) Western New England College
Deborah L. Schneer Development Intern
B.A. (1975) University of Massachusetts at Amherst; M.A. (1977) University of Massachusetts at Amhert; Ph.D.
(1990) University of Massachusetts at Amherst
John Skavlem Associate Director of Capital Giving
B.A. (1984) Williams
Paula Moore Tabor Associate Director of Alumni Relations
B.A. (1976) Williams; Ed.M. (1989) Harvard
Stephen M. Tomkowicz Senior Programmer/Analyst
B.S. (1985) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
Robert H. White Director of Communications
B.A. (1977) Colgate
Office of Admission
Richard L. Nesbitt Acting Director of Admission
B.A. (1974) Williams; M.S.Ed. (1985) University of Pennsylvania
Gina M. Coleman Associate Director of Admission
B.A. (1990) Williams; M.Ed. (2000) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
Frances B. Lapidus Associate Director of Admission
B.S. (1966) Maryland; M.Ed. (1978) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
Constance D. Sheehy Associate Director of Admission for Operations
B.A. (1975) Williams; M.Ed. (1995) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
Nathaniel Budington Assistant Director of Admission
B.A. (1974) Johnston College
Frederick M. Licon, Jr. Assistant Director of Admission
B.A. (1999) Williams
Karen J. Parkinson Assistant Director of Admission
A.B. (1970) Mount Holyoke; M.Ed. (1976) University of Rochester
Offices of Administration
­ 417 ­
Lauren E. Posner Assistant Director of Admission
B.A. (1989) Smith; M.S.W. (1992) Columbia University School of Social Work
Miguel A. Rivera Assistant Director of Admission
B.A. (1999) Williams
Matthew A. Swanson Assistant Director of Admission
B.A. (1997) Williams
Office of Career Counseling
Fatma Kassamali Director of Career Counseling
B.A. (1970) Cedar Crest; M.S. (1972) Syracuse
Mary M. Winston Associate Director of Career Counseling
B.A. (1987) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
Dawn M. Dellea Career Counselor
B.S. (1992) Northeastern University
Ronald L. Gallagher Alumni Internship Program Counselor
B.S. (1976) Springfield; A.S. (1974) Springfield Technical College
Office of the Chaplain
Richard E. Spalding Chaplain
B.A. (1976) Yale University; M. Div. (1981) Yale Divinity School; S.T.M. (1986) Union Theological Seminary
Peter Feudo, Jr. Associate Chaplain
B.A. (1974) Boston College; M.A. (1977) Michigan State University; Sc.D. (1986) Boston University; Third
Order Profession, Secular Franciscan Order
Sigma F. Coran Associate Chaplain
B.A. (1988) Tufts University; M.A. (1992) Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion; Rabbinic Ordination
(1993) Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion
Conference Office
Marjorie M. Wylde Director of Conferences
B.A. (1964) Regis
Office of the Controller
Susan S. Hogan, CPA Controller
B.S. (1980) Syracuse
Karen P. Jolin Director of Financial Information Systems
B.S. (1982) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
David W. Holland Bursar
B.S. (1967) Suffolk University
Sandra A. Connors Supervisor of Gift and Grant Accounting
Kelly F. Kervan Accountant
B.S. (1990) North Adams State College
Office of Financial Aid
Paul J. Boyer Director of Financial Aid
B.A. (1977) Williams
Betsy Hobson Associate Director of Financial Aid
B.S. (1989) University of Colorado
Jessica L. Bernier Assistant Director of Financial Aid
B.A. (1998) Bowdoin College
Office of Health
Ruth G. Harrison Director of Health Services
B.S. (1973) Hunter College; M.A. (1982) New York University
Dale M. Newman, F.N.P. Nurse Practitioner
B.S. (1986) S.U.N.Y., Stonybrook; M.S.N. (1995) Sage Colleges
Frances Lippmann, Ph.D. Director of Psychological Counseling
B.A. (1955) Adelphia; Ph.D. (1966) New York University
John A. Miner Psychiatrist
B.S. (1973) University of South Dakota; M.D. (1975) University of Minnesota
Margaret H. Wood, L.I.C.S.W. Psychotherapist
B.A. (1968) Eckerd College; M.S.W. (1987) S.U.N.Y., Albany
Donna M. Denelli-Hess Health Educator
B.A. (1975) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts; M.S.P.H. (1978) University of Massachusetts
Alyssa Sporbert Health Educator
B.A. (1992) North Adams State College; M.Ed. (2000) Cambridge College
Michael Pinsonneault Pharmacist
Health Professions Program Office
Susan M. Salko Health Professions Advisor
B.A. (1990) George Mason University; M.S. (1996) University of Scranton, Pennsylvania
Offices of Administration
­ 418 ­
Office of Human Resources
Martha R. Tetrault Director of Human Resources
B.A. (1977) Springfield College; M.A. (1985) S.U.N.Y., Albany
Rosemary K. Moore Assistant Director of Human Resources
B.A. (1968) Viterbo college; M.S. (1974) S.U.N.Y., Albany
Richard B. Davis Payroll Manager
B.A. (1971) Lowell Tech; M.B.A. (1981) University of Massachusetts
Robert F. Wright Benefits Manager
Jill B. Strawbridge Employment Manager
B.A. (1987) University of South Alabama
Office for Information Technology
James F. Allison Project Manager
B.S. (1972) Tufts; M.B.A. (1994) Clark
Mark I. Berman Director of Networks and Systems
B.S. (1988) S.U.N.Y., Binghamton
Cheryl Brewer Budget and Facilities Administrator
Peter Charbonneau Networks and Systems Administrator
B.S.E.E. (1984) University of Colorado
Ashley W. Frost Networks and Systems Administrator
B.A. (1992) Williams
Paul Gerding Director of Instructional Technology
B.S. University of the South
Mary Glendon Desktop Systems Intern
B.A. (1999) Williams
Gabriel McHale Godbey Assistant Networks and Systems Administrator
Maggie Koperniak Project Manager
B.A. (1979) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts; M.S. (1999) University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Criss S. Laidlaw Project Manager
B.A. (1982) Carleton College
Terri-Lynn Lamarre Desktop Specialist
B.S. (1992) Westfield State College
Jonathan Morgan-Leaman Desktop Systems Manager
B.A. (1989) Colgate
Sharron J. Macklin Instructional Technology Specialist
B.S. (1972) University of Massachusetts, Amherst; M.S. (1996) University of Maine, Orono
Edward S. Nowlan Networks and Systems Administrator
B.S. (1985) Southern Connecticut State University
Robert G. Ouellette Project Manager
Scott A. Reese Instructional Technology Specialist
B.A. (1987) University of Iowa; B.S. (1989) University of Iowa
Mike Richardson Desktop Specialist
Seth Rogers Desktop Specialist
B.A. (1989) Reed College
Douglas A. Rydell Project Manager
B.A. (1980) St. John's
Tanya Salcedo Instructional Technology Specialist
B.Mus. (1989) University of Lowell
Dinny S. Taylor Interim Chief Technology Officer
B.A. (1968) Connecticut College; M.Ed. (1970) Lesley
Jianjun Wang Instructional Technology Specialist
B.A. (1982) Shanghai International Studies University, China; M.A.(1994) University of Connecticut, Storrs
Office of Physical Education, Athletics and Recreation
Harry C. Sheehy III Director of Athletics
B.A. (1975) Williams; M.Ed. (1988) University of Washington
Jana Hunkler Brulé Coordinator of Business and Financial Planning
B.A. (1990) University of New Hampshire; M.Ed. (1995) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
Michael J. Frawley Director of Sports Medicine
B.S. (1987) Bridgewater State; M.S. (1988) Old Dominion
Gary J. Guerin Assistant Director for Operations, Athletics
B.S. (1975) Boston University
Ronald A. Stant Trainer
Lisa Wilk Assistant Trainer
B.S. (1992) Northeastern; M.S. (1995) Indiana State
Offices of Administration
­ 419 ­
Holly E. Silva Assistant Coordinator of Dance
B.S. (1977) Southern Connecticut State College; M.F.A. (1987) Smith College
Office of Public Affairs
James G. Kolesar Director of Public Affairs
B.A. (1972) Williams
Heather H. Clemow Publications Manager
B.A. (1975) Stephens College; M.S. (1976) Nova University
A. Jo Procter News Director
B.A. (1960) Antioch College; M.S. (1987) Boston University
Dick Quinn Assistant Director of Public Affairs, Director of Sports Information
B.A. (1973) Holy Cross; M.S. (1989) Iona
Office of the Registrar
Charles R. Toomajian, Jr. Registrar and Associate Dean for Student Services
A.B. (1965) Bowdoin; Ph.D. (1974) Cornell
Barbara A. Casey Associate Registrar for Student and Faculty Services
B.A. (1983) Williams
Mary L. Morrison Associate Registrar for Records and Registration
B.A. (1974) Mount Holyoke; M.B.A. (1989) S.U.N.Y., Albany
Office of Security
Jean M. Thorndike Director of Security
B.S. (1986) Southern Vermont College
David J. Boyer Assistant Director of Security
B.S. (1982) Westfield State College
Special Academic Programs Office
Margaret L. Magavern Coordinator of Special Academic Programs and
Director of the Math Science Resource Center
B.A. (1983) Wesleyan University; Ed.M. (1996) North Adams State College
Office of the Treasurer
Douglas W. Phillips Treasurer
B.A. (1980) Rutgers; M.B.A. (1991) R.P.I.
Robert A. Seney Investment Administrator
Kathleen L. Therrien Trust Administrator
Center for Development Economics
Henry J. Bruton Chair of the Center for Development Economics
B.A. (1943) Texas; Ph.D. (1952 ) Harvard
Thomas S. Powers Director of the Center for Development Economics
B.A. (1981) Williams; M.B.A. (1987) Harvard
Pamela D. Turton Assistant Director
B.A. (1970) Colby College; M.Ed. (1971) University of Cincinnati
Center for Environmental Studies
Henry W. Art Director
A.B. (1966) Dartmouth; Ph.D. (1971) Yale
Andrew T. Jones Hopkins Memorial Forest Manager
B.A. (1986) Macalester College; M.F. (1994) Duke
Rachel J. Louis Program Assistant
B.A. (1992) Kenyon; M.A. (1999) Yale; M.E.S. (1999) Yale
Center for Foreign Languages, Literatures, and Cultures
Joseph Bessette Foreign Languages Technology Specialist
B.S. (0000) University of Maryland; M.A. (0000) University of Maryland
Jane Canova Assistant Director of the Center for Foreign Languages, Literatures and Cultures
B.S. (1976) Georgetown; M.S.W. (1980) New York University
Multicultural Center
Alex W. Willingham Director of the Multicultural Center
B.A. (1963) Southern University, Baton Rouge; Ph.D. (1974) U.N.C., Chapel Hill
Stephen D. Collingworth Coordinator of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender Issues
B.A. (1992) Ohio State University; M.A. (1994) Ohio State University
Medha Kirtane Assistant to the Director of the Multicultural Center
B.A. (2000) Williams
Marcela Villada Peacock Multicultural Center Program Assistant
Oakley Center for the Humanities and Social Sciences
Robert Kavanaugh Director
B.A. (1967) Holy Cross; Ph.D. (1974) Boston University
Offices of Administration
­ 420 ­
Academic Support
Bryce A. Babcock Coordinator of Science Facilities and Staff Physicist
B.S. (1968) University of Michigan; Ph.D. (1972) University of Michigan
Mary K. Bailey Systems Support Specialist, Computer Science
B.S. (1983) University of New Hampshire; M.M. (1988) University of Massachusetts
Lisa D. Carey Leadership Programs Coordinator
B.A. (1992) McGill University
Susan L. Engel Director of Education Programs
B.A. (1980) Sarah Lawrence; Ph.D. (1986) C.U.N.Y.
Stephan E. Martin Observatory Supervisor
B.A. (1989) Colgate; M.S. (1993) University of Wyoming
Laurie C. Hurshman Mellon Project Coordinator, Economics
B.A. (1999) Williams College
Linda A. Reynolds Slide Librarian, Art
B.S. (1970) University of Connecticut; M.A. (1979) New York University; M.A. (1993) Williams
David S. Richardson Postdoctoral Research Fellow in Physics
B.S. (1994) University of Manchester, UK; Ph.D. (1997) University of Birmingham, UK
Noah J. Sandstrom Essel Postdoctoral research Fellow in Neuroscience
B.A. (1994) Knox College; Ph.D. (1999) Duke
Anne R. Skinner Safety Officer
B.A. (1961) Radcliffe; Ph.D. (1966) Yale
Adams Memorial Theatre
Cosmo A. Catalano, Jr. Production Manager
B.A. (1976) University of Iowa; M.F.A. (1979) Yale
Deborah A. Brothers Costume Designer
B.A. (1976) University of New Orleans; M.F.A. (1979) California Institute of the Arts
George T. Aitken, Jr. Senior Scene Technician
Leah Pike Theatre Administration Intern
B.A. (1990) University of Binghamton, SUNY
Buildings and Grounds
Winthrop M. Wassenar Director of Physical Plant
B.S. (1959) W.P.I.; M.S. (1960) W.P.I.
Thomas D. McEvoy Director of Housing
B.A. (1975) S.U.N.Y., Geneseo
John C. Holden Associate Director for Operations
B.S.M.E. (1969) Lehigh
Harold F. White Associate Director for Administrative Services
B.A. (1955) Williams
Eric L. Beattie Assistant Director for Construction Services
B.S. (1981) University of Vermont
Timothy J. Reisler Assistant Director for Administrative Services
B.A. (1983) Wheaton College; M.B.A. (1992) Western New England College
Christopher Williams Assistant Director for Architectural Services
B.F.A. (1978) Pratt Institute
Thomas A. Bona Architectural Maintenance Supervisor
B.S. (2000) Westfield State College
Michael R. Briggs Construction Supervisor
Donald B. Clark Mechanical Maintenance Supervisor
B.S. (1971) St. Lawrence University
Christina A. Cruz Special Assistant to the Director of Physical Plant
B.S. (1982) University of Wisconsin; Ed.M. (1997) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
Bruce J. Decoteau Construction Supervisor
Ronald N. Favreau Manager of Office Services/Purchasing Coordinator
David F. Fitzgerald Horticulturist and Grounds Supervisor
B.S. (1980) University of Massachusetts; M.S. (1982) Washington State University
Robert C. Jarvis Construction Supervisor
B.A. (1952) University of Miami
Thomas R. Mahar Construction Projects Supervisor
A.S. (1999) Berkshire Community College
Beatrice M. Miles Manager of Custodial Services and Special Functions
Joseph M. Moran Fire Marshall and Safety Officer
A.S. (1998) Berkshire Community College
Jean F. Richer Manager of Telecommunications
A.S. (1967) St. Joseph College
Offices of Administration
­ 421 ­
Dining Services
James W. Hodgkins Director of Dining Services
B.S. (1965) University of New Hampshire
Helen C. Aitken Associate Director of Dining Services
B.A. (1995) Southern Vermont College
Alexandre M. da Silva Associate Director of Dining Services for Operations
B.S. (1991) Norfolk State University; M.S. (1997) Penn State
TBA Assistant Director of Dining Services, Catering
Martin E. Blake Unit Manager
Michael A. Cutler Unit Manager
Ian A. Ferro Manager of the Faculty House/Alumni Center
Erwin Bernhart Assistant Manager of the Faculty House/Alumni Center
Carol A. Luscier Snack Bar Manager
Roberta H. Marcyoniak Unit Manager
John I. Markland Assistant Unit Manager
Michele N. O'Brien Unit Manager
Gary L. Phillips Purchaser
Virginia B. Skorupski Nutritionist
Jonathan C. Tustin Unit Manager
Alan E. Wiles Catering Chef
Williams College Museum of Art
Linda B. Shearer Director of the Williams College Museum of Art
B.A. (1968) Sarah Lawrence
Marion M. Goethals Associate Director of the Williams College Museum of Art
B.A. (1968) Duke; M.A. (1989) Williams
Nancy Mowll Mathews Eugénie Prendergast Curator
B.A. (1968) Goucher College; Ph.D. (1980) N.Y.U. Institute of Fine Arts
Deborah Menaker Rothschild (on leave 2000­2001) Curator of Exhibitions
B.A. (1971) Vassar; Ph.D. (1990) N.Y.U. Institute of Fine Arts
Vivian L. Patterson Associate Curator, Collections Management
B.A. (1977) Williams; M.A. (1980) Williams
Judith M. Raab Director of Membership and Events
B.A. (1961) University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
Barbara G. Robertson Director of Education
B.A. (1983) Hampshire
Diane Hart Agee Museum Registrar
B.A. (1977) Virginia Tech; M.A. (1986) Virginia Commonwealth University
Stefanie Spray Jandl Andrew W Mellon Curatorial Associate
B.A. (1983) University of Southern California; M.A. (1993) Williams
Kay M. Kamiyama Public Relations Assistant
B.A. (1998) Williams
* Phi Beta Kappa
 Sigma XI
__________________
­ 422 ­
Clark Fellow
Conferring of the Degree of Master of Arts
DEGREES CONFERRED JUNE, 2000
Conferring of the Degree of Master of Arts
in Development Economics
*
_____________________
*
Katherine Anne Bussard
Lisa Beth Dorin
Alanna Erin Gedgaudas
Robert Gordon Glass
Elyse Amparo Gonzales
Adam Robert Greenhalgh
Jennifer Ann Greenhill
Laura Beth Groves
John Lindsey Hagood
Amy Kelly Hamlin
Elizabeth Anne Mangini
Theresa McGuire Mann
Kimberly Lauren Mims
Robin Schaefer Schuldenfrei
Catherine R. Steward
Leah Gabriella Sweet
Olivia Catherine Vitale
Jason Ngute Akoyo
Kamiljon Tagaevich Akramov
Eko Ariantoro
Tessie Paulo Candelario
Stanley Tipemphemalo Mundaogona Chuthi
Helena Barangan Habulan
Young-joo Hong
Md. Faizul Islam
Ahmad Kaikaus
Smith Akibu Kamwana
Sylvester Simalumba Kamwi
Elsie Kanza
Tasawan Kasemsawasdi
Philip Katamba
Truong Dang Khoa
Mduduzi A. Langa
Fisa Priscilla Lembede
Min Thu Myo (Saw Kapi)
Msafiri David Nampesya
Pon Nya Mon
Teguh Setiadi
Tessie P. Velasquez
*
Bachelor of Arts, Summa Cum Laude
*DoHyun Tony Chung, with honors in Political
Economy
*Rebecca Tamar Cover, with highest honors in
Astrophysics
*Amanda Bouvier Edmonds
*Douglas Bertrand Marshall III, with highest
honors in Philosophy
*Michelle Pacholec, with honors in Chemistry
*Grace Martha Pritchard, with honors in English
*Michael Vernon Ramberg
*Taylor Frances Schildgen, with highest honors in
Geosciences
*Qiang Sun
*Laura Susan Trice
*Max McMeekin Weinstein, with highest honors
in Philosophy
*Catherine Anne Williams, with highest honors in
History
Bachelor of Arts, Magna Cum Laude
David Scott Adams
*Julianne Humphrey Anderson
*Michael Zubrow Barkin
Robert Charles Blackstone
*Marlin Chu
*Sarah Ann Cohen, with highest honors in English
Mark Douglas Conrad
*Ellen Griswold Cook
*Mary Bowman Cummins
*Yana Dadiomova
*Katharine Elizabeth Davis
*Meg Elizabeth Davis, with honors in Sociology
Michelle Beth Dunn, with honors in Chemistry
*Peter Jacobs Eyre
*Lily Christine Filip, with honors in History
*Jon Wesley Foreman
*Meghan Amanda Freeman, with honors in
English
*Brad Kenneth Geddes
*Richard James Giarusso, with highest honors in
Music, with honors in English
*Katharine Ross Gold
*Joshua Howard Goldstein, with highest honors in
Biology
*Stephen Michael Gray, with honors in Psychology
*Haibo Gu
*Jessica Anne Haffajee
*Victor Lahiri Hart, with honors in Political
Science
*Ginel Corina Hill, with highest honors in Physics
*Mariya Jean Hodge
*Jason William Holmes
Michael Drew Hurwitz, with honors in Chemistry
*Elizabeth Clelland Hutton
Jonathan Mark Isaacs, with honors in Political
Science
*Rebecca Ann Iwantsch
SungHwan Kim, with highest honors in Art
*Jason Marcus Langheier, with honors in Biology
*Aaron I. Lehman, with honors in English
*Stefanie Ann Liquori
*Veena Mandava, with highest honors in
Chemistry
*Sara Kate May, with highest honors in
Astrophysics
*Andrea Luigi Mazzariello, with highest honors in
Music
*Erin Louise Morrissette
*Patchen Evan Mortimer
Meghan Nicole Moscati, with honors in
Psychology
*Michelle Sarah Mourad, with highest honors in
Chemistry
*Charles Nelson Munyon, with honors in Biology
Brendan Nelson
*Dawn Christiana Nelson
*Catherine Jean Nicholson
*Rebecca Joy Norwick
Degrees Conferred
* Phi Beta Kappa
 Sigma XI
__________________
­ 423 ­
*Rachel Kate Oberter, with highest honors in Art
*Jason Christopher Rutledge Oraker, with honors
in Psychology
Elizabeth Anne Overbay
*Jillian Annice Pesin, with honors in Biology
*Honey Michelle Phillips, with honors in English
*Kate DeLaney Ramsayer, with honors in Biology
*Aya Elaine Reiss, with highest honors in Biology
*Theodore Daniel Satterthwaite
*Matthew Patrick Scherer, with honors in Political
Science
*Amish Ajit Shah, with highest honors in
Chemistry
*James Lampert Shutzer
*Kathryn Dawn Simpson
Andrew J Speck, with honors in Physics
*Anita Ellen Spielman
Jason Troy Stanley, with honors in Asian Studies
Kevin Lee Eckart Stephans
*Carolyn Ann Stickney, with highest honors in
Chemistry
Jane Blair Vaughn, with honors in American
Studies
*Alexander Veytsel, with honors in Political
Science
*Elizabeth Hamilton Wells, with honors in Biology
*Andrew Harris Werbrock, with highest honors in
Biology
*Robert Andrew Wiygul, with highest honors in
History, with honors in Philosophy
*Alona Zaitzeff
*Kimberly Helene Zelnick, with honors in English
*Leila Ruth Zelnick
Bachelor of Arts, Cum Laude
Katherine Osborn Abbott, with honors in English
Khaleefah Ali Khaleefah Al-Sabah
Andrew Carl Arbesman
Jonathan Seth Asarch
Aida Avdic
Gwendolyn Rebecca Baxter
Amina Belghiti
Katharine Kimi Berlin
Katherine Birnie
Emily Elaine Boer
Ira Martin Boudway
Lauren Beth Buckley, with honors in Biology
Joseph John Busnengo
Andrew Louis Chang
Molly Beth Chase
Tegan Elyze Cheslack-Postava, with highest
honors in Mathematics
Catherine Francoise Coueignoux
Tara Resha Crowley
Elise Luisa Cucchi
Alicia Rochelle Currier, with honors in Art
Erin Lane Davies, with highest honors in
Biology
Megan Marta Doherty
Melissa Jean Duggan
Deborah Maura Ebert
Emily Frances Eustis, with honors in Psychology
Thomas Roy Fleming, with honors in
Mathematics
Anna Jordan Frantz
Megan Hayes Fredericks
Rebecca Joan French
Deborah Florence Frisone, with honors in
Psychology
Susannah Sarah Mahinaokapolanialoha Fyrberg
Dorothy Ida Gambrell
Kristina Marie Gehrman, with honors in
Philosophy
David Goodrich Gilford
Alfonso Rodrigo González del Riego
Mary Victoria Gorges
Andrew Jonathan Gow, with honors in Art
Thomas Durfee Grant
Kristen Alexandra Grippi
Michael William Hacker
Katherine Amy Hansen
Cory Reed Heilmann, with honors in
Mathematics
Rebecca Rose Hermes, with honors in Economics
Nelson Nienjung Hioe
Lindsey Lane Holzapfel
Janine Patricia L. Ivanova
Jonathan Kallay
Kathryn Chauvin Kavanaugh
Ashley Burrell Kidd
Stephen Kim
Jennifer Pascale Helen Kingsley
Marissa Louise Kreh
Rebecca Siobhan Kummer
Angela Elizabeth Lankford
Bria Heidi Larson
Amanda May Leach
Jennifer Hoi-Shan Leung, with honors in
Economics
David Albert Lombino
Katharine Adams Lusk
Kimberly Frahm Massimiano
Nancy Marie Moeur
Steven Carlton Moore
Anthony M. Ndirango, with honors in Physics
Tory Guilfoyle Nims
Kevin Mitchell O'Connor, with honors in Physics
Kathrina Julia Oetjen, with highest honors in
Economics
Jocelyn Christensen Olsen
Jennifer Carolan Page, with honors in Psychology
vMaria Gabriela Dias Pereira, with honors in
Psychology
Shara Ann Pilch
Kerice Ann Pinkney, with honors in Biology
Jonathan Colin Plowman, with honors in English
Ethan Barret Plunkett, with honors in Biology
Daniel Lee Puskin, with honors in Economics
Sharmistha Ray, with honors in Art
Kathleen Morse Reardon
Christopher David Richards
Jocelyn Riedl
Ji-Eun Rim, with highest honors in Art
Joseph Patrick Rogers, Jr.
Jeffrey David Roizen, with honors in Biology
Kevin Daniel Russell, with highest honors in
Astrophysics
Marja Kristina Samenfeld-Specht, with honors in
Art
Abigail Katherine Sayer
Brian Andrew Schaub
Richard Sanders Scott III, with honors in History
Catherine Lee Shortsleeve
Lauren Abby Siegel, with honors in English
Rebecca Irene Silver
Jared Andrew Silverstein
Emily L'Heureux Simpson, with highest honors
in Biology
Andrew Franklin Singer
Lauren Merritt Singer, with honors in Biology
Christopher Spence
Carolin Elizabeth Spiegel, with honors in Biology
Degrees Conferred
* Phi Beta Kappa
 Sigma XI
__________________
­ 424 ­
Amy Laura Sprengelmeyer, with honors in
Psychology
Jacklyn Alice Stein
Jill Elizabeth Straits
David Allen Taylor
Nathan Wynfield Tefft
Margaret Page Li-Ching Ting
Matthew Simon Toth
Reed Lincoln Townsend, with honors in
Computer Science
Jonathan Louis Trementozzi
Robert Bartlett Trumbull
Rhett Alexander Van Syoc
Ellen Krista Van Wert
Sarah Elizabeth White
Allen Wai Wong
Junghee Yang
Saminaz Zaman, with honors in English
Bachelor of Arts
Moges Abebe
Katherine Araminta Acton, with honors in
English
Mark Robert Acton, with highest honors in
Physics
Patrick Ramone Adair
David Lincoln Adams
Peter Lockwood Adams, with highest honors in
History
Tobey Leigh Adler
Karelle Simone Aiken, with honors in Chemistry
Stephanie Jean Airoldi, with honors in Biology
David Freeman Aisner
Sara Gabriela Allen
Vanessa Ursula Alvarez
Marissa Lyn Ambio
Patrick John Andersen
Erin Kate Anderson
George Anthes
Neal Appleman
Matthew Beall Art
Rebecca Kate Atkinson, with honors in
Geosciences
Asha Anne Awad
Trevor Eugene Babb
Augusta Stevens Babson
Elizabeth Todd Bailey
Elizabeth Jane Dudley Baker
Miles Maxwell Baltrusaitis
Camille Reshon Barker
Nicholas Adams Barker
Hilary Martin Barraford
Michael Henry Bensen
Alex Todd Bernstock
John Eugene Berry, Jr.
Nathaniel Adams Bessey
Paul Munson Bethe
Alexander Sherman Birdsall
Kate Macdonald Bishop
Adwoa Kyeiwa Boahene
Shawn Michael Boburg
William Eric Bodenstab, Jr.
Carlos Alberto Bongioanni
Zelle Akua Bonney, with highest honors in
Afro-American Studies
Alison Arlene Booth
Megan Julia Bott
Elizabeth Louise Boyd
Craig David Branca
Marian Brevdo
Rebecca Ellen Brooks
Ann Margaret Brophy
Julia Marie Lehrke Brown, with honors in Art
Patrick Michael Burton, with honors in Biology
Jason Russell Busch
Ann Elizabeth Butler
Gregory David Butz
John Franklin Cale
Matthew Robert Campanelli
Todd Myles Carnam
Suzanne Amber Carrier
David Carrillo
Johana Vanessa Castro
Sara Kathleen Caswell
Jill Kristen Caterer
Meghan Elizabeth Cavanaugh
Elizabeth Putnam Cesarz
Sadruddin Kassamali Chandani, with honors in
Biology
Neng-Chao Chang
Colin William Blizzard Chard
Audrey Marie Chen
Charles Matthew Chen, with honors in Art
Yung-En Chen, with highest honors in Art
Andy Chiu
Carla Bergen Chokel, with honors in Geosciences
Sheraz Ahmad Choudhary
Charlene Amstardetta Clarke, with honors in
Afro-American Studies
Meghan Anne Cleary
Andrew McCaughey Cloutier
Jessica Danielle Coffin, with highest honors in
History
Sara Jeanine Cofrin
Douglas Philip Cohan
Geoffrey Hayes Cohane
John Bartman Cole
Elizabeth Francis Collier
Sarah Elizabeth Connolly, with honors in
Contract: Latin American Studies and honors
in Environmental Studies
Abib Tejan Conteh
Haynes Alexander Cooney
Owen Austin Cooney
Andrew Donald Criqui
Lisa Catherine Crooks
Nora Mary Cuddy
Christopher Tammany Cuneo
Jennifer Annick Curley
Heather Ann Cyr
Nicholas James Daft, with honors in Asian
Studies
Sally-Thomas Daigneault
Katherine Frances Darling
William Chanter Darrin
Alison Crakow Davies
Yolanda Davila
Dennis Ryan DeBassio, with honors in History
Meera Arun Deean
Jeantel Louise DeGazon
Patrick Delivanis
Mayda Alexandra Del Valle, with honors in Art
Adrienne Michelle Denson, with honors in
Afro-American Studies
Brian James Dineen II
Aimee Kathleen Donnelly
Nicole Anne Draghi
Jared Asher Drake
Shaun Devon Duggins, with honors in
Afro-American Studies
Morgan Kaimalei Eckles
David Morgan Erickson
Elise Thorbecke Estes
Melina Frances Evans, with honors in History
Christopher Jon Fairbanks
Degrees Conferred
* Phi Beta Kappa
 Sigma XI
__________________
­ 425 ­
Miguel Esteban Fernandez
Justin John Ferrelli
Matthew Joshua Fineman
Benjamin Steed Finholt
John Kerr Finkbeiner
Mya Nicole Fisher
Alan Oliver Fitts
Casey Eiran Flavin
Mark Allen Florenz
Kate Eileen Flynn
Katherine Fogg
Kathryn Marie Ford
Robert Christopher Foxwell
Paul Jason Friedmann
Jason Carlton Frink
David Yakar Fuchs
Karina Dilia Fuentes
Masao Fujita
Jonathan David Garcia
Biniam Gebre, with highest honors in Chemistry
Katherine Delle Geier
Duarte Juan Pablo Geraldino
Alexis Patricia Gilman
Rebecca Lucy Goldfine
Edward Kabifya Gondwe
Jeffrey Dean Grant
Kelly Marie Grant
Julian Paul Green
Leigh Foster Greenwood
Kai Alexander Gross
Philip Henry Groth II
Matthew Armstrong Gunther
Matthew Aaron Gutman, with honors in Political
Science
Catharine Marie Haack
Charles John Hagenbuch
Sawyer Bailey Haig
David Berke Haimson
Christopher Houston Hale
Yui Haraguchi
Wilmot Bain Harkey
Eric Roman Hasenauer
Alex Michael Hassinger
Lindsay Beth Hatton
Jason Becker Healy, with honors in Computer
Science
Cara Morgan Heintz
Jennifer Lauren Heller
Jeffrey Sol Herzog
Stephen Watts Kearny Hibbard
Larry Elliott Hibbler, Jr.
Michael Kemmerer Hickey
Patricia Gertrude Hines, with honors in
Geosciences
Anthang Ensheng Hoang
Robert Reid Hodge
Alexander Stuart Benedict Horn
Robert Thomas Howell III
Elizabeth Claire Hoyt
Deborah Te-Lan Hsu
Mireya Hurtado
Stefan Hugo Hwang
Olivia Naomi Imoberdorf
Michael Xabier Izquierdo
Dahra Nicole Jackson, with honors in Psychology
Allison Lee Jacobs
Robeson John-Calvin Jennings
Helena Anne Johnson
Andrew Michael Jones
David Benjamin Joyce, with honors in
Environmental Studies
Benjamin Samuel Katz
Sean Patrick Keenan
Cyrus Black King III
Brendan Martin Kinnell
Medha Jayant Kirtane
Robert Justus Kleberg
Lisa Diane Knappen, with honors in Psychology
Melissa Irene Koehler
Lauren Michelle Krisko
Sophia Kuo
Vikram Singh Lamba
Thomas Joseph LaRocca
Albert Roy Leatherman III
Tanesha Anne Leathers
Anne W Lee
Matthew Lee Levy
Sara Josephine Levy
Elizabeth Allison Lierman
Randall Lee Lindquist, with highest honors in
Biology
Meadow Marie Linn
Jeffrey Ronald Lisciandrello
Allison Kay Litten
F. Norman Liversidge IV
Bevan Patrick Londergan, with honors in
Chemistry
Nicole C. Lopez
John Taft Lowe
Maxine Maria Lyle
Wyeth Pendleton Lynch
Jennifer Ruth Lyons
Jeffrey Arthur Macey
John Campbell Magary
Matthew Mitten Magiera
Vineeta Mahajan
Sarah Elisabeth Mandle, with honors in English
Britton Rodman Mann
Jeffrey Dabrowski Manning
Jaime Lyn Margalotti, with honors in History
Shannon Marie Mark
Sarah Hudson Marks
Nicholas Philip Martinelli
Daniel Mark Mason
Heather Wheeler May
John Richmond Mayhall
Michael James McAdam
Geordie Gaudion McClelland
Marian Porter McConnell, with honors in
Political Science
Taylor Anderson McKinley
Allison Sibley Michael, with highest honors in
African and Middle Eastern Studies
Jonathan Woodside Miles
John Campbell Miller
Shad Michael Miller
Adam Tahir Mirza
Damien Nicolas Mitchell
Stephanie Montez Moore
John Hunnewell Moorhead, Jr.
Lindsay Stapleton Morehouse
Melissa Motta Gaston, with honors in Biology
Andre Michel Mura
Liza Susana Murcia
Melissa Jean Murphy
Farrah Musani
Albert Paul Naclerio
Suela Nako
David McPherson Navins
Jennifer L. Newton, with honors in Geosciences
Viet Quoc Nguyen
Hilary Alwyn Oat-Judge, with highest honors in
History
William James O'Brien III
Chad Matthew Ogiba
Megumi Onishi, with highest honors in Chemistry
Degrees Conferred
* Phi Beta Kappa
 Sigma XI
__________________
­ 426 ­
Michael Anthony Paolercio, Jr.
Rebecca Penniman Parkinson
Ronald Fairbairn Parsons
Samuel Jonathan Pearson
Tanya Negeen Pegahi
Brian Lister Petersen
Tyson Antony Phipps
Joshua Starrett Pierson
Charles Bernard Pinson-Rose
Alexander Hoyt Poole, with highest honors in
History
Yolanda Marie Pope
Jason Thomas Price
Glenn Allen Prichett
Ravi Purushotham
Eleanor Lowell Putnam-Farr, with honors in
Economics
Andrea Renee Pyatt
Virginia Mahealani Pyle
Robert T Quan
Leah Louise Rabin
Imelda Valerie Ramirez
Alberto David Ramos
Denise Joy Ramzy
Cordelia Rose Ransom, with honors in
Geosciences
Ryan John Raveis
Will James Rawls
Samantha Denise Reed
Rebecca Posey Rehm
Ralston Alexander Reid, Jr.
Silvia Rhee
Kamille Simone Richards
Daniel Joseph Richter, with honors in Biology
Caitlin Greenleaf Ritchie
Marcus Wesley Robinson
Tracey Lynne Rocha
Ian Michael Roche
Esteban Antonio Roman
Christina Ronai
Raphael Philip Rosen
Jacob Mark Rosenbury
Emilio Ricardo Ruperty
Caroline Hancock Ryan, with honors in English
Joshua Matthew Saladino
Tanisha Niquet Salmon
Lisa Sanchez
Julia Rachel Sandy
Cristina Marie Santiestevan
Katherine Felice Schulte
Adam David Schuyler, with honors in
Mathematics
Alexis Joanna Scott
Teal Stephen Scott
Kevin Engler See
Scott David Selberg
Boudhayan Sen
Kevin Patrick Sendlenski
Joe Sensenbrenner
Robin Carroll Severud
David Joseph Seward, with honors in Biology
James Michael Sheehy, Jr.
Sarah Deming Sheppe
Daniel McClelland Shirai
Katherine Helen Simon
Jason Bradley Slingerlend
Carrie Elizabeth Sloan
Emily Frances Small
Benjamin Clarke Smeal
Sarah Young-Mi Song, with honors in Women's
and Gender Studies
Nickolas Manual Sophinos
Peter John Spina
Elinor Newman Springer
Clayton Andrew Stein
Peter Russell Clement Stein
Nicole Marie Steinmuller
Wayne Emile Stephens
Todd Robert Stiefler, with honors in Political
Science
Jason George Stojkovic
Gordon Kayser Strauss
Kathleen Elizabeth Sullivan
Arjuna Rajeev Sunderam
Andrew William Sutton
Christopher Michael Sweatman
Ryan Sylvia
Haruko Takeuchi
Mark Tanno
Harin Tantongsirisak
Marie-Michel Elizabeth Tassé
Kenric Omar Taylor
Gabriella Thiele
David Takashi Ohta Walfish, with honors in
Biology
Kristin Marie Walker
Nancy Cooper Walworth
Edward Paul Wasserman
Amanda Suzanne Watts
Sarah Elizabeth Watts
Richard Nicholas Waugh
Owen Cooper Weihman
Nicholas Ian Weiss
Nicholas Alton Weisser
George Christopher Wendell
Carl Gifford Whitbeck III
Stephanie Mary Elizabeth Whitehead
Catherine Hedges Wicker
David Wayne Wicklund, Jr.
John Fourt Wiedower
Reed Maxfield Wiedower
Wayne Michael Wight, with honors in
Psychology
Catherine Crist Williamson, with highest honors
in English
Malana Page Willis
Judith Anne Wines
Boisseau Michael Woltz, Jr., with honors in
Afro-American Studies
Raquel Farrah Wong
Donald Franklin Wood
Robin L. Yan
Rebecca Ann Young, with honors in English
James Martin Ziai
Damian Delafield Zunino
CONFERRING OF HONORARY DEGREES
Commencement, June 2000
George Mitchell LL.D.
Morton O. Schapiro LL.D.
Carl W. Vogt LL.D.
Jenny Holzer D.F.A
Anna Faith Jones L.H.D.
Mathilde Krim Sc.D.
ENROLLMENT
­ 427 ­
Graduate Students 49
. . . . . . . . . .
Seniors 559
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Juniors 537
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sophomores 528
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
First-Year Students 548
. . . . . . . . . .
Total 2221
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Graduate Students 47
. . . . . . . . . .
Seniors 551
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Juniors 533
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sophomores 523
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
First-Year Students 545
. . . . . . . . . .
Total 2199
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
BY CLASSES, SEPTEMBER 1999 BY CLASSES, FEBRUARY 2000
Of the 526 who entered in 1993, 89% graduated within 4 years and 94% within 6 years; of the 496 new
first-year students who entered in the Fall of 1994, 90% graduated from Williams within 4 years and
95% within 6 years. Additional information on this topic is available at the Office of the Registrar.
GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION
Alaska 5
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Alabama 6
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Arkansas 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Arizona 5
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
California 156
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colorado 25
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Connecticut 159
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
District of Columbia 26
. . . . . . . . .
Delaware 5
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Florida 28
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Georgia 26
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Hawaii 23
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Iowa 7
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Idaho 7
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Illinois 61
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indiana 9
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Kansas 4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Kentucky 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Louisiana 4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Massachusetts 341
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Maryland 70
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Maine 51
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Michigan 20
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Minnesota 36
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Missouri 11
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mississippi 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Montana 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
North Carolina 21
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
North Dakota 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Hampshire 51
. . . . . . . . . . . .
New Jersey 137
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Mexico 7
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nevada 4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New York 405
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ohio 42
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Oklahoma 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Oregon 18
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pennsylvania 79
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rhode Island 12
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Carolina 6
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tennessee 12
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Texas 47
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Utah 6
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Virginia 59
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Vermont 39
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Washington 29
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Wisconsin 17
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
West Virginia 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Wyoming 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Argentina 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Austria 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bangladesh 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bermuda 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Belgium 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bulgaria 9
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada 17
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
People's Republic of China 4
. . .
Costa Rica 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cyprus 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ecuador 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
England 5
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France 6
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany 6
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Hong Kong 7
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India 5
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Israel 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica 36
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan 8
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Kenya 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea 5
. . . . . . . . . .
Kuwait 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malawi 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Muscat and Oman 1
. . . . . . . . . . .
Nepal 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan 7
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines 5
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Puerto Rico 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russia 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sri Lanka 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Switzerland 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Taiwan 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tanzania 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Thailand 6
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Trinidad and Tobago 7
. . . . . . . .
Turkey 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Vietnam 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Virgin Islands 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Yugoslavia 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Zimbabwe 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
­ 428 ­
PRIZES AND AWARDS--1999-2000
OLMSTED PRIZES--Awarded for excellence in teaching to four secondary school teachers nominated by the
Williams Class of 2000. These prizes were established in 1984 through the estate of George Olmsted, Jr.,
1924. Peter F. C. Armstrong,Iolani School, Honolulu, Hawaii; Dr. Sharon Erickson Harman,Moorefield
High School, Moorefield, West Virginia; Thomas P. Keelan, The Culver Academies, Culver, Indiana;
Shawn J. Mintek, Franklin High School, Seattle, Washington.
Fellowships Awarded by Williams College in 1999-2000
HORACE F. CLARK, CLASS OF 1833, FELLOWSHIP. Lili Christine Filip '00.
CLASS OF 1945 STUDENTWORLDFELLOWSHIP. Jennifer A. Abrego '01, Karen E. Allen '01, Camille S. Burnett
'01, NogaChlamtac'01,MichaelL.Cooper'01,CatherineE.Doe'01,MayaL.Kapoor '01,SonyaRavin-
dranath '01, Robert Rivas, Jr. '01, Elena M. Traister '01.
FRANCISSESSIONSHUTCHINS,CLASS OF 1900,FELLOWSHIPPRIZE. Biniam Gebre '00, Medha Jayant Kirtane '00.
HUBBARDHUTCHINSON,CLASS OF 1917,MEMORIALFELLOWSHIPS. Yung-En Chen '00,Andrea Luigi Mazzariello
'00, Will James Rawls '00, Laura Susan Trice '00.
CHARLES BRIDGEN LANSING, 1829, FELLOWSHIP IN LATIN AND GREEK. Stephen A. Floyd '02.
NATHANIEL M. LAWRENCE TRAVELING FELLOWSHIP
. Shirin A. Fozi '01, Julia M. Goren '01.
RUCHMAN STUDENT FELLOWSHIPS. Rebecca L. Hinyard '01, Elisa T. Beller '01.
RUTH SCOTT SANFORD MEMORIAL FELLOWSHIP IN THEATRE. David R. Ticehurst '03.
DR. HERCHEL SMITH FELLOWSHIPS. Catherine Jean Nicholson '00 , Amish Ajit Shah '00, Max McMeekin
Weinstein '00.
STEPHEN H. TYNG AND STEPHEN H. TYNG, JR. FOUNDATION FELLOWSHIP. Wendy Love Anderson '96, Dayo N.
Mitchell '97, Megan M. Moore '98, Kevin P. Montee '99, Joseph J. Busnego '00.
WILLIAMSTEACHINGFELLOWSHIP, SUNYAT-SENUNIVERSITY OFMEDICALSCIENCES. Vanessa Ursula Alvarez '00.
WILLIAMSTEACHINGFELLOWSHIP, UNITEDCOLLEGE,CHINESE UNIVERSITY OF HONGKONG. Elizabeth Claire Hoyt
'00.
ROBERT G. WILMERS, JR. '90, MEMORIAL SUMMER TRAVEL ABROAD FELLOWHIP. Daniel A. Auerbach '01,
Elizabeth G.Berg'01,LisaN.Brodsky '01,Brian R. Conners'01, JoshuaS. Easter'01, ShirinA. Fozi'01,
Pelagia I. Ivanova '01, Elizabeth C. H. Lee '01, Shawn H. Song '01, Kristine E. Taylor '01.
National Fellowships Awarded in 1999-2000
AMERICAN METEOROLOGICAL SOCIETY GRADUATE FELLOWSHIP Michael Drew Hurwitz '00.
FULBRIGHT GRANT. Amanda May Leach '00, Tanya Nageen Pegahi '00, Jillian Annice Pesin '00, Michael
Vernon Ramberg '00, Kevin Daniel Russell '00, Matthew Simon Toth '00.
BARRY M. GOLDWATER SCHOLARSHIP. Jason I. Pack '02, Paul D. Friedberg '01.
NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION FELLOWSHIPS. Jillian Pesin '00.
RHODES SCHOLARSHIP Jason Troy Stanley '00.
THOMAS J. WATSON FELLOWSHIP. Allison Sibley Michael '00, Albert Roy Leatherman II '00.
General Prizes Awarded in 1999-2000
JOHN SABIN ADRIENCE,
CLASS OF 1882, PRIZE IN CHEMISTRY. Amish Ajit Shah '00.
CHARLES R. ALBERTI, CLASS OF 1919, AWARD. Peter Jacobs Eyre '00.
ROBERT G. BARROW MEMORIAL PRIZE FOR MUSIC COMPOSITION. Kenric Omar Taylor '00.
THE MICHAEL DAVITT BELL PRIZE. Honey Michelle Phillips '00.
ERASTUSC.BENEDICT,CLASS OF 1821,PRIZES. (Biology) FirstPrize:Erin Lane Davies'00,Second Prize:Ran-
dall Lee Linquist '00; (French) First Prize: Allison Kay Litten '00, Second Prize: Meadow Marie Linn '00;
(German) AmandaMayLeach'00; (Greek)FirstPrize:CarolynShank'02,SecondPrize: JuliaSnyder'02;
(History) First Prize: Elizabeth Clelland Hutton '00, Second Prize: Catherine Anne Williams '00; (Latin)
First Prize: Hunter Greene '02, Second Prize: Jeff Garland '03.
GAIUSC.BOLIN,CLASS OF 1889,ESSAYPRIZE INAFRO-AMERICANSTUDIES. Adrienne MichelleDenson'00, Zelle
Akua Bonney '00.
RUSSELL H. BOSTERT THESIS PRIZE IN HISTORY
. Catherine Anne Williams '00.
KENNETH L. BROWN, CLASS OF 1947, PRIZE IN AMERICAN STUDIES. Jane Blair Vaughn '00.
STERLING A. BROWN,CLASS OF 1922, CITIZENSHIP PRIZES. Bouisseau Michael Woltz, Jr '00.
THE BULLOCK POETRY PRIZE OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF POETS. Laura Susan Trice '00.
W. MARRIOTT CANBY, CLASS OF 1891, ATHLETIC SCHOLARSHIP PRIZE. Rebecca Tamar Cover '00.
DAVID TAGGART CLARK PRIZE IN LATIN. Karl S. Remsen '03.
WILLIAMS COLLEGE COMMUNITY BUILDER OF THE YEAR. Medha Jayant Kirtane '00.
JAMESBRONSONCONANTANDNATHANRUSSELLHARRINGTON,CLASSOF 1893,PRIZE INBIOLOGY. Andrew Harris
Werbrock '00.
HENRY RUTGERS CONGER, CLASS OF 1899, MEMORIAL LITERARY PRIZE. Laura Susan Trice '00.
DORIS DEKEYSERLINGK PRIZE IN RUSSIAN. Laura Susan Trice '00.
GARRETT WRIGHT DEVRIES, CLASS OF 1932, MEMORIAL PRIZE IN SPANISH. Marissa Lyn Ambio '00.
DEWEY PRIZE. Will James Rawls '00.
JEAN DONATI STUDENT EMPLOYEE AWARD IN MUSIC. Jason Christopher Rutledge Oraker '00, Joshua Starrett
Pierson '00.
HENRY A. DWIGHT, CLASS OF 1829, BOTANICAL PRIZE. Aya Elaine Reiss '00.
ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES COMMITTEE AWARD Ethan Barrett Plunkett '00.
FREEMAN FOOTE PRIZE IN GEOLOGY. Taylor Frances Schildgen '00.
Prizes and Awards
­ 429 ­
ROBERT W. FRIEDRICHS AWARD IN SOCIOLOGY. Meg Elizabeth Davis '00.
GILBERT W. GABRIEL, CLASS OF 1912, MEMORIAL PRIZE IN THEATRE. Julia Rachel Sandy '00.
SAMGOLDBERGPRIZES. (Computer Science) Jason BeckerHealy;(Mathematics)DouglasBertrandMarshall
III '00.
FRANK C. GOODRICH 1945 AWARD IN CHEMISTRY
. Karell Simone Aiken '00, Michelle Beth Dunn '00.
WILLIAM C. GRANT, JR. PRIZE IN BIOLOGY. Joshua Howard Goldstein '00.
ARTHURB.GRAVES,CLASS OF 1858,ESSAYPRIZES. (Art) Rachel Kate Oberter '00; (Economics) Brian Andrew
Shaub '00; (History) Peter Lockwood Adams '00; (Philosophy) Max McMeekin Weinstein '00, Douglas
Bertrand Marshall III '00; (Political Science) Jonathan Colin Plowman '00; (Religion) Jon Wesley Fore-
man '00, Mariya Jean Hodge '00.
THE GRAVESPRIZE FORDELIVERY OFESSAY. Matthew Joshua Fineman '00, Megan Hayes Fredericks '00, Jen-
nifer Lauren Heller '00, Benjamin Clarke Smeal '00.
GROSVENOR MEMORIAL CUP
. Erin Louise Morrissette '00.
FREDERICK C. HAGEDORN, JR., CLASS OF 1971, PREMEDICAL PRIZE. Stephen Kim '00.
THOMAS G. HARDIE III, CLASS OF 1978, PRIZE IN ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES. Sarah Elizabeth Connolly '00.
C. DAVID HARRIS, JR., CLASS OF 1963, PRIZE IN POLITICAL SCIENCE. Allen Wai Wong '00.
WILLARD E. HOYT, JR., CLASS OF 1923, MEMORIAL SCHOLAR ATHLETE PRIZE. Robert Charles Blackstone '00.
ARTHUR C. KAUFMANN, CLASS OF 1899, PRIZE IN ENGLISH. Catherine Jean Nicholson '00.
MUHAMMAD KENYATTA, CLASS OF 1966, COMMUNITY SERVICE PRIZE. Charlene Armstardetta Clarke '00.
WILLIAMW.KLEINHANDLERPRIZEFOREXCELLENCEINMUSIC. Nathaniel AdamsBessey'00, RichardJamesGia-
russo'00,AlfonsoRodrigoGonzalesdelRiego'00,JasonBeckerHealy'00,AndreaLuigiMazzariello'00,
Adam Tahir Mirza '00.
RICHARD KROUSE PRIZE IN POLITICAL SCIENCE. Yolanda Davila '00, Michael Vernon Ramberg '00.
JACK LARNED, CLASS OF 1942, INTERNATIONAL MANAGEMENT PRIZE. Kamiljon Tagaevich Akramov M.A.D.E.
RICHARD LATHERS, CLASS OF 1877, ESSAY PRIZE IN GOVERNMENT. Alexander Veytsel '00.
LINENGRANT FORSUMMERTRAVEL IN ASIA. JulianPaulGreen'00,NishantNayyar'02, GeraldineY
. Shen'01,
Nugyek A. Payano '03, Joshua C. Wakeham '01, Elizabeth C. H. Lee '01, Kristen Sullivan '01.
LINEN SENIOR PRIZES IN ASIAN STUDIES. (Asian Studies) Catherine Ann Williams '00; (Chinese) Jonathan
Mark Isaacs '00; (Japanese) Owen Austin Cooney '00.
H. GANSE LITTLE, JR. PRIZE IN RELIGION. Catherine Jean Nicholson '00.
DAVID N. MAJOR, CLASS OF 1981, PRIZE IN GEOLOGY. Taylor Frances Schildgen '00.
WILLIAMS COLLEGE MULTICULTURAL CENTER STUDENT OF THE YEARS. Boisseau Michael Woltz, Jr. '00.
LEVERETT MEARS PRIZE IN CHEMISTRY
. Veena Mandava '00.
WILLIS I. MILHAM PRIZE IN ASTRONOMY. Rebecca Tamar Cover '00, Sara Kate May '00.
JOHN W. MILLER PRIZE IN PHILOSOPHY. Robert Andrew Wiygul '00.
MORGAN PRIZE IN MATHEMATICS. Dawn Christiana Nelson '00.
JAMES ORTON AWARD IN ANTHROPOLOGY
. Robert Christopher Foxwell '00.
FREDERICK M. PEYSER PRIZE IN PAINTING. Andrew Jonathan Gow '00.
Ursula Prescott Essay Prize in Political Science. Todd Robert Stiefler '00
JAMES LATHROP RICE, CLASS OF 1854, PRIZES IN CLASSICAL LANGUAGES. Grace Martha Pritchard '00, Max
McMeekin Weinstein '00.
ROBERT F.ROSENBURG AWARD FOREXCELLENCEIN MATHEMATICS. Tegan ElyzeCheslack-Postava '00,Anthony
M. Ndirango '00.
ROBERT F. ROSENBURG AWARD FOR EXCELLENCE IN ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES. Aya Elaine Reiss '00.
MURIEL B. ROWE PRIZE. Michael Vernon Ramberg '00.
SIDNEY A. SABBETH PRIZE IN POLITICAL ECONOMY. DoHyun Tony Chung '00.
BRUCE SANDERSON, CLASS OF 1956, PRIZE IN ARCHITECTURE. Meera Arun Deean '00.
RUTH SCOTT SANFORD MEMORIAL PRIZE IN THEATRE. Nancy Marie Moeur '00.
SCHEFFEY ENVIRONMENTAL LEADERSHIP AWARD KATHERINE BIRNIE '00.
ROBERT C. L. SCOTT ESSAY PRIZE IN HISTORY. Robert Andrew Wiygul '00.
ROBERT C. L. SCOTT PRIZE FOR GRADUATE STUDY IN HISTORY. Lily Christine Filip '00..
SENTINELS OF THE REPUBLIC ADVANCED STUDY PRIZE. Joel M. Iams '01, Daniel E. Matro '01.
SENTINELS OF THE REPUBLIC ESSAY PRIZE IN GOVERNMENT. Brian M. McDonnell '01.
EDWARD GOULD SHUMWAY, CLASS OF 1871, PRIZE IN ENGLISH. Grace Martha Pritchard '00, Meghan Amanda
Freeman '00.
JAMES F. SKINNER PRIZE IN CHEMISTRY. Jeffrey David Roizen '00.
ELIZUR SMITH RHETORICAL PRIZE. Robert Andrew Wiygul '00.
HOWARD P. STABLER PRIZE IN PHYSICS. Mark Robert Acton '00.
SHIRLEY STANTON PRIZE IN MUSIC. Richard James Giarusso '00.
STANLEY R. STRAUSS, CLASS OF 1936, PRIZE IN ENGLISH. Rebecca Ann Young '00.
WILLIAM BRADFORD TURNER, CLASS OF 1914, CITIZENSHIP PRIZE. Albert Roy Leatherman, III '00.
WILLIAM BRADFORD TURNER, CLASS OF 1914, PRIZE IN AMERICAN HISTORY. Jessica Danielle Coffin '00.
A.V.W. VAN VECHTEN, CLASS OF 1847, PRIZE FOR EXTEMPORANEOUS SPEAKING. Joshua Kelner '01.
LASZLO G. VERSENYI MEMORIAL PRIZE. Max McMeekin Weinstein '00.
BENJAMIN B. WAINWRIGHT, CLASS OF 1920, PRIZE IN ENGLISH. Elizabeth Clelland Hutton '00.
HAROLD H. WARREN PRIZE IN CHEMISTRY. Christopher E. Goggin '02
DAVID A. WELLS PRIZE IN POLITICAL ECONOMY
. Brendan Nelson '00.
KARLE.WESTON,CLASS OF 1896,PRIZES FORDISTINCTION INART. (Art History)Amanda BouvirEdmonds;(Art
Studio) Ji-Eun Rim '00.
WITTE PROBLEM SOLVING AWARD.
Thomas Roy Fleming '00.
Prizes and Awards
­ 430 ­
Athletic Prizes Awarded in 1999-2000
FRANCIS E. BOWKER, JR. SWIMMING PRIZE. (Men) Seth B. Borland '03.
JAMES R. BRIGGS '60 BASEBALL AWARD. F. Norman Liversidge '00.
BELVIDERE BROOKS FOOTBALL MEDAL. Sean P. Keenan '00.
BRZEZINSKI TRACK PRIZE. (Women) Melissa J. Murphy '00.
J. EDWIN BULLOCK WRESTLING TROPHY. (Men) Christopher M. Sweatman '00.
CANBY ATHLETIC SCHOLARSHIP PRIZE. (Women) Rebecca T. Cover '00.
CLASS OF 1925 WOMEN'S SCHOLAR ATHLETE AWARD. Tara R. Crowley '00.
CLASS OF 1981 BASKETBALL AWARD. (Women) Rebecca E. Brooks '00.
CLASS OF 1986 MOST IMPROVED LACROSSE PLAYER AWARD. (Men) Graham Davidson '01.
CLASS OF1996 MOSTIMPROVEDLACROSSE PLAYERAWARD. (Women) Sarah D. Commito '01, Mary B. Venter
'02.
DR. EDWARD J. COUGHLIN, JR. BOWL. (Football) John Berry '00.
DANIEL A. CREEM MEMORIAL TRACK PRIZE. (Men) Matthew R. Campanelli '00.
BRIAN DAWE AWARD. (Men's Crew) Emily E. Boer '00.
DR. I. S. DRIBBEN, CLASS OF 1924, AWARD. (Golf) Taylor A. McKinley '00.
DUAL MEET HIGH POINT TROPHY
. (Women's Swimming) Cristin L. Brennan '02.
HANK N. FLYNT, JR. MEN'S FIRST-YEAR PLAYER SOCCER AWARD. Robert W. Kirsher '03.
HANK N. FLYNT, JR. WOMEN'S FIRST-YEAR PLAYER SOCCER AWARD. Trisha M. Barbosa '02, Stacey L. Starner
'03.
FOX MEMORIAL SOCCER TROPHY. (Men) Neal Appleman '00.
HOOP GROUP PURPLE & GOLD AWARD.
(Women) Sally-Thomas Daigneault '00.
HOOP GROUP PURPLE & GOLD AWARD.
(Men) David J. Seward '00.
WILLARD E. HOYT 1923 MEMORIAL AWARD. (Men) Robert C. Blackstone '00.
TORRENCE M. HUNT '44 TENNIS AWARD. (Men) Eric R. Hasenauer '00.
NICKELS W. HUSTON MEMORIAL HOCKEY AWARD. Wesley G. Fox '03, William R. Gilchrist '03.
LEE F. JACKSON LEADERSHIP AWARD. (Men) Robert C. Blackstone '00.
LEE F. JACKSON LEADERSHIP AWARD. (Women) Shannon M. Mark '00.
ROBERT W. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL AWARD. (Baseball) Michael A. Paolercio '00.
KIELER IMPROVEMENT AWARD. (Men's Squash) Matthew A. Haldeman '02.
MARYLAND ALUMNI MOST VALUABLE PLAYER AWARD. (Men) John H. Moorhead Jr. '00.
MARYLAND ALUMNI MOST VALUABLE PLAYER AWARD. (Women) Catherine L. Shortsleeve '00.
CHRIS LARSON MASON FIELD HOCKEY AWARD. (Women) Robin C. Severud '00.
WILLIAM E. MCCORMICK COACH'S AWARD. Robert R. Hodge '00, Chad M. Ogiba '00.
ROBERT B. MUIR MEN'S SWIMMING TROPHY. Chris Wendell '00.
ROBERT B. MUIR WOMEN'S SWIMMING TROPHY. Elizabeth L. Boyd '00.
OARSWOMAN OF THE YEAR IZZY S. LOWELL '02.
FRANKLIN F.
OLMSTED MEMORIAL AWARD. (CROSS-COUNTRY MEN) SHAD M. MILLER '00.
ANTHONY PLANSKY TRACK AWARD. Jason A. Mirach '01.
LEONARD S. PRINCE MEMORIAL SWIMMING PRIZE. (Women) Elizabeth L. Strokes '03.
PURPLE KEY TROPHY. (Men) David B. Haimson '00.
PURPLE KEY TROPHY. (Women) Rebecca E. Brooks '00.
MICHAEL D. RAKOV MEMORIAL AWARD. (Football) Wyeth P. Lynch '00.
PAUL B. RICHARDSON SWIMMING TROPHY. (Men) Cyrus B. King '00.
ROCKWOOD TENNIS CUP. (Men) Joshua D. Lefkowitz '02.
CHARLES DEWOODY SALMON AWARD. (Football) James M. Kingsley '02.
ARTHUR J. SANTRY, JR. '41 LACROSSE AWARD. (Men) Nick A. Weisser '00.
SCRIBNER MEMORIAL TENNIS TROPHY. (Men) Peter R.C. Stein '00.
EDWARD S. SHAW '62 MEMORIAL SQUASH TROPHY. (Men) Robert T. Howell III '00, Jeffrey D. Roizen '00.
JOHN A. SHAW AWARD. (Men's Crew) Geordie G. McClelland '00.
CAROL GIRARD SIMON SPORTSMANSHIP AWARD. (Men's Tennis) Joshua D. Lefkowitz '00.
WILLIAM E. SIMON IMPROVEMENT AWARD. (Men's Tennis) Kurt H. Palmer '02.
SIMON MOST IMPROVED SQUASH PLAYER AWARD. (Women) Selma Kikic '02.
SQUASH RACQUETS PRIZE. (Men) Parth P. Doshi '03.
ROBERT L. STONE AWARD. (Women) Julianne H. Anderson '00, C. Morgan Heintz '00.
SHEILA M. STONE AWARD. (Women) Kate M. Bishop '00, Kristen M. Lee '01.
TEAM OF 1982 WOMEN'S VOLLEYBALL AWARD. Katie M. Ford '00.
OSWALD TOWER BASKETBALL AWARD. (Men) James M. Sheehy '00.
DOROTHY TOWNE AWARD. (Women's Track) Tara R. Crowley '00.
RALPH J. TOWNSEND SKI TROPHY. (Men) Peter J. Spina '00.
WOMEN'S ALUMNAE SKIING AWARD. Helena A. Johnson '00.
WOMEN'S ALUMNAE SOCCER AWARD. Ann M. Brophy '00.
WOMEN'S CREW--OUTSTANDING SENIOR OARSWOMAN. Sarah-Kate May '00.
WOMEN'S HOCKEY MOST IMPROVED AWARD. Amanda C. Weber '02.
WOMEN'S HOCKEY MOST VALUABLE PLAYER AWARD. Catherine L. Shortsleeve '00, Alexis J. Scott '00.
WOMEN'S LACROSSE AWARD. Meghan A. Cleary '00.
WOMEN'S SQUASH AWARD. Megan M. Doherty '00.
WOMEN'S 25TH ANNIVERSARY AWARD. Ann M. Brophy '00.
YOUNG-JAY HOCKEY TROPHY. David B. Haimson '00, David Carrillo '00.
INDEX OF TOPICS
­ 431 ­
Academic Advising, 21
Academic Honesty, Statement of, 22-23
Academic Requirements, 8-12, 18
Academic Standards and Regulations, 16-20
Administration, Offices of, 415-421
Advanced Placement, 12
Advisors, Special Faculty, 413
African and Middle-Eastern Studies, Courses in,
46-47
African-American Studies, Courses in, 47-49
American Maritime Studies, See Williams-Mystic
Maritime Studies Program
American Studies, Courses in, 49-57
Anthropology and Sociology, Courses in, 57-69
Arabic, Courses in, 140
Art, Courses in, 69-92
Asian Studies, Courses in, 92
Asterisks, Courses with, 44
Astronomy, Courses in, 99-105
Athletic Coaches, 410
Attendance, 16
Bachelor of Arts, 8-12
Degrees Conferred, 422-426
Bills, College, Payment of, 24-25
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 105-107
Biology, Courses in, 107-114
Calendar, College, See Inside Back Cover
Center for Development Economics, 32, 152-153
Certificate in European Languages, 12
French, 309
German, 187
Russian, 319-320
Spanish, 315
Chemistry, Courses in, 115-124
Chinese, Courses in, 95-97
Classics, Courses in, 124-131
Clusters, 14-15
Jewish Studies, 223
Latin-American Studies, 224
Leadership Studies, 224-225
Materials Science Studies, 229
Performance Studies, 252
Co-ordinate Programs, 12
Combined Program in Liberal Arts and
Engineering, 15, 30
Committees:
Faculty-Student, 412-413
Trustee, 396
Computer Science, Courses in, 131-138
Contract Major, 11, 138-139
Correspondence, Directions for, See Inside Front
Cover
Course Change Period, 16
Course Load, 16
Course Numbering System, 43
Courses, 43-345
Requirements for Graduation, 8-12, 18
Courses of Instruction, 43-338
Critical Languages, Courses in, 139-140
Cross-enrollment programs, 15
Curriculum, 8-12
Dean's List, 19
Deficiencies, 18
Degree, Requirements for, 8-12, 18
Degrees:
Awarding of, 20
Bachelor of Arts, 8-12
Conferred, 422-426
Distinction, 20
Honors, 13
Master of Arts in Development Economics, 32
Master of Arts in History of Art, 32
Distinctive Undergraduate Scholarships, 27-28
Distribution Requirements, 8-10
Divisions, 8-10
Early Concentration Rule, 43
Economics, Courses in, 140-153
Engineering, Combined Program in, 15, 30
English, Courses in, 153-173
Enrollment, Statistics on, 427
Environmental Studies, Courses in, 174-181
Exchange Programs, 15, 42
Expenses, 24
Experimental and Cross-Disciplinary Studies,
Interdepartmental Program for, 221-222
Extensions, Academic, 17-18
Extracurricular Activities, Eligibility for, 19
Faculty, 399-409
Emeriti, 397-398
Faculty-Student Committees, 412-413
Fees, College, Payment of, 24-25
Fellowships and Prizes for Graduate Study, 41-42
Prizes Awarded, 428
Fifth Course, 17
Financial Aid, 27
First-Year Residential Seminar, 181
First-Year Student "W" Rule, 16
First-Year Student Warnings, 17
French:
Certificate in, 309
Courses in, 308-314
Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Studies, 337
Geosciences, Courses in, 181-186
German:
Certificate in, 187
Courses in, 186-190
Grading System and Records, 17
Graduate Programs at Williams
Master of Arts in Development Economics, 32,
152-153
Master of Arts in History of Art, 32, 88-92
Graduate Study
Fellowships and Prizes for, 41-42
Preparation for, 29-31
--Business Administration, 29-30
--Engineering, 30
--Health Professions, 30-31
--Law, 30
--Religious Study, 31
--Teaching and Research, 31
--Visual Arts, 29
Graduation Rate, 427
Graduation Requirements, 8-12, 17, 18
Graduation with Distinction, 20
Greek, Courses in, 127-308
Guangzhou, 42
Index
­ 432 ­
Health Professions Advising, 30-31
Hebrew, Courses in, 140
Hindi, Courses in, 140
History, Courses in, 194-219
History of Science, Courses in, 219-221
History of the College, 3-5
Hong Kong Program, 42
Honor System, 22-23
Honors Program, 13
Independent Study, 13
Independent Study, Winter Study, 346
Interdepartmental Program for Experimental and
Cross-Disciplinary Studies, 221-222
International and Global Studies, 338
Italian, Courses in, 314-315
Japanese, Courses in, 98-99
Jewish Studies, 223
Korean, Courses in, 140
Languages and the Arts, Division of, 8-10
Latin-American Studies, 224
Latin, Courses in, 129-131
Leadership Studies, 224-225
Libraries, 411
Linguistics, Courses in, 226
Literary Studies, Courses in, 226-229
Major, 11
Co-ordinate Programs, 12
Completion of, 19
Contract Major, 11
Double Major, 11
Eligibility for, 19
Fields, 11
General Structure, 11
Major Exercise, 19
Maritime Studies Program, See Williams-Mystic
Maritime Studies Program
Master of Arts in Development Economics, 32,
152-153
Degrees Conferred, 422
Master of Arts in History of Art, 32, 88-92
Degrees Conferred, 422
Materials Science Studies, 229
Mathematics and Statistics, Courses in, 230-240
Mead, The George J. Fund, 42
Medieval Studies, 337
Mission and Objectives, 6-7
Music, Courses in, 240-250
Mystic Program, See Williams-Mystic Maritime
Studies Program
99's, 346
National Theatre Institute, 15, 330
Neuroscience, Courses in, 250-251
Nondiscrimination, Statement of, 2
Offices of Administration, 415-421
Oxford Programme, See Williams-Oxford
Programme
Parallel Courses, 43
Pass-Fail Option, 17
Peoples and Cultures:
Courses Offered, 334-337
Distribution Requirement, 9, 44
Performance Studies, 252
Phi Beta Kappa Society, 19-20
Philosophy, Courses in, 253-259
Physical Education Requirement, 12
Physical Education, Athletics, and Recreation, 259
Physics, Courses in, 260-265
Plagiarism, 22-23
Political and Economic Philosophy, 338
Political Economy, Courses in, 265-266
Political Science, Courses in, 267-288
Premedical Advising, 30-31
Presidents, List of, 395
Prizes and Awards, 33-42
Awarded, 428-430
Psychology, Courses in, 288-295
Quantitative Studies, 232
Readmission to College, 19
Records and Grading System, 17
Refunds, 19, 26
Registration, 16, 43
Regulations, Academic, 16-20
Religion, Courses in, 295-308
Requirements, Academic, 8-12, 18
Residence Requirement, 8
Romance Languages, Courses in, 308-319
Russian:
Certificate in, 319-320
Courses in, 319-323
Science and Mathematics, Division of, 8-10
Science and Technology Studies, 323-325
Separation for Low Scholarship, 18
Sequence Courses, 43
Social Studies, Division of, 8-10
Sociology, Courses in, See Anthropology and
Sociology
Spanish:
Certificate in, 315
Courses in, 315-319
Student-Initiated Courses, 13, 44
Students Enrolled, 427
Study Away From Williams, 14-15, 44
Swahili, Courses in, 140
Theatre, Courses in, 325-330
Trustees, 395
Tutorial Program, 13-14, 45-46
Warnings, First-Year Student, 17
Williams-Mystic Maritime Studies Program, 14,
339-340
Williams-in-Hong Kong, 42
Williams-Oxford Programme, 14, 340-345
Winter Study, 8, 17
Course Offerings, 346-394
Independent Study (99's), 346
Withdrawal:
From a Course, 16
From the College, 19
Women's and Gender Studies, Courses in, 331-339
Writing-Intensive Courses, 44
Courses Offered, 338-339
CALENDAR 2000-2001
2000
September 3-6 Sunday through Wednesday First Days
September 6 Wednesday First Year Student Advising
September 7 Thursday, 8:30 a.m. Fall Semester classes begin
September 23 Saturday Convocation
Sept./Oct. TBA Friday Mountain Day
October 16-17 Monday & Tuesday Fall Reading Period
October 27-29 Friday through Sunday First Year Family Days
November 4 Saturday Homecoming
November 21 Tuesday, 9:30 p.m. Thanksgiving Recess begins
November 27 Monday, 8:00 a.m. Thanksgiving Recess ends
December 8 Friday, 3:50 p.m. Fall Semester classes end
December 9-12 Saturday through Tuesday Reading Period
December 13-18 Wednesday through Monday Final Examinations
December 18 Monday, 4:00 p.m. Vacation begins
2001
January 3 Wednesday, 9:00 a.m. Winter Study Period begins
January 26 Friday, 3:50 p.m. Winter Study Period ends
February 1 Thursday, 8:30 a.m. Spring Semester classes begin
February 16-17 Friday & Saturday College Holidays (Winter Carnival)
March 16 Friday, 3:50 p.m. Spring Recess begins
April 2 Monday, 8:00 a.m. Spring Recess ends
April 27-29 Friday through Sunday Spring Family Days
May 11 Friday, 3:50 p.m. Spring Semester classes end
May 12-15 Saturday through Tuesday Reading Period
May 16-21 Wednesday through Monday Final Examinations
June 2 Saturday Class Day
June 2 Saturday Baccalaureate Service
June 3 Sunday, 10:00 a.m. Commencement
June 7-10 Thursday through Sunday Alumni Reunions
NUMBER OF CLASS MEETINGS
Fall Semester
Spring Semester
Evenings
M,W,F
Mornings Afternoons
T,Th M,Th W T,F T
36
36
25
25
25
25
12
12
24
24
12
12
The Winter Study Period covers 24 calendar days.
NOTE: A recent enactment of the Massachusetts General Court provides: "Any student...who is unable, because of his religious beliefs, to
attend classes or to participate in any examination, study, or work requirement on a particular day shall be excused from any
such...requirement, and shall be provided an opportunity to make up such...requirement which he may have missed because of
such absence...provided, however, that such makeup examination or work shall not create an unreasonable burden upon such
school...No adverse or prejudicial effects shall result to any student because of his availing himself of the provisions of this sec-
tion."
Approved by the Faculty, May 16, 1984
Approved by the Trustees, June 2, 1984
