Williams College
Bulletin
2011-2012
September 7, 2011 Edition
1
___________________________
The post office address of the College is Williamstown, Massachusetts 01267. The
telephone number is (413) 597-3131.
Correspondence concerning matters of general interest to the College should be
addressed to the President.
Other inquiries should be addressed to the officers named below:
Academic and student affairs Dean of the College
Admission of students Director of Admission
Alumni matters Director of Alumni Relations
Business matters Controller
Catalogs and brochures Director of Admission
Financial aid Director of Financial Aid
Graduate study in art history Director of Master of Arts in
Art History
Graduate study in policy economics Chair of Master of Arts in
Policy Economics
Transcripts and records Registrar
___________________________
WILLIAMS COLLEGE
DIRECTIONS FOR CORRESPONDENCE
COURSE CATALOG SEPTEMBER 2011
BULLETIN
___________________________
Published by Williams College, Hopkins Hall, 880 Main Street, Williamstown,
Massachusetts, 01267.
The corporate name of the College is
The President and Trustees of Williams College.
Williams College is accredited by the
New England Association of Schools and Colleges.
1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
HISTORY OF THE COLLEGE 3
MISSION AND PURPOSES 5
THE CURRICULUM 6
ACADEMIC ADVISING 16
ACADEMIC HONESTY 17
EXPENSES 18
ENDOWED SCHOLARSHIPS AND TUTORIALS 20
PREPARATION FOR GRADUATE AND PROFESSIONAL STUDY 21
GRADUATE PROGRAMS AT WILLIAMS 23
PRIZES AND AWARDS 24
COURSES OF INSTRUCTION 2011-2012 31
AFRICANA STUDIES (Div. II) 31
AMERICAN STUDIES (Div. II) 37
ANTHROPOLOGY AND SOCIOLOGY (Div. II) 44
ARABIC STUDIES (Div. I) 52
ART (Div. I) 56
ASIAN STUDIES (Div. I & II, see explanation below) 74
COURSES IN CHINESE (Div. I) 76
COURSES IN JAPANESE (Div. I) 79
ASTRONOMY (Div. III) 81
ASTRONOMY COURSES 83
BIOCHEMISTRY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY (Div. III) 85
BIOINFORMATICS, GENOMICS, AND PROTEOMICS 87
BIOLOGY (Div. III) 87
CHEMISTRY (Div. III) 93
CLASSICS (Div. I) 98
COGNITIVE SCIENCE (Div. II) 103
COMPARATIVE LITERATURE (Div. I) 104
COMPUTER SCIENCE (Div. III) 111
CONTRACT MAJOR 115
CRITICAL LANGUAGES (Div. I) 116
DANCE (Div I) 117
ECONOMICS (Div. II) 118
ENGLISH (Div. I) 129
ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES 143
FIRST-YEAR RESIDENTIAL SEMINAR 151
GEOSCIENCES (Div. III) 151
GERMAN (Div. I) 155
HISTORY (Div. II) 158
HISTORY OF SCIENCE (Div. II & III, see course descriptions) 182
INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES (Div. II, with some exceptions as noted in course descriptions) 183
INTERNATIONAL STUDIES (Div. II) 184
JEWISH STUDIES (Div. II) 187
LATINA/O STUDIES (Div. II) 189
LEADERSHIP STUDIES (Div. II) 194
LEGAL STUDIES (Div. II) 196
MARITIME STUDIES 197
MATERIALS SCIENCE STUDIES 198
MATHEMATICS AND STATISTICS (Div. III) 199
MATHEMATICS COURSES 200
STATISTICS COURSES 205
MUSIC (Div. I) 206
NEUROSCIENCE (Div. III) 216
PERFORMANCE STUDIES 217
PHILOSOPHY (Div. II) 217
PHYSICAL EDUCATION, ATHLETICS, AND RECREATION 227
PHYSICS (Div. III) 227
POLITICAL ECONOMY (Div. II) 231
POLITICAL SCIENCE (Div. II) 233
PSYCHOLOGY (Div. II, with some exceptions as noted in course descriptions) 245
PUBLIC HEALTH 250
RELIGION (Div. II) 251
See French, Italian, Spanish for searchable course listings! 261
ROMANCE LANGUAGES (Div. I) 261
SPANISH 266
RUSSIAN (Div. I) 270
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES (Div. II) 272
SOCIOLOGY (Div. II)--see ANTHROPOLOGY AND SOCIOLOGY 273
STATISTICS (Div. III)--see MATHEMATICS AND STATISTICS 273
WILLIAMS PROGRAM IN TEACHING 273
THEATRE (Div. I) 273
WOMEN'S, GENDER and SEXUALITY STUDIES (Div. II) 278
CRITICAL REASONING AND ANALYTICAL SKILLS (CRAAS) Courses 282
EXPERIENTIAL EDUCATION Courses 282
EXPLORING DIVERSITY INITIATIVE 283
QUANTITATIVE/FORMAL REASONING COURSES 285
THE WILLIAMS TUTORIAL PROGRAM 287
TUTORIALS OFFERED 2011-2012 287
WRITING-INTENSIVE COURSES 288
WILLIAMS-EXETER PROGRAMME AT OXFORD UNIVERSITY 290
WILLIAMS-MYSTIC MARITIME STUDIES PROGRAM 308
WINTER STUDY PROGRAM 309-338
PRESIDENTS OF WILLIAMS 339
FACULTY EMERITI 341
FACULTY 343
COMMITTEES 2011-2012 352
SEXUAL HARASSMENT/DISCRIMINATION ADVISORS 354
OFFICES OF ADMINISTRATION 2011-2012 355
DEGREES CONFERRED JUNE, 2011 363
2
Charles Toomajian
Editor
________________________________
This bulletin contains information that was complete and
accurate at the time of publication. Williams College
reserves the right, however, to make from time to time such
changes in its operations, programs, and activities as the
trustees, faculty, and officers consider appropriate.
Williams College is dedicated to building a di-
verse and inclusive community in which members of
all backgrounds can live, learn and thrive. In com-
pliance with state and federal law, Williams does not
discriminate in admission, employment, or adminis-
tration of its programs and activities on the basis of
race, color, sex, national origin, religion, age, disabili-
ty, marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity
or expression, ancestry, or military service.
The following person has been designated to
handle inquiries concerning the College's non-dis-
crimination policies: Dean of the College, Williams
College, Williamstown, MA (413) 597-4171.
________________________________
3
HISTORY OF THE COLLEGE
The chartering of Williams College in 1793 was an act of faith and certainly an act surpassing the modest intentions of Colonel Ephraim
Williams, for whom the college is named.
Colonel Williams had not intended to found a college. Enroute with his regiment of Massachusetts militia to join the battle with the French
and Indians at Lake George, the Colonel had tarried long enough in Albany to write his last will and testament on July 22, 1755. In it he
bequeathed his residuary estate for the founding and support of a free school in West Township, where for some years he had commanded a
detachment of militia at Fort Massachusetts, farthest outpost of the province. The will stipulated that West Township, then in dispute between
Massachusetts and New York, must fall within Massachusetts and that the name of the township must be changed to Williamstown, if the free
school was to be established at all.
On September 8, 1755, Colonel Williams was killed at the Battle of Lake George. On October 26, 1791, after many delays, fifteen scholars
were admitted to the free school in Williamstown. Within a year the trustees, not content with the original modest design of the founder, were
captivated by the idea of creating a college where, as they put it, "young gentlemen from every part of the Union" might resort for instruction
" in all the branches of useful and polite literature." The proposal was extremely ambitious, to be sure, but ambition was a common American
ailment. England did not develop a third university until the nineteenth century; Williams was the twentyfirst institution of higher learning
to flower in onetime British colonies, the second in Massachusetts, the sixth in New England. On June 22, 1793, the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts granted a charter to Williams College.
I
The bold decision to plant a college in the wilderness betrayed the intentions of Colonel Williams; yet the new vision had been fed by the
same sort of dreams that had led Ephraim Williams to see a school and a comfortable community where only a military outpost had stood.
The early trustees and the legislature of the Commonwealth were to be remembered for their foresight, but in the decades after 1793 they had
reason to acknowledge that the soil they had chosen was stubbornly uncongenialso uncongenial, in fact, that for many years the trustees of
Williams spent more time and energy in trying to close the College than in trying to keep it open.
In 1819 they petitioned to move the college to Northhampton, and in 1821, having been spurned by the legislature, President Zephaniah
Swift Moore took matters into his own hands. Convinced that almost everything about Williams was impossibleits location, its funds, its
enrollmenthe led a group of students over the mountains into the Connecticut Valley. There he became their president once again, at the
struggling new college known as Amherst. As for Williams, one member of the senior class wrote home to his father: "It remains for us to say
whether it shall die suddenly, or whether it shall linger along for two or three years."
In the past the public had come to the support of the institution. A lottery furnished funds essential to the opening of the free school. A
public subscription was the answer of Berkshire County to the threat of removal in 1819. What saved the College in 1821 was the willingness
of the Reverend Edward Dorr Griffin to take the job of president and the determination with which he drew upon the College's reputation for
religious conservatism to collect muchneeded funds. By 1828, the Reverend Griffin could be seen standing in the middle of Main Street,
supervising the construction of a handsome new building, housing a chapel, a library, and classrooms, a testament to his confidence and his
skill. The building is now known as Griffin Hall.
The College which had been taking shape under Griffin and his predecessors was not unlike many other New England colleges where the
classical curriculum and a moral atmosphere served as the basis for training young men for professional life. The college turned out its share
of clergymen, doctors, lawyers, and teachers, serving the needs of Western Massachusetts and surrounding communities in New York and
Vermont. But Williams was not yet a place to which "young gentlemen from every part of the Union" resorted. In fact, Nathaniel Hawthorne,
attending the commencement exercises in 1838, jotted in his notebook some observations on the Williams students he saw there: "Country
graduatesrough, brownfeatured, schoolmasterlooking...A rough hewn, heavy set of fellows from the hills and woods in this neighbor-
hood; unpolished bumpkins, who had grown up as farmerboys."
Williams seldom knew financial security until the end of the nineteenth century. But it did have assets that enabled it to develop into a
prototype of the small New England liberal arts college. Scenery, a reputation for moral soundness, a loyal body of alumni, and a devoted
faculty went a long way toward compensating for inadequate funds.
Of the scenery, Thoreau remarked, after a visit in 1844, "It would be no small advantage if every college were thus located at the base of a
mountain." For Thoreau the location of Williams was "as good at least as one wellendowed professorship."
In the early years the religious reputation of the College depended on the essential orthodoxy of its presidents and faculty. It gathered
strength from the famous episode of the "haystack meeting" in the summer of 1806. Five Williams undergraduates, seeking to continue their
prayers and conversations in spite of a sudden thunderstorm, retired from a grove of trees to the shelter of a nearby haystack, where they were
inspired to launch the great adventure of American foreign missions. The extremely informal ties with the Congregationalists saved it from
the sometimes stifling stranglehold of an organic denominational connection.
During a crisis in the affairs of the College in 1821, a group of alumni met in Williamstown and organized the Society of Alumni, dedicated
to the future welfare of the College. Their action gave Williams the distinction of organizing the first college alumni society in history. Alum-
ni loyalty was rewarded when, in 1868, the College provided for official alumni representation on the board of trustees, an act of recognition
in which only Harvard, among American colleges, anticipated Williams.
II
But essentially the College has built its reputation around teachers and teaching. Mark Hopkins, who was a Williams professor from 1830
to 1887 and president of the College from 1836 to 1872, has become a symbol of this emphasis. In American education Hopkins pioneered in
making the student the center of the educational experience, and he did it so well that one of his former students, U.S. President James A.
Garfield, immortalized his achievement in an aphorism which has passed into the lore of American education: "The ideal college is Mark
Hopkins on one end of a log and a student on the other." The Hopkins tradition has become one of the College's great assets. It has been
perpetuated in the lives of generations of teachers.
Scenery, a reputation for building sound character, loyal but not especially affluent alumni, and devoted teachers could keep the College
open, but like most other colleges Williams did not experience growth and prosperity until the closing decades of the nineteenth century. The
scenery, of course, remained constant, but it developed into an even greater asset as the United States became more urbanized and industrial-
ized. Williams was still a country college; a Massachusetts court decision of 1888 declared that cows owned by the college were tax exempt.
The discovery that businessmen could profit from liberal education sent college enrollments upward as the century drew to a close; now
more Williams alumni were men of affairs, fewer were clergymen. By 1906, of all the colleges in New England, Williams drew the largest
percentage of students from outside New England.
From 1793 through 1870 the Commonwealth of Massachusetts appropriated for Williams College over $150,000, a sum of such impor-
tance that Mark Hopkins himself observed that he did "not see how the College could have got on" without state aid. A new and more depend-
able source of financial support was developed as the century drew to a close. In the 1890's Frederick Ferris Thompson of the Class of 1856
became the first of many individuals to supersede the Commonwealth as the largest benefactor of the College. Ephraim Williams' original
bequest of $9,297 has since grown by additional gifts and bequests to an endowment valued at approximately $1.3 billion.
4
III
Williams moved into the twentieth century firm in its intentions to remain a college, at a time when aspirations toward university status
were unsettling many of the old colleges. It adhered to a curriculum that was designed for undergraduates; it made room for the elective
principle, but it subjected course election to safeguards and controls. The idea of a liberally educated man was not jettisoned in favor of the
widely accepted idea of almost complete student freedom in course election. A survey of the college curriculum in 1925 showed that Wil-
liams had combined the principles of prescription and election, the goals of concentration and distribution, in such a way as to be the only
major American college without any absolutely required courses and without any uncontrolled wideoption electives. The Williams curric-
ulum has continued to evolve, but it has not undergone such a series of major overhauls as characterize curriculums inspired by the popular
educational fancy of the moment. Not having abandoned itself to the elective principle in the nineteenth century, Williams did not need to
rescue itself with the general education principle of the twentieth century.
During its long history much of the life and tone of the college was shaped by students. While the same influence continues, the competi-
tive pressure for admission since World War II has allowed for a new and significant degree of selectivity on the part of the College. Among
the consequences of this change have been a quickening of the intellectual life of the College and a reconsideration of traditions and em-
phases no longer considered appropriate for an institution of liberal learning.
Among the first traditions to go was compulsory religious exercises, abandoned in 1962 after a hundred years of gradual but steady ero-
sion. Voluntary worship in the form of ecumenical chapel services and the activities of student religious organizations carry on another long
tradition. In response to the concern of undergraduate leaders and the faculty and in recognition of the failure of Greek Letter Fraternities to
fulfill adequately objectives consistent with college purpose, the Trustees in 1962 took the first of a series of actions that replaced fraternities
with a residential house system. Williams became, as a result, a much more open community. The decision to become coeducational and the
admission of women to Williams as degree candidates in 1970 have reinforced the spirit of equality and freedom conducive to a climate of
learning.
In this atmosphere of change and heightened purpose the curriculum underwent appropriate transformations, as a careful comparative
study of the yearly catalogues readily shows, leading to the present 414 curriculum and a more flexible and wideranging schedule and
program both on and beyond the campus. Changes in the curriculum included the addition of majors and the introduction of interdisciplinary
programs, along with the expansion of language offerings to include full, fouryear cycles in Chinese and Japanese. Continuing the tradition
of putting the student at the center of the educational experience, Williams in the Fall of 1988 introduced in each department at least one
course taught as a tutorial, in which, typically, pairs of students meet weekly with the professor to discuss a paper, problem set, or work of art
produced by one of the students. By 1992 some 40 percent of the graduating class had experienced at least one tutorial course either in Wil-
liamstown or in the WilliamsOxford program, run in association with Exeter College, Oxford, which provides each year for some 30 Wil-
liams juniors a yearlong immersion in the life of Oxford University.
This curricular expansion, and another in the first decade of this century, reflected, and in part resulted from, the fact that the makeup of the
college community was changing to mirror more closely the growing racial, ethnic, and religious diversity of American society and of the
world more broadly. The percentage of students who identified themselves as members of one or more American minority group or were
overseas citizens rose to 40 percent, of faculty to 22 percent.
At the same time, programming and structures were introduced to student residential life and major projects were completed to enhance
greatly the College's student center, its facilities for theatre and dance, and its office and teaching spaces for faculty.
5
MISSION AND PURPOSES
Williams seeks to provide the finest possible liberal arts education by nurturing in students the academic and civic virtues, and their related
traits of character. Academic virtues include the capacities to explore widely and deeply, think critically, reason empirically, express clearly, and
connect ideas creatively. Civic virtues include commitment to engage both the broad public realm and community life, and the skills to do so
effectively. These virtues, in turn, have associated traits of character. For example, free inquiry requires open-mindedness, and commitment to
community draws on concern for others.
We are committed to our central endeavor of academic excellence in a community of learning that comprises students, faculty, and staff, and
draws on the engagement of alumni and parents. We recruit students from among the most able in the country and abroad and select them for the
academic and personal attributes they can contribute to the educational enterprise, inside and outside the classroom. Our faculty is a highly
talented group of teachers, scholars, and artists committed deeply to the education of our students and to involving them in their efforts to expand
human knowledge and understanding through original research, thought, and artistic expression. Dedicated staff enable this teaching and learn-
ing to take place at the highest possible level, as do the involvement and support of our extraordinarily loyal parents and alumni.
No one can pretend to more than guess at what students now entering college will be called upon to comprehend in the decades ahead. No
training in fixed techniques, no finite knowledge now at hand, no rigid formula can solve problems whose shape we cannot yet define. The most
versatile, the most durable, in an ultimate sense, the most practical knowledge and intellectual resources that we can offer students are the open-
ness, creativity, flexibility, and power of education in the liberal arts.
Toward that end we extend a curriculum that offers wide opportunities for learning, ensures close attention of faculty to students but also
encourages students to learn independently, and reflects the complexity and diversity of the world. We seek to do this in an atmosphere that
nurtures the simple joy of learning as a lifelong habit and commitment.
We place great emphasis on the learning that takes place in the creation of a functioning community: life in the residence halls, expression
through the arts, debates on political issues, leadership in campus governance, exploration of personal identity, pursuit of spiritual and religious
impulses, the challenge of athletics, and direct engagement with human needs, nearby and far away.
To serve well our students and the world, Williams embraces core values such as welcoming and supporting in the College community people
from all segments of our increasingly diverse society and ensuring that College operations are environmentally sustainable.
From this holistic immersion students learn more than they will ever know. Such is the testimony of countless graduates--that their Williams
experience has equipped them to live fuller, more effective lives. Ultimately, the College's greatest mark on the world consists of this: the
contributions our alumni make in their professions, their communities, and their personal lives.
Therefore, we ask all our students to understand that an education at Williams should not be regarded as a privilege destined to create further
privilege, but as a privilege that creates opportunities to serve society at large, and imposes the responsibility to do so.
At the same time, being itself privileged by its history and circumstances, Williams understands its own responsibility to contribute by
thought and example to the world of higher education.
The above description arises on its surface from public statements made by Williams presidents and others associated with the College, from
which it borrows, and at a deeper level from the felt experience of students, faculty, staff, alumni, and parents over many decades. It was
approved by vote of the Board of Trustees on April 14, 2007.
6
THE CURRICULUM
Williams College offers a course of study leading to the degree of Bachelor of Arts. The course requirements prescribe both the number of
courses to be completed and the minimum grade level to be achieved; the curriculum also requires that each student explore several fields of
knowledge and concentrate in one. The full requirements for the degree include meeting the minimum academic standards stated below,
residing at the College, fulfilling the distribution requirement, completing a major, and completing the physical education requirement.
The academic year is divided into two regular semesters and a Winter Study Period. The student takes four courses in each semester and
during January pursues a single program of study on a pass-fail basis.
Winter Study Period, which began in 1967, is intended to provide students and faculty with a dramatically different educational experi-
ence. The differences are in the nature of the courses, the nature of the learning experience, and the change of educational pace and format
from the fall and spring semesters. These differences apply to the faculty and students in several ways: faculty can try out courses with new
subjects and techniques that might, if successful, be used later in the regular terms; they can explore subjects not amenable to inclusion in
regular courses; and they can investigate fields outside their usual areas of expertise. In their academic work, which is graded Honors, Pass,
Perfunctory Pass, or Fail, students can explore new fields at low risk, concentrate on one subject that requires a great deal of time, develop
individual research projects, or work in a different milieu (as interns, for example, or on trips outside Williamstown). In addition, Winter
Study offers studentsan opportunity formore independence and initiativeinaless formalsetting, more opportunity to participate in cultural
events, and an occasion to get to know one another better.
REQUIREMENTS FOR THE BACHELOR OF ARTS DEGREE
Academic Requirement
To be eligible for the Bachelor of Arts degree a student must pass 32 regularly graded semester courses and receive grades of C minus or
higher in at least 19 of those semester courses, pass four Winter Study Projects, fulfill the four-part distribution requirement, complete all
requirements for the major including an average of C minus or higher, and complete the physical education requirement. A student may not
repeat a course for which degree credit has been awarded.
Distribution Requirement
The distribution requirement falls into four parts. Please note that courses used to fulfill these requirements must be regu-
larly graded.
1) DIVISIONAL REQUIREMENT--designed to ensure that in their course of study at Williams, students take an appropriately diverse distribution of
courses across the full range of the curriculum.
For the purposes of the requirement, courses are grouped into three divisions: Division I, Languages and the Arts; Division II, Social Studies; and Division
III, Science and Mathematics. A full listing of the subjects in each division appears below.
Students must complete at least three graded semester courses in each division. Two in each division must be completed by the end of the sophomore year.
No more than two of the courses used to satisfy the requirement may have the same course prefix. The courses must be taken at Williams or at programs
under the direction of Williams College Faculty.
Courses that fulfill the distribution requirement in Division I are designed to help students become better able to respond to the arts sensitively and intelli-
gently by learning the language, whether verbal, visual, or musical, of a significant field of artistic expression. Students learn how to develop the capacity
for critical discussion, to increase awareness of the esthetic and moral issues raised by works of art, and to grow in self-awareness and creativity.
Courses which fulfill the Division II requirement consider the institutions and social structures that human beings have created, whether knowingly or
unknowingly, and which in turn markedly affect their lives. These courses are intended to help the students recognize, analyze, and evaluate these human
structures in order that they may better understand themselves and the social world in which they live.
Courses which fulfill the Division III requirement are intended to provide some of the factual and methodological knowledge needed to be an informed
citizen in a world deeply influenced by scientific thought and technological accomplishment, and to cultivate skill in exact and quantitative reasoning.
Courses with the following designations receive divisional distribution credit as indicated:
DIVISION I. Languages and the Arts
Arabic
Art History
Art Studio
Chinese (except CHIN 223)
Classics
Comparative Literature
Critical Languages
Dance
English
EXPR 245
First-Year Residential Seminar 101
French
German
Greek
INTR 252
Italian
Japanese (except Japanese 217, 218, 321, 486T)
Latin
Literary Studies
Maritime Studies 231
Music
Russian
Spanish
Theatre
DIVISION II. Social Studies
Africana Studies
American Studies
Anthropology
Asian Studies
Chinese 223
Cognitive Science
Economics
Environmental Studies 101, 309, 351
Experimental Studies--EXPR (except 245)
History
History of Science (except HSCI 224)
Interdisciplinary Studies--INTR
(except INTR 160, 223, 225, 315)
International Studies
Japanese 217, 218, 321, 486T
Jewish Studies
Latina/o Studies
Leadership Studies
Legal Studies
Maritime Studies 351, 352
Philosophy
Political Economy
Political Science
Psychology (except PSYC 212, 315, 316, 317T, 318)
Religion
Science and Technology Studies
Sociology
Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies
DIVISION III. Science and Mathematics
Astronomy
Astrophysics
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
Biology
Chemistry
Computer Science
Environmental Studies 102
Geosciences
History of Science 224
INTR 160, 223, 225, 315
Maritime Studies 104, 211, 311
Mathematics
Neuroscience
Physics
Psychology 212, 315, 316, 317T, 318
Statistics
7
Please note: Any Environmental Studies course that is also cross-listed with another subject carries distribution credit of that subject. Other Environ-
mental Studies courses may fulfill distribution requirements as indicated under individual course listings.
Williams-Exeter Programme at Oxford University tutorial courses (WIOX) may be used toward fulfilling the divisional distribution requirement; a
student may earn a maximum of three distribution requirements, with no more than one from each division, for the year. All tutorial courses in the
Williams-Exeter Programme at Oxford University (WIOX) meet the Williams College `W' designation, except for those in studio arts, mathematics,
and the sciences. Courses at the Williams-Mystic Program may also be used toward fulfilling the distribution requirement as appropriate.
2) THE EXPLORING DIVERSITY INITIATIVE REQUIREMENT--Williams College is committed to creating and maintaining a curriculum, faculty,
and student body that reflects and explores a diverse, globalized world and the multi-cultural character of the United States. Courses designated "(D)" in the
College Bulletin are a part of the College's Exploring Diversity Initiative (EDI); they represent our dedication to study groups, cultures, and societies as
they interact with, and challenge, each other. Through such courses, students and faculty also consider the multiple approaches that engage these issues.
Rather than simply focus on the study of specific peoples, cultures, or regions of the world, in the past or present, however, courses fulfilling the require-
ment actively promote a self-conscious and critical engagement with diversity. They urge students to consider the operations of difference in the world and
provide them with the tools to do so. The ultimate aim of the requirement is to lay the groundwork for a life-long engagement with the diverse cultures,
societies, and histories of the United States and the rest of the world.
Courses that comprise the Exploring Diversity Initiative may fall under a variety of categories, including (but not limited to) the following:
1. Comparative Study of Cultures and Societies. These courses focus on the differences and similarities between cultures and societies, and/or on the ways in
which cultures, peoples, and societies have interacted and responded to one another in the past.
2. Empathetic Understanding. These courses explore diverse human feelings, thoughts, and actions by recreating the social, political, cultural, and historical
context of a group in order to imagine why within that context, those beliefs, experiences, and actions of the group emerged.
3. Power and Privilege: These courses link issues of diversity to economic and political power relations, investigating how cultural interaction is influenced by
various structures, institutions, or practices that enable, maintain, or mitigate inequality among different groups.
4. Critical Theorization: These courses focus on ways scholars theorize the possibilities of cross-cultural understanding and interaction; they investigate the
ways that disciplines and paradigms of knowledge both constitute "difference" and are reconfigured by the study of diversity-related questions.
5. Cultural Immersion: In various ways these courses immerse students in another culture and give them the tools with which to understand that culture from
the inside. They include those foreign language courses that explicitly engage in the self-conscious awareness of cultural and societal differences, traditions,
and customs as an integral aspect of language study.
All students are required to complete ONE course that is part of the Exploring Diversity Initiative. Although this course, which may be counted toward the
divisional distribution requirement, may be completed any semester before graduation, students are urged to complete the course by the end of the sopho-
more year.
By immersing students in foreign cultures, and often by furthering language acquisition, study abroad programs can offer a robust way to study cultural
diversity. Students wishing to fulfill the EDI requirement via the completion of a study abroad program must submit a petition before departure proposing
EDI credit for a particular course on their program, for particular experiences (such as independent research or a homestay), or for a specific language
training program they will undertake while abroad. The petition will require students to describe how they believe their proposed study abroad experience
will meet one or more of the goals of the Exploring Diversity Initiative; it will be considered by the Director of the Exploring Diversity Initiative working in
concert with the Committee on Academic Standing.
The one-course EDI requirement must be met by all members of the classes of 2012 and 2013; members of the class of 2011 who have already completed a
course designated "People's and Cultures" do not need to complete an EDI course.
Click here for a list of courses offered in 2011-2012 that meet the requirement.
3) QUANTITATIVE/FORMAL REASONING REQUIREMENT is intended to help students become adept at reasoning mathematically and abstractly.
The ability to apply a formal method to reach conclusions, to use numbers comfortably, and to employ the research tools necessary to analyze data lessen
barriers to carrying out professional and economic roles. Prior to the senior year, all students must pass a Quantitative/Formal Reasoning (QFR) course--
those marked with a "(Q)." Students requiring extra assistance (as assessed during First Days) are normally placed into Mathematics 100/101/102, which is
to be taken before fulfilling the QFR requirement.
The hallmarks of a QFR course are the representation of facts in a language of mathematical symbols and the use of formal rules to obtain a determinate
answer. Primary evaluation in these courses is based on multistep mathematical, statistical, or logical inference (as opposed to descriptive answers). Click
here for a list of courses offered in 2011-2012 that meet the requirement.
4) WRITING REQUIREMENT--All students are required to take two writing-intensive courses: one by the end of sophomore year, and one by the end of the
junior year. Students will benefit most from the writing-intensive courses by taking them early in their college careers, and are therefore strongly encour-
aged to complete the requirement by the end of the sophomore year.
The goal of the writing-intensive course requirement is to improve student writing proficiency across disciplines. Students in these courses should expect to
receive guidance on style, argumentation, and other significant aspects of writing, as well as evaluation and criticism of their writing throughout the semes-
ter. This may be achieved through a variety of approaches: brief assignments spaced over the semester, sequenced assignments leading to a longer final
paper, etc. Writing-intensive courses may also include multiple drafts, conferences, peer review, or class discussions designed to improve writing skills. A
course with a single long paper due at the end of the semester, but with no required or structured means of addressing writing issues, would not be consid-
ered writing intensive.
Writing-intensive courses require a minimum of 20 pages of writing and have a maximum enrollment of 19 to allow the instructor to devote appropriate
attention to writing over the course of the semester.
All tutorial courses in the Williams-Exeter Programme at Oxford University (WIOX) meet the Williams College `W' designation, except for those in the
studio arts, mathematics, and the sciences.
Click here for a list of courses offered in 2011-2012 that meet the requirement.
Major Requirement
The Major Requirement is designed to assure that all Williams undergraduates will have the experience of disciplined and cumulative study, carried on over an
extended period of time, in some important field of intellectual inquiry. Juniors are required to declare a major and the selection is normally made at the time of
registration in the spring of the sophomore year.
Majors are offered in the following fields:
American Studies Geosciences
Anthropology German
Arabic Studies History
Art Japanese
Asian Studies Literary Studies
Astronomy Mathematics
Astrophysics Music
Biology Philosophy
Chemistry Physics
Chinese Political Economy
Classics (Greek, Latin) Political Science
Comparative Literature Psychology
Computer Science Religion
Economics Russian
English Sociology
Environmental Policy Spanish
Environmental Science Theatre
French Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies
8
GENERAL STRUCTURE OF MAJORS
1) A student ordinarily must elect at least nine semester courses in his or her major field. A major may also require an additional course
and/or one Winter Study Project during the junior or senior year.
A student may also fulfill the minimum requirements for a major by taking eight semester courses in the major field and two semester
courses, approved by a major advisor, in associated fields. In interdepartmental majors, such as Political Economy, a larger number of
courses may be required.
2) A prescribed sequence of courses, supplemented by parallel courses, and including a major seminar, is required in some major fields.
Other majors ask the student to plan a sequence of elective courses, including advanced work building on elementary courses in the field, and
ending in a one- or two- semester faculty-organized course or project in the senior year. All majors provide a system of counseling to help
students plan programs reflecting individual interests as well as disciplined and cumulative patterns of inquiry.
Courses in many major programs require prerequisite courses in related areas. A full description of the detailed structure of each major is
found under the heading of that major.
CONTRACT MAJOR
Students who wish to undertake the coherent study of an interdisciplinary subject not covered by a regularly offered major may propose to
be contract majors. Procedures for arranging a contract major and for honors work in such a major are described in the section, "Courses of
Instruction." Students interested in this option should begin consulting with the Dean's Office and with potential faculty advisors early in the
sophomore year. A student completing a contract major may not do so in conjunction with a second major. For further details, click here
TWO MAJORS
A student may complete two majors with the permission of both majors and the Committee on Academic Standing. Although a student
may be granted permission to use a course from one major to fulfill a particular requirement in the other, the student nevertheless must take
the minimum number of courses in each field without counting any course twice. A student may be a candidate for Honors in either or both of
the majors, but a course for Honors in one major may not be used for an Honors course in the other.
Physical Education Requirement
The Physical Education requirement provides students the opportunity of establishing and maintaining a general level of fitness and well-
being; of developing abilities in carry-over activities; of discovering and extending their own physical capabilities; and of developing skills
in activities with survival implications, such as swimming.
A swim test is required of all first-year students at the start of the academic year. Students who fail to complete the test must pass a basic
swim course given in the Physical Education program during the first quarter of the year.
Students must complete four quarters of physical education by the end of the sophomore year. Students must enroll in at least two different
activities in fulfilling the requirement.
Participation in a fall or spring intercollegiate sport is equivalent to two activity units and participation in a winter sport is equivalent to
three units. A maximum of three credits may be attained while participating in intercollegiate sports with the exception of a two sport athlete
who can fulfill the physical education requirement by totaling four units in two sports. Students may receive a maximum of two activity units
for participation in a club sport; the remaining two units must come from the physical education activity program.
Residence Requirement
Students who begin college at Williams must spend a minimum of six semesters in residence at Williams. Students transferring to Wil-
liams from other institutions must spend a minimum of four semesters in residence at Williams, and those entering as sophomores are ex-
pected to spend six semesters in residence. Students are considered to be in residence if they are taking a program of study under the direction
of the Williams College Faculty. Students must be in residence for both semesters of the final year.
The degree requirements must be completed within eight semesters, including any semesters for which a student receives credit while not
in residence at Williams. Thus, semesters spent away on exchange or other approved programs at other colleges are included in the eight
semesters.
ADDITIONAL CURRICULAR OPPORTUNITIES
Advanced Placement and International Baccalaureate
At the discretion of the appropriate departments or programs, students presenting satisfactory scores in Advanced Placement tests or Inter-
national Baccalaureate higher level examinations may be placed in advanced courses not regularly open to them and/or may receive course
credit toward the major or concentration. Therefore, if granted, this credit may be used as a prerequisite or in partial fulfillment of the major
or concentration requirements. AP and IB credit, however, may not be used to reduce the normal course load of any semester, to make up a
deficiency incurred at Williams, or to satisfy the Distribution Requirement.
Degree Credit Based on A-Level Examination Grades
Upon petition from the student, the Committee on Academic Standing may award two course credits toward the Williams degree for each
grade of A or B received on an A-Level Examination in a liberal arts discipline. These credits may be used to accelerate graduation but may not
be used to lower the course load during a semester in residence.
Normally, the student must have completed at least one full year of study at Williams and have met minimum academic standards before
the CAS would consider the petition. The petition must include certification that all degree requirements, including a major, can be fulfilled if
the credit is awarded.
Certificate in Foreign Languages
Certificates are awarded in Arabic, French, German, Russian and Spanish. The certificate confirms a particular degree of proficiency,
cultural literacy and experience with the language in the context of the student's college education. Seven or eight courses are required,
depending on the language. Please see the individual programs for details and specific requirements.
Combined Program in Liberal Arts and Engineering
The 3-2 program enables qualified students to combine a liberal arts education at Williams with undergraduate professional training in
engineering. In this program, a student studies at Williams for 3 years, completing 24 courses and 3 Winter Study Projects. He or she then
transfers to a leading engineering school and studies for a Bachelor of Science degree, usually for 2 more years. Upon successful completion
of this program, the student receives a Bachelor of Arts degree from Williams and a Bachelor of Science degree from the engineering school.
During their 3 years at Williams, 3-2 students must complete all of the normal requirements for a Williams degree, including a major and
the distribution requirements. For students majoring in physics, chemistry, computer science, or mathematics, the requirements for the se-
nior year courses and major exercise are waived for the Williams degree. Only students who have taken the prerequisite courses, who have at
least a B average in scientific subjects, and who have a good record in other subjects will be recommended by their major department and
approved by the Committee on Academic Standing for this program.
The 3-2 program has an extensive list of prerequisite mathematics and science courses, so it is necessary to plan course selections at Wil-
liams carefully. The booklet "Choosing First Year Courses" includes a list of Williams courses recommended to prospective engineers.
A popular alternative to the 3-2 program is to complete the Williams B.A. in the usual 4 years, majoring in one of the sciences, and then go
directly to a graduate program in engineering. Please see the section of this catalog titled "Preparation for Graduate and Professional Study."
9
Also, prospective engineers at Williams have the opportunity to take undergraduate engineering courses at other institutions through various
exchange programs. For information about these opportunities, please see the section titled "Exchange Programs."
The pre-engineering advisor, Professor Jefferson Strait, will be happy to assist students interested in any of the options leading to engi-
neering careers. Many more details about pre-engineering can be found in the Physics Department section of the College website.
Co-ordinate Programs Offering Concentrations
In addition to majoring in a field, a student may choose to concentrate elective courses on a single topic or area. Normally, a student de-
clares a concentration at the time of registration in the spring of the sophomore year. Concentrations are offered in the following programs:
Africana Studies
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
Cognitive Science
Environmental Studies
International Studies
Jewish Studies
Latina/o Studies
Leadership Studies
Legal Studies
Maritime Studies
Neuroscience
Science and Technology Studies
Descriptions of these programs appear under the appropriate heading in this publication. If the co-ordinate program courses are directly
related to the major, a student may be allowed to reduce the number of courses required to complete the major.
Co-ordinate Programs
A number of programs do not offer concentrations formally, but do provide students with the opportunity to work in areas that cut across
departmental and program lines. These are: Bioinformatics, Genomics, and Proteomics; History of Science; Materials Science Studies; Per-
formance Studies; and Public Health. They are listed in this publication in alphabetical order.
These programs provide guidance only and do not appear on transcripts.
The Critical Reasoning and Analytical Skills (CRAAS) Initiative
To one degree or another, every class at Williams goes beyond its subject--be it mathematics, Machiavelli, or modernism--to teach intel-
lectual skills that have wide application in other fields as well as outside of the academy: scientific reckoning, expository writing, rhetorical
analysis, oral presentation, and so on.
Courses offered under the CRAAS initiative foreground such analytical skills. While each CRAAS class covers a different topic, all are
aimed particularly at developing the processes necessary for excellence in a range of fields: techniques for analyzing ideas, data, texts or
artworks; approaches to interpreting, synthesizing, and developing arguments; strategies for presenting ideas and results.
CRAAS classes typically emphasize the practices of meta-analysis--self-criticism, editing, and revision--with the goal of constant im-
provement. Many classes feature peer tutoring, small group work, and intensive one-on-one engagement with the professor. Students should
leave a CRAAS course with a substantially heightened ability to approach problems, analyze texts, and craft arguments in whatever disci-
pline they may go on to explore.
A few CRAAS courses are restricted to advanced students, but the majority are open to all, and some are specifically targeted for first-year
students. Most have strictly limited enrollment. Because these classes cultivate the general strategies of effective scholarship, students are
encouraged to consider taking a CRAAS course early in their academic careers.
Click here for a list of CRAAS courses offered in 2011-2012.
Cross-Enrollment Programs
A limited number of students may register at Bennington College or Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts for courses not offered by
Williams. Interested students should contact the Registrar's Office about arrangements.
Experiential Education at Williams
Experiential education, involving "learning by doing" outside the classroom, has been a relatively understated but successful part of the
Williams curriculum for a number of years. In addition to the use of traditional laboratory work in the natural sciences and studio work in art,
faculty have been challenging students to become engaged more personally in the Williams curriculum through field work, whether in the
form of research, sustained work on special projects or through placement with community organizations. Courses which include experien-
tial learning provide students with opportunities to encounter firsthand the issues that they read and study about, requiring them to apply
academic learning to nonacademic settings and challenging them to use their experiences in those settings to think more critically and deeply
about what they are studying. Courses involving experiential education as defined above range from fully integrated off-campus programs
such as the Williams-Mystic Maritime Studies Program (www.williams.edu/williamsmystic) to courses involving one small field re-
search project. The amount and nature of the experiential component(s) varies according to the instructor's judgment. Click here for a list
of 2011-2012 courses involving experiential education.
A range of non-credit experiential education opportunities is also available to interested students. Community service, internships, re-
search, and the Museum Associates Program of the College Museum of Art all provide students the chance to "learn by doing" outside the
classroom. Information on each of these opportunities is provided below.
Community Service:
Opportunities to apply creative energy and initiative abound in community organizations in the Williams College area. Service ranges
from tutoring or building homes with Habitat for Humanity, to working with developing non-profit organizations such as Northern Berkshire
Creative Arts. For more information, go to the Office for Community Engagement homepage on the College website at <www.wil-
liams.edu/resources/commservice/> or contact Stewart Burns, Director of the Center for Community Engagement (Ste-
wart.Burns@williams.edu).
Internships and Research Opportunities:
A wide variety of summer internship opportunities are available to interested students through the Office of Career Counseling (OCC) and
the Center for Environmental Studies (CES). Research opportunities are also available through individual departments. Information about
OCC's Williams College Alumni Sponsored Summer Internships can be found at http://www.williams.edu/go/careers/ or by con-
tacting Ron Gallagher, Assistant Director of Career Counseling (Ronald.L.Gallagher@williams.edu). Information about CES's
summer internship and research opportunities can be found at http://www.williams.edu/CES/ces/studentopps/employ-
ment.htm or by contacting Sarah Gardner, Associate Director of the Center for Environmental Studies, Harper House (Sarah.S.Gar-
10
dner@williams.edu). Information about research opportunities sponsored by individual departments is available from Department
Chairs.
Museum Associates:
The Museum Associates Program of the Williams College Museum of Art provides students an opportunity to broaden their knowledge of
art and art history, to learn about the field of museum education, and to develop valuable communication and public speaking skills while
working with the public. The only academic requirement is the completion of ArtH 101-102. Applications are accepted every spring. For
more information, contact Cynthia Way, Director of Education at Cynthia.Way@williams.edu.
For more information about experiential education at Williams College, visit the Experiential Education website at www.williams.e-
du/admin/deanfac/exped/ or contact Paula Consolini, Coordinator of Experiential Education at 597-4588 (pconsoli@williams.e-
du)
Honors Program
Williams awards the degree with honors to those students who have demonstrated imagination, initiative, and intellectual independence
within the major. The Honors Program requires two or three courses constituting a clearly interrelated pattern of study, whether in the form of
a thesis, specialization within the major, or interdisciplinary study with courses from other programs or departments. At least one of the
courses must be in addition to the minimum number required for the major; one may be a Winter Study Project. A student who is completing
two majors may be a candidate for honors in either or both of the majors, but a course for honors in one major may not be used as an honors
course in the other. Some programs also award honors for their concentrations.
Individual departments and programs describe special criteria, procedures, and patterns of study for honors in the "Courses of Instruction"
section. Students should consult with their departments on their honors options prior to the senior year. Before the student has begun the last
of the required course units, the department or program determines whether the student is admitted to honors candidacy. The degree is
awarded with Honors or Highest Honors at the end of the senior year if, in the judgment of the department, its criteria of excellence have been
met.
Independent Study
When a particularly able student wishes to study a subject not covered by the normal offerings of the College, arrangements may be made
to undertake courses of independent study under faculty supervision. Such arrangements are made with the appropriate department at the
time of registration.
Study Away from Williams
Many students decide to study at another college or university, in this country or abroad, during their undergraduate education. The Col-
lege encourages students to think about the option of study away as they begin the process of considering major fields and course require-
ments during the sophomore year.
All students in good standing with no deficiencies, including financial aid recipients, may study away on approved programs during all or
part of the junior year. Academic credit is earned after evidence of the satisfactory completion of the program. A student wishing to enroll in
another institution or program in this country or abroad, and to transfer credits earned on this program to Williams, must consult with Dean
Laura McKeon and the appropriate department chair early in the fall semester of the sophomore year. Students are responsible for reading the
Guide to Study Abroad available in the Dean's Office. They should also consult faculty members with expertise in the area or region of
interest to them. All students who are curious about the off-campus study option should browse through the reference library in the Dean's
Office and attend one of the general information meetings that Dean McKeon offers throughout the autumn and in February. After attending
an information session, students are free to schedule an appointment with the Dean. Approval is required from the chair of the student's major
department, Dean McKeon, and the Committee on Academic Standing. Students wishing to study away for any portion of the junior year
must request approval in March of the sophomore year by submitting a pink petition to Dean McKeon.
When a student has decided to accept an offer of admission from a program, he or she must notify the Dean's Office. The Committee on
Academic Standing will make a final decision at that time. Students need to attend a pre-departure meeting and meet all the guidelines as
directed in the Guide to Study Abroad. Upon return to Williams, students must complete a program evaluation in order to receive credit.
The Williams Tutorial Program
The Tutorial Program offers Williams students a distinctive opportunity to take a heightened form of responsibility for their own intellec-
tual development. No student is required to take a tutorial course, but any student with the appropriate qualifications and interests is invited to
do so.
Tutorials at the 100/200 level are designed primarily for first-year students and sophomores; they are usually given enrollment preference
for such courses, though interested juniors and seniors are often welcome. Tutorials at the 300/400 level are designed primarily for juniors
and seniors (and, often, for majors in the discipline); first-year students and sophomores are welcome to apply, but are urged to consult the
instructor before registering.
Tutorials place much greater weight than do regular courses--or even small seminars--on student participation. They aim to teach stu-
dents how to develop and present arguments; listen carefully, and then refine their positions in the context of a challenging discussion; and
respond quickly and cogently to critiques of their work. Tutorials place particular emphasis on developing analytical skills, writing abilities,
and the talents of engaging in rigorous conversation and oral debate.
The ways in which particular tutorials are conducted vary across the disciplines, but here is a description of how most tutorials at Williams
are organized. Tutorials are usually limited to ten students. At the start of term, the instructor divides the students into pairs. Each pair meets
weekly with the instructor for roughly one hour. Many tutorial courses begin and end the term with a group seminar, and in a few depart-
ments, instructors hold weekly group meetings of all tutorial members to provide background information designed to facilitate the students'
independent work. But the heart of every tutorial course is the weekly meeting of the two students with the instructor.
At these weekly meetings, one student delivers a prepared essay or presentation (e.g., an analysis of a text or work of art, a discussion of a
problem set, a report on laboratory exercises, etc.) pertaining to the assignment for that week, while the other student--and then the instruc-
tor--offer a critique. In the following week, students switch roles. Typically, students write five or six essays (usually in the range of 4-7
pages) during the term, and offer five or six critiques of their partners' work.
Since the program's inception in 1988, students have ranked tutorials among the most demanding--and rewarding--courses they have
taken at Williams. While not designed to be more difficult than other courses, tutorials are nonetheless challenging, with frequent writing
assignments and the expectation that students will be well prepared to participate actively and effectively in weekly discussions. At the same
time, students have consistently placed tutorials among the most enriching and consequential courses they have taken. They have appre-
ciated the close attention to their writing and argumentation skills; the opportunity to be held accountable, in a detailed way, for the extended
implications of their ideas; the chance to develop their oral abilities as they engage in debate; and the close intellectual bonds tutorials build
between teachers and students, and students with each other. Many students have formed important advising and mentoring relationships
with their tutorial teachers.
Registration information: Students preregister for tutorials as they would for any other course (but should first check the description for
prerequisites and to see if permission of the instructor is required). Because of limited enrollments and the special logistical arrangements
11
involved in organizing tutorials, students may not drop a tutorial after 4:00 PM on the day before the first scheduled day of organizational
meetings each semester. It is therefore important that students determine, before the start of the term, their interest in and commitment to the
course. If they are uncertain whether they wish to take the tutorial, they should consult with the instructor. Tutorials may not be taken on a
pass/fail basis.
More information: Click here for a list of tutorials offered in 2011-2012. Students may obtain detailed information about particular
tutorials from the course descriptions and the instructors. (All tutorials have a "T" after the course number.) For general information, advice,
or suggestions about the program, please contact Professor Stephen Fix, Tutorial Program Director for 2011-2012, in Hollander 136.
Williams-EPRI-UCT-Interstudy Cape Town Policy in Action Program
Williams offers a unique fall semester program of studies in Cape Town, South Africa in partnership with the Economic Policy Research
Institute, Interstudy and the University of Cape Town. This innovative experiential study away program teaches students about South Afri-
can politics, society and development. Students take courses at the University of Cape Town and the Economic Policy Research Institute
where they also hone their research skills through a policy fieldwork placement. The program's unique feature is the unifying seminar/tutori-
al on contemporary social and political issues in South Africa. This course partners Williams students with South African Parliamentarians
in a collaborative learning effort focused on policy issues of mutual interest. Interested students should consult the Dean's Office or
www.williams.edu/go/africa for more information.
Williams-Exeter Programme at Oxford University
Williams offers a year-long programme of studies at Oxford University in cooperation with Exeter College, Oxford. Based at Ephraim
Williams House, Williams' study center at Oxford, the Programme is designed to offer the fullest possible integration of the students into the
intellectual and social life of one of the world's great universities. It makes full use of the Oxford tutorial system and the Oxford three-term
calendar is followed.
Interested students should consult the Dean's Office. Click here for a more complete description of the programme.
Williams-Mystic Maritime Studies Program
The William-Mystic Seaport Maritime Studies Program offers students a unique opportunity to explore the ocean, to travel the Atlantic,
Pacific and Gulf Coasts, and to undertake original research of their own design in the humanities and sciences. A term at Williams-Mystic
satisfies both a semester's credit and one winter study requirement, as well as intensive writing course credit. Four Williams courses are
offered as an integrated, multidisciplinary curriculum in the semester-long program at Mystic Seaport, in Mystic, Connecticut: Maritime
History, Literature of the Sea, Marine Policy, and either Marine Ecology or Oceanography (see the American Maritime Studies section in this
catalog). Williams College faculty members serve as the Director and Marine Scientist. Travel includes an offshore voyage on the open
ocean sailing aboard a tall ship, a seminar along the Pacific Coast, and a Louisiana seminar, all of which are cross-disciplinary and inter-dis-
ciplinary exercises. Students live in historic, cooperative, coed houses at Mystic Seaport, the world's largest maritime museum, and have full
access to world-class maritime collections, a maritime library, well-equipped laboratory, and diverse coastal habitats (where field research
can be undertaken in a wide variety of environments, ranging from tidepools and salt marshes to sandy beaches and estuaries). Students also
participate in maritime skills under professional instruction, with choices such as celestial navigation, maritime art, music of the sea, boat
building, or small boat handling and sailing. Williams-Mystic seeks candidates who are willing to try new things and work in a compelling
academic environment. No sailing experience necessary, and all majors are welcome--a typical semester at Williams-Mystic is represented
by 12 to 14 different majors spanning the sciences and humanities. Sophomores, juniors, and seniors can attend. Interested students should
contact Williams-Mystic at admissions@williamsmystic.org, call (860-572-5359), or visit the website (www.williams.edu/williams-
mystic).
12
ACADEMIC STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS
Attendance
In order to give students a larger share of responsibility for their own education, Williams College does not administer a general system of required
classroom attendance. The College expects students to make full use of their educational opportunities by regular class attendance and to assume the
academic risks incurred by absences.
Although no formal system of class attendance is maintained by the College, instructors may set such standards of attendance as they deem neces-
sary for the satisfactory conduct of their courses. Students who fail to meet these standards may be warned by the instructor and notice sent to the Dean
that continued absence could result in their being dropped from the course. A failing grade will be assigned to any regularly graded course dropped
after the designated course change period. Students who do not attend the first class meeting in a semester course or Winter Study Project may be
required to withdraw by the instructor. Attendance is required at announced tests and final examinations unless the student is specifically excused by
the instructor or the Dean's Office. Satisfactory attendance in four quarters of activities approved by the Department of Physical Education is required
except for students excused by the Dean and the Director of Health.
Registration
Registration for fall and spring semesters and for the Winter Study Program takes place at designated periods during the academic year. There may
be a $5 per day late fee for any registration changes accepted after the announced deadlines, including the subject designation for cross-listed courses.
New students register online in early summer; soon after arrival at Williams, they meet with their assigned Academic Advisors to discuss the curric-
ulum and their course selections. All course changes for new students are made after these meetings. During the first two years of study, students are
limited in the number of courses they may take in one department or subject each semester as follows:
a) First-year students may take no more than one course with the same course prefix, nor more than two in one department, in a semester.
b) Sophomores may take no more than two courses with the same course prefix, nor more than three in one department, in a semester.
c) Sophomores may take no more than three courses with the same course prefix, nor more than four in one department, during the full year.
d) A student may take no more than a total of five courses with the same course prefix, nor more than eight in one department, during the first two years.
e) Any exception to the above early concentration rule may be requested by a petition (goldenrod) to the Committee on Academic Standing (C.A.S.) filed
at the time of registration.
Course Change Period
Course changes may be made during a designated period at the beginning of each semester. No course changes may be made after that period except
with the approval of the Committee on Academic Standing, after consultation with the Dean's Office. During Winter Study, a second Winter Study
Project may be added if the instructor approves but the original Project may not be dropped. A late fee of $5 per day may be assessed for each course
change accepted after the announced deadline.
First-year and first-semester transfer students may be permitted to withdraw from one course (incurring a deficiency but no grade penalty) as late as
the tenth week of the semester. Upperclass students also may withdraw from a course under the same conditions once in subsequent years. A with-
drawal, recorded on the transcript as a "W," is granted only with the approval of the instructor and a dean and only if there is complete agreement
between the instructor and the dean that, despite conscientious effort to do the work, continuation in the course would be detrimental to the overall
educational interest or health of the student. The deficiency thereby incurred must be removed in the normal manner.See "Deficiencies," page
13 of this document.
Course Load
Students are required to complete four courses each semester. In exceptional cases, students may, upon petition to the Committee on Academic
Standing and with departmental approval at the time of registration, elect a pattern of five semester courses in the fall semester and three in the spring or
three in the fall and five in the spring; a pass-fail course cannot be used as the fifth course in this pattern.
If a student with a disability believes that he/she is unable to pursue a full course of study, the student may petition the Disabilities and Accommoda-
tions Advisory Committee for permission to pursue a reduced course load. Such a petition must be accompanied by a professional evaluation that
addresses the student's inability to maintain a full course of study and discusses the rationale for a reduced course load. Upon consideration of a stu-
dent's petition and supporting documentation, the Disabilities and Accommodations Advisory Committee makes a recommendation to the Committee
on Academic Standing, which renders decisions. Such cases are considered on an individual basis and may be initiated at any time during the student's
tenure at Williams.
Fifth Course Pass-Fail Option
Except in the case of the unbalanced course program described above, a student may, at the beginning of any semester, enroll in a fifth course that
must be specified as the pass-fail course. By the sixth week, a student must decide whether to continue the course, and if so, whether on a pass-fail or
regularly graded basis. A form for designating the option chosen will be sent from the Registrar's Office. A processing fee of $5 per day may be
assessed for fifth course grading option designations accepted after the announced deadline. A course graded "Pass" may not be used as one of the
thirty-two semester courses required to complete the degree, to fulfill distribution or major requirements, or to make up a deficiency. A pass-fail course
converted to a fifth regularly graded course may be used to fulfill distribution or major requirements or to make up a deficiency incurred in a prior term.
The grade received will be included in the calculation of the student's cumulative grade-point average.
The Gaudino Option
 This initiative attempts to encourage students to engage in courses of interest beyond their area of focus or "expertise"dare yourself to
enroll in challenging but intriguing courses that you would otherwise not take!
 You can declare a Goption at the beginning of the semester for courses taken at Williams, starting as early as the spring semester of
your first year and as late as the fall semester of your senior year. You can sign up for at most one Goption course per semester, and at
most two in your undergraduate career.
 You cannot invoke the Goption on a course used to satisfy divisional or other college requirements (EDI, Q, W).
 You cannot invoke the Goption for any course that fulfills major or concentration requirements unless it is the very first course you
take in that major or concentration.
 You will have up to 30 days after grades are posted to elect to invoke the Goption for a course from the previous semester. If your
course grade is above a certain floor and the instructor of the course approves, then the course grade will be changed to G on your
transcript and the GPA will not be affected by the original grade. The course will count toward graduation, but the transcript will reflect
that you declared the course to be an intellectual stretch.
 Any course can be taken with the Goption unless the course description in the College Bulletin explicitly states otherwise.
Declaring the Goption
 You can declare a regular course at Williams as one of your two Goptions any time during the drop/add period of any semester for
which you are eligible to declare one. You cannot undeclare the Goption after the end of drop/add!
13
Invoking the Goption
 You may ask the Registrar's Office to invoke your option for a Goption course within 30 days after grades are posted. After 30 days
you will keep the grade you earned in that class if you don't notify the Registrar that you wish to invoke the Goption. To apply the
option, your course grade has to be no lower than the lesser of: (a) your current GPA minus 0.67; or (b) the grade of B. In addition, the
registrar will ask the instructor of the course to assert that you were "intellectually present." If either of these conditions is not met, then
the grade you earned cannot be removed. "Intellectual presence" implies that you have attended and participated in all the class meet-
ings and that you have done all the required work. Some instructors might have other requirements. You should feel free to meet with
and interact with your instructor to get the most out of the experience.
Winter Study Project
Students must pass a Winter Study Project in each of their four years. Winter Study Projects are graded Honors, Pass, Perfunctory Pass, or Fail. All
work for Winter Study Projects must be submitted by the last day of the Winter Study Program; work may be accepted after this date only with the
permission of a dean. Students who fail their Winter Study Projects will be placed on Academic Probation by the Committee on Academic Standing
and will be required to make up the deficiency. (See "Deficiencies," page 13 of this document.) Students who fail through gross neglect
of work will normally be required to resign. A student who receives a second Perfunctory Pass grade in Winter Study will be required to pass a fifth
course, which may be graded on the regular A-E or pass/fail basis, in the following spring or fall semester.
Grading System and Records
Williams uses the following system of grades: A, excellent; B, good; C, fair; D, passing; E, failing. These letters, with plus and minus value, have the
following numerical equivalents in calculating grade averages:
A+ = 4.33 B+ = 3.33 C+ = 2.33 D+ = 1.33
A = 4.00 B = 3.00 C = 2.00 D = 1.00 E = 0
A = 3.67 B = 2.67 C = 1.67 D = 0.67
A permanent record of each student's grades is kept and this official record forms the basis for any academic action by the College.
A transcript of a student's cumulative academic record is available from the Registrar's Office upon written request. Transcripts will not be issued for
students who are in financial arrears.
Provisions relating to student records, access to them, and safeguards on their use are in the Student Handbook.
First-Year Student Warnings
In the middle of each semester, instructors report to the Registrar those first-year students whose grades at that time are unsatisfactory. The students
and their academic advisors receive notices of warnings as a matter of routine. The Dean's Office may inform parents of students who receive two or
more warnings.
Extensions of Deadlines
Deadlines for course work are set by the instructor with the following limitations:
for courses with final exams, the latest that written work may be due is 5:00 p.m. on the last day of
reading period.
for courses without final exams, the latest that written work may be due is 5:00 pm. on the third-to-last
day of the exam period.
If work is due before these deadlines, the instructor may grant an extension up to these deadlines solely at his or her discretion. Short extensions
beyond these deadlines may be granted by a dean but only with the concurrence of the instructor. No extensions will be granted beyond the examina-
tion period except in the case of serious illness.
Instructors may require students who have missed announced quizzes or hour tests to present satisfactory explanations to a dean before they are
permitted to make up the exercises.
If a student is absent from a final examination, a make-up examination may be given only with the permission of a dean and at a time determined by
the dean.
Deficiencies
A student receives credit for a course by obtaining a grade of at least D minus. A student may not repeat a course for which degree credit has
been awarded. If the student fails a course, he or she must make up the deficiency.
If a failure occurs in the first semester of a full-year course, the student may, with the consent of the instructor, continue the course and receive credit
for the second semester only. If a failure occurs in the second semester of a full-year course, credit for passing the first semester may be retained only
with the approval of the Committee on Academic Standing.
A senior who incurs a failure in the first semester in a required major course may be dropped from the College at midyear.
Normally deficiencies can be made up only by courses taken after the deficiencies have been incurred.
A student must make up a deficiency in one of these ways:
1) obtain a grade of at least C minus in a summer school course, approved in advance by the Registrar, at a regionally accredited four-year college
or university; (The grade will not, however, be included in the calculation of the student's cumulative grade point average.)
2) pass an extra graded course at Williams in the semester following the failure;
3) in the case of a first-semester failure of a year-long language course, obtain a grade of at leastaCminus in the work of the second semester of that
course. The failure for the first semester will, however, remain on the student's record and will be included in the cumulative grade point average.
A deficiency must normally be made up before the start of the following academic year, or in the case of a deficiency incurred in the spring semester,
no later than the following fall semester. A student may, in consultation with the Dean's Office, petition the Committee on Academic Standing with an
alternate plan.
14
Separation for Low Scholarship
It is the policy of Williams College not to permit a student to remain in residence after it has become evident that he or she is either unable or
unwilling to maintain reasonable standards of academic achievement. At the end of each term, the Committee on Academic Standing reviews all
academic records that fail to meet the following minimum academic requirements:
For first-year students: Three grades of C minus or better and no failures each semester, and at least Perfunctory Pass on the Winter Study Project
For upperclass students: Four grades of C minus or better each semester, and at least Perfunctory Pass on the Winter Study Project
Students whose records fail to meet these minimum academic requirements or whose records otherwise fail to show adequate progress may receive
an academic reminder, be placed on academic probation, or be required to resign.
Students who are required to resign from the College for academic reasons are normally not permitted to return for at least one year from the date of
their resignation. A student who has been required to resign from the College may petition the Committee on Academic Standing through the Dean for
reinstatement on two conditions only: all deficiencies must have been made up and a letter submitted to the Committee that offers convincing evidence
that the student is ready and able to complete work toward a degree at Williams without further interruption.
When required to resign, students must vacate their rooms promptly. Financial aid students must also see the Director of Financial Aid before leav-
ing to discuss loan repayment and renewal of aid in the event of readmission.
A student who fails to meet minimum academic standards in his or her final semester at Williams may be required by the Committee on Academic
Standing to meet them by earning grades of at least C minus elsewhere before the B.A. will be awarded. If such work is required, it must be completed
within three years unless stipulated otherwise, and the courses must be approved in advance by the Registrar.
Withdrawal from the College in Good Standing
Students may request personal leaves of absence from a dean and, if granted, withdraw from the College. Such time away, often as a period of
reassessment and self evaluation, can prove to be beneficial educationally. A withdrawal in good standing may be granted for not less than one semes-
ter and not more than three years. Students who withdraw in good standing are readmitted with the approval of the Dean's Office and are expected to
complete the degree without further interruption.
Students may request permission from a dean to withdraw at any time. If a student is granted a personal leave of absence after the semester begins,
but before the end of the drop/add period, the transcript will list the date of withdrawal as the day before the term began. If a personal leave is granted
after the end of the drop/add period, but before the end of the eighth week of the semester, the transcript will list the date of withdrawal, but the semester
will not count toward the maximum of eight allowed to complete the degree. If a personal withdrawal is allowed after the eighth week of the semester,
the transcript will list the date of withdrawal and the courses in progress, each with a W; the semester will normally count toward the maximum of eight
allowed to complete the degree and the student will incur deficiencies that must be made up before returning to the College.
Refunds
Payment refund or credit in the event of withdrawal is described here.
Eligibility for and Completion of Majors
To be eligible for any major, students must have received grades of C minus or better in each course in the major taken in the first two years of
college and Honors or Pass on any Winter Study Project taken in the major department or program. A senior may enter a major only upon the approval
of the department chair and the Committee on Academic Standing.
All semester courses in the major must be taken on a regularly graded basis. In addition to passing each major course and, where required, a major
Winter Study Project, the student must maintain an average in the major of 1.67 or higher. Seniors who have an average below 1.67 in the major field
normally will not be allowed to continue. A senior who receives a grade of E in the first semester of a required major course may be dropped from the
College at mid-year. A student who falls below these standards may continue in the major only with the approval of the Committee on Academic
Standing.
A senior major exercise is not required by every department but is by some. All departments requiring such an exercise specify it as such in the
description of their major programs in the "Courses of Instruction" section, and all students in those departments must complete the exercise satisfacto-
rily.
Eligibility for Extracurricular Activities
A student is eligible to represent the College in any athletic, dramatic, literary, or musical event and be in the student government, or other organiza-
tion as a member, substitute, or officer, unless he or she is declared ineligible:
1) by the Dean;
2) by vote of the Discipline Committee; or
3) by vote of the Committee on Academic Standing because of a dangerously low record.
The Student Honor Committee may recommend to the Dean loss of eligibility as a penalty for a violation of the Honor Code.
Dean's List
All students who attain a semester average of 3.50 or higher in a program of four or more courses are placed on the Dean's List for that semester.
Phi Beta Kappa Society
Students of the highest academic standing are eligible for election to membership in the Phi Beta Kappa Society in accordance with the following
rules:
1) The requirements for election to membership shall be a grade point average of 3.3 and Honors or Pass in all required Winter Study Projects.
There shall be two elections of new members for each class, at the end of the junior and senior years.
2) At the end of the junior year, all students in the highest five percent of the class, ranked by cumulative grade point average, shall be eligible for
election provided they have met the requirements and have completed enough courses to be considered candidates for the B.A. degree in the following
year. A student who leaves Williams at the end of the junior year to attend graduate school may be elected under the above procedures.
At the end of the senior year, all students not yet elected and in the highest 12.5 per cent of the class, ranked by cumulative grade point average, shall
be eligible for election provided they have met the requirements.
3) Students shall be eligible for election only if they have been students at Williams College for at least two years.
4) Honorary members may be elected from distinguished alumni of at least twenty years' standing. No more than one such member shall be elected
each year.
5) Any student who shall have gained his or her rank by unfair means or who in the judgment of the Dean of the College is not of good moral
character is ineligible to election.
6) The name of a member elect shall be entered on the roll only after he or she has accepted the election and has paid to the Treasurer the regular
entrance fee.
7) Any undergraduate member who withdraws from the College before graduation or who falls short of the minimum Phi Beta Kappa scholastic
standing may, upon a two-thirds vote of the members present at the annual meeting, be deprived of membership in the society.
15
8) Any undergraduate member who is expelled from the College shall be deprived of membership in the Society.
9) While connected with Williams College as an officer of instruction or administration, any graduate of Williams College who is a member of
another chapter of Phi Beta Kappa shall be considered a regular member of the Williams chapter.
10) While connected with Williams College as professor, associate professor or assistant professor, or an officer of administration, any member of
another chapter of Phi Beta Kappa shall have all the privileges of the Williams chapter, including holding office and voting. While connected with
Williams College, any other officer of instruction or administration who is a member of another chapter shall have all the privileges of the Williams
chapter, except holding office and voting.
Awarding of Degrees
By vote of the Trustees, the degree of Bachelor of Arts is conferred at Commencement upon students who have completed the requirements as to
courses and grades to the satisfaction of the Faculty. The right to a degree may, however, be forfeited by misconduct at any time prior to the conferring
of the degree. No degree in absentia will be conferred except by special vote of the Trustees on petition presented to the Dean. Diplomas will not be
authorized for students who have not paid College charges or have not returned all books belonging to the library.
Graduation with Distinction
The Faculty will recommend to the Trustees that the degree of Bachelor of Arts with distinction be conferred upon those members of the graduating
class who have passed all Winter Study Projects and obtained a four-year average in the top:
35% of the graduating class -- Bachelor of Arts cum laude or higher
15% of the graduating class -- Bachelor of Arts magna cum laude or higher
2% of the graduating class -- Bachelor of Arts summa cum laude
16
ACADEMIC ADVISING
A variety of academic advice and counsel is offered to students. Instructors, departmental and administrative officers and some special programs are
available to help students explore and develop their academic interests and talents and take advantage of the academic and intellectual opportunities
available at the College.
In the first-year, each student is assigned an Academic Advisor who is either a member of the faculty or an administrative officer whose responsibili-
ties keep him or her in close contact with the curriculum of the College. The Deans of the College also advise undergraduates and coordinate the
first-year advising program, review the academic progress of individual students, and--when appropriate--call students in to discuss their situations.
In the sophomore year, students continue to meet with their first-year advisors and it is recommended that they seek advice from deans and instruc-
tors, along with pre-professional and other special advisors (click here for a list). Sophomores are also encouraged to discuss major options and re-
quirements with faculty members from departments and programs in which they have an interest before declaring a major in the spring semester.
In the junior and senior years, students are advised by faculty from their major departments or programs. Each department or program determines its
own advising system for its majors, although chairs are regularly available for consultation.
ACADEMIC ASSISTANCE
Additional programs of academic assistance are also available through the Academic Resources Office. Any student who desires extra help in a
course in which she or he is registered may request a tutor who has been recommended by the relevant department to the Academic Resources Office;
costs of this tutoring are covered by Academic Resources. The Math and Science Resource Center (MSRC), a dropin help center staffed by student
tutors who come highly recommended from the appropriate departments, is also available to students of Biology 101, 102, and 202, Chemistry 151,
153, 155, 156, 251, 255, and 256, Mathematics 100, 101, 103, 104, 105, and 106, and Physics 131, 132, 141, and 142. The MSRC (which is open from
8 pm to midnight Sundays through Thursdays throughout both academic semesters) works in close cooperation with faculty teaching those courses.
All students are encouraged to take full advantage of these academic resources.
STUDY AWAY AND INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS
Advising of Williams students wishing to study away in the junior year is coordinated by the Dean's Office. Information sessions are held during the
fall semester and early spring of the sophomore year for students wishing to study away. Orientation and counseling of international students is ar-
ranged by the International Student Advisor in the Dean's Office.
POSTGRADUATE AND PROFESSIONAL STUDY
Click here.
 17 
ACADEMIC HONESTY
All students are expected to be familiar with the Williams College Honor Code and to reaffirm their
commitment to the Statement of Academic Honesty at the beginning of each academic year. The Honor
Code covers all aspects of academic honesty, including the writing of papers and laboratory reports as well
as all quizzes, homework assignments, hour tests, and examinations.
Statement of Academic Honesty
As an institution fundamentally concerned with the free exchange of ideas, Williams College has al-
ways depended on the academic integrity of each of its members. In the spirit of this free exchange, the
students and faculty of Williams recognize the necessity and accept the responsibility for academic hones-
ty.
A student who enrolls at the College thereby agrees to respect and acknowledge the research and ideas
of others in his or her work and to abide by those regulations governing work stipulated by the instructor.
Any student who breaks these regulations, misrepresents his or her own work, or collaborates in the mis-
representation of another's work has committed a serious violation of this agreement.
Students and faculty are to report violations and alleged violations of this agreement. Such reports are to
be submitted to the Student Honor Committee, consisting of eight student members of the joint Faculty-
Student Honor System-Discipline Committee. This committee is responsible for determining the guilt or
innocence of the accused person or persons, and for recommending appropriate punishments to the Dean.
A committee of faculty members to be designated by the Faculty will sit with the Student Honor Commit-
tee in an advisory capacity.
A quorum of three-quarters shall be required for the Committee to meet. A vote of guilty by at least
three-quarters of those present is necessary for conviction. A recommendation for dismissal must be made
by unanimous vote of those present, and shall be carried out only with the assent of the President of the
College.
The Committee is responsible for informing the student body of the meaning and implications of this
statement. The aforementioned faculty committee shall be responsible for informing faculty members of
the meaning and implications of this statement.
Any amendments to this statement must be made through a student referendum in which two-thirds of
the student body votes, and in which two-thirds of those voting vote for the amendment. These alterations
must be ratified by the Faculty.
Adopted 1971
Guidelines
Instructors are encouraged to submit to the Honor Committee a written statement defining how the
Statement of Academic Honesty applies to their courses or laboratories, and to explain such guidelines to
their students. Instructors may set any type of final examination or hour test, ranging from closed-book,
alternate-seating classroom exercises to open-book, "take-home" examinations or papers, and any require-
ments for laboratory exercises. Some instructors encourage cooperation among students but others do not.
If a student is unsure how the Honor Code applies in a particular situation, it is ultimately the student's
responsibility to find out from his or her professor, or from a member of the Honor Committee, how the
Honor Code applies in that situation. An open and highly individualized system can last only as long as
both the students and the faculty work together to create a true academic community.
In written material, students are expected to avoid the possibility of even unintentional plagiarism by
acknowledging the sources of their work. Careful observance of accepted standards of reference and
attribution is required. The basic rules are summarized below. Students are further advised to consult a
recognized style manual to learn how to acknowledge sources correctly. While academic honesty does not
demand a footnote on statements of common fact, it does require that a student provide clear footnotes or
other appropriate documentation and give credit in the bibliography to ideas, interpretations, and facts that
particular sources have contributed to the student's final work.
Academic Honesty
 18 
The basic rules of attribution require that:
1) A direct quotation (whether a single word or a phrase, sentence, paragraph, or series of paragraphs)
must always be identified by quotation marks, by indenting and single spacing, or by reduced type size of
the quoted material, and a note must be used to state the exact source.
2) A paraphrase of the work of another must be acknowledged as such by a note stating the source.
3) Indebtedness to the specific ideas of others, or the summarizing of several pages, even though ex-
pressed in different words, must be acknowledged by a note stating the source.
4) Every instance of the use of another student's laboratory reports, computer programs, or other mate-
rial must be acknowledged by a note.
5) Even the use of a student's own previous work must be acknowledged; thus, a student must obtain
the prior permission of all instructors concerned before submitting substantially the same paper in more
than one course.
Procedures for Alleged Violations
Students or faculty members who have discovered a violation or a possible violation of the Honor Code
should report it promptly either to the faculty chair or to the student chair of the Honor Committee. As
soon as possible after receiving a report of an alleged Honor Code violation, the Student Honor Committee
will convene to hear the case. The person bringing the charge will present the evidence to the Committee in
the presence of the accused student, who may then speak in his or her own defense both with and without
the accuser present. After the accused student has left the proceedings, the Committee will determine inno-
cence or guilt and, if the latter, will recommend an appropriate penalty to the Dean. Depending on the
circumstances of the violation, penalties then imposed by the Dean may include such possibilities as a
directed grade of E in the course, disciplinary probation, or temporary or permanent separation from the
College.
19
EXPENSES
Within the limits of available funds, Williams endeavors to offer its educational opportunities to all who qualify for admission. Income from its
endowment and annual contributions from its alumni and friends have enabled Williams to keep its tuition at about half the actual cost per student to the
College.
Payment of Term Bills
College bills for one-half of all tuition and fees are sent electronically to students twice a year (in mid-July and mid-December) for payment on
August 15 and January 15; a fee of $250 may be charged if payment is received after these dates. Term bills must be paid before the semester's classes
begin or the student may not be permitted to enroll in classes or remain in residence at the College. Billing statements for accounts with outstanding
balances or current activity will be issued monthly and are due upon receipt.
All outstanding balances must be paid to the Bursar, and all books and materials must be returned to the Library, before the student is entitled to a
degree or a transcript.
College Bills
College charges for tuition, room, board, and fees for the academic year 2011-2012 are as follows:
Tuition $42,938
Board 5,590
Room 5,780
Activities and Residential House Fees 252
_______
$54,560
Other Expenses
Based on a study of expenses reported by financial aid students, a minimum normal budget for a college year at Williams includes additional ex-
penses estimated as follows:
Books 800
Clothing, Laundry, Recreation approximately 1200
_______
Estimated year's total, exclusive of travel expenses** $2,000
________________
*A student activities fee for support of non-athletic student organizations is charged to all undergraduates as part of the College term
bill.
**Travel expenses are not included in figures listed above. The cost of two round-trip tickets is added into each successful financial aid
candidate's award.
Additional Items
A House Maintenance Fee of $50 per year is charged to upperclassmen as a part of the College term bill. It is used to provide a base for the social and
cultural programs of each residential House and to meet any unusual maintenance expenses for the Houses. First-year class dues of $50 are charged at
the rate of $25 each semester. Co-op residents and off-campus residents are charged a $25 neighborhood residential fee each semester.
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts requires that all full- and part-time students enrolled in institutions of higher education located in Massachu-
setts must participate in a qualifying student health insurance plan offered by the institution or in another health insurance program affording compara-
ble coverage.
The College offers a qualifying student health insurance plan to all students. Students may waive participation in the College's plan if the student
certifies prior to August 1, 2011 at www.gallagherkoster.com/williams that the coverage offered by an alternative program chosen by the student is
comparable to the plan offered by the College.
Information about the student health insurance plan offered by the College is e-mailed to every student in June. Questions about the College's plan or
about the online waiver/enrollment process should be directed to the Koster Insurance Agency at 800-406-5205 or by e-mail at williamsstudent@gal-
lagherkoster.com
There may be a $5 per day processing fee for any registration changes accepted after the announced deadlines. There is a charge of $25 for a lost key.
Payment of College Bills
A non-refundable deposit of $200 to reserve a place in the first-year class is required from all admitted candidates (except certain financial aid
recipients) by the Candidate's Reply Date of May 1. The deposit appears as a credit on the term bill rendered in July.
College term bills for one half of the annual comprehensive fee are issued electronically to students twice a year--in July payable in August and in
December payable in January. Students are encouraged to grant access to their "e-bill" to parents and other parties to be able to view and pay the
student's term bill online. Payments may be made by electronically by ACH, by check, money order or wire transfer or by credit card, MasterCard,
Discover or American Express. Credit card payments are subject to a 2.99% convenience fee.
Students who receive a scholarship(s) that was not awarded through the Williams Office of Financial Aid must complete a Scholarship Information
Sheet and mail it to the Financial Aid Office by early June. Provisional credit will be posted to the semester bill for the following; anticipated disburse-
ments of direct loans for which a promissory note has been signed and returned to the Office of Financial Aid, anticipated disbursements of outside
loans approved by the lender, outside scholarships which have not yet been received and applied against the student account and any remaining semes-
ter contract amount for the Ten Month Payment Plan. If actual payment for the above provisional credits are not received by the date anticipated, the
provisional credit will expire and be removed from the student's account creating a balance due.
A check returned to the College for any reason such as "account closed" or "insufficient funds" will be charged to the student's term bill and a
"return check charge" of $25.00 will be assessed. The College reserves the right to require that payment be made in the form of cash, cashier check or
money order.
Students with bills still unpaid at the start of the semester who have not made satisfactory arrangements with the Bursar will not be permitted to
enroll in classes or remain in residence at the College. Furthermore, if arrangements for payment after the start of the semester are approved by the
Bursar and these expected payments are not made on time, students may not be allowed to enroll for the next semester.
20
If efforts by the Bursar's Office to collect the monies owed are unsuccessful, the account could be placed with a collection agency, and if the delin-
quency persists, the College's experience with the account may be reported to a national credit bureau. It is the policy of the College to pass on to the
debtor all reasonable costs associated with collection of the debt through a collection agency. If at any time the student believes information concerning
payment delinquency is inaccurate, he/she should notify the College c/o The Bursar's Office, P.O. Box 406, Williamstown, MA 01267.
There are several loan options available to parents through outside sources. These include the MassPlan Loan through the Massachusetts Education-
al Financing Authority and the Federal Plus Loan Program. Information on these loans can be found in the brochureA Guide to Borrowing for College.
Williams also offers an installment plan, administered by Tuition Management Services whereby the yearly charges are paid in 10 equal installments
starting in June, with no interest charges. There are no income restrictions. Monthly payments will be the total cost (less any scholarships, Stafford or
parent loans) divided by 10. There is an administration fee for this program. Information on this program is sent each spring to all parents or can be
obtained by calling Tuition Management Services at (888) 216-4258.
Refund Policy
Federal regulations require that all educational institutions disclose their refund policy to all prospective students. In accordance with that regulation,
below is the Williams College Refund Policy for the 2011-2012 academic year.
Date of Withdrawal
Prior to start of classes September 8 100% (tuition and all fees)
Week 1 September 8-14 90% (tuition, board only)*
Week 2 September 15-21 80% (tuition, board only)*
Week 3 September 22-28 70% (tuition, board only)*
Week 4 Sept. 29-Oct. 5 60% (tuition, board only)*
Week 5 October 6-12 50% (tuition, board only)*
Week 6 October 13-19 40% (tuition, board only)*
Week 7 October 20-26 30% (tuition, board only)*
Week 8 October 27-November 2 20% (tuition, board only)*
No refund after November 2, 2011
Fall Semester 2011
Date of Withdrawal
Prior to start of classes February 1
February 1-7
February 8-14
February 15-21
February 22-28
February 29-March 6
March 7-13
March 14-20
March 21-27
No refund after March 27, 2012
Winter Study/Spring Semester 2012
*Housing and miscellaneous fees are not pro-rated after the start of classes. Coverage under the College's student health insurance plan will continue
for the length of the plan (August 15, 2011-August 14, 2012).
For students receiving Title IV federal funds, repayment of federal funds on a pro-rata basis will be determined up to the 60% point of the semester
per federal regulation. Please note that withdrawal late in the semester could result in a balance owed to the College for federal aid that must be returned
to the program.
Repayment is first made to federal programs in the following order: Unsubsidized Federal Direct Stafford Loan, Subsidized Federal Direct Stafford
Loan, Federal Perkins Loan, Federal Direct PLUS Loan, Federal Pell Grant, Federal SEOG, Federal ACG, National Smart, Federal SSIG, Robert Byrd
Scholarship. Any remaining credit balance reimburses other sources in the following order: Williams scholarship, other scholarships, other parent loan
programs and family. Specific examples are available on request.
The College offers, through A.W.G. Dewar, Inc., a Tuition Refund Plan which supplements the Williams College Refund Policy in certain circum-
stances. A brochure describing this plan will be sent to you under separate cover, or you may contact Dewar, Inc. directly at (617) 774-1555 or online at
http://www.tuitionrefundplan.com.
The College will issue a 1098-T form at the end of each calendar year for the HOPE and Lifetime Learning tax credits.
Financial Aid
Williams has a substantial financial aid program to promote the greatest possible diversity in the social and economic background of the student
population. Students interested in financial aid policies and procedures should consult Williams College Prospectus, the Student Handbook, or the
Office of Financial Aid (finaid@williams.edu).
 21 
ENDOWED SCHOLARSHIPS AND TUTORIALS
Distinctive Undergraduate Scholarships
Williams College, through the Office of Financial Aid, administers over three hundred endowed schol-
arships, all of which are based on demonstrated need. Students who apply for financial assistance are auto-
matically considered for all these and other endowed scholarships. No separate application is required.
Limited space prohibits the complete listing of these, but some deserve special mention because of their
distinctiveness.
BRONFMAN FAMILY FUND--Established in 1990 as part of the Third Century Campaign for inter-
national programs. The family's support provides financial aid both for students coming to Williams from
foreign countries and for students spending part of their undergraduate years overseas.
CLASS OF 1936 MEMORIAL SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1986 by members of the Class of
1936 and their families and friends as its 50th Reunion gift to the College. Preference is given to descen-
dents of members of the Class of 1936.
CLASS OF 1957 SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1982 by the Class of 1957 as its 25th Reunion gift
to the College. This award honors several Juniors and Seniors each year who have successfully combined
campus leadership with academic achievement.
POLLY AND WILLARD D. DICKERSON '40 SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1990 by members
of the Class of 1940 on the occasion of their 50th Reunion in honor of Willard D. Dickerson '40, Executive
Director of Development Emeritus, and his wife Polly. For 32 years from their home in Williamstown the
Dickersons cared for the College, the Class, and its members with great concern, affection, and pride.
Awarded to young men and women of promise.
MARY AGNES R. AND PETER D. KIERNAN '44 SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1989 by Fleet
Financial Group in memory of Peter D. Kiernan '44, former chairman and CEO of Fleet/Norstar Financial
Group, Inc. The scholarship was further endowed by Peter D. Kiernan III '75, and his wife Eaddo, in
memory of his father and in honor of his mother, Mary Agnes R. Kiernan. Seven scholarships are awarded
annually, with preference given first to Fleet employees and their children or to residents of regions served
by Fleet Financial Group (notably New England, New York, and New Jersey). A secondary preference is
given to students from Ireland.
JOHN W. LASELL SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1952 by five members of the Lasell family in
memory of John W. Lasell of the Class of 1920. Preference is given first to students of Whitinsville; then to
other Massachusetts residents.
HERBERT H. LEHMAN SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1964 by Mrs. Lehman as a memorial to
her husband, a former New York Governor and U.S. Senator, who graduated from Williams in 1899. Fif-
teen to twenty upperclass students are selected each year on the basis of service to both the Williams and
wider community.
MORRIS AND GLADYS LEWY SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1983 by Morris and Gladys
Lewy, parents and grandparents to two Williams graduates. Preference in these awards is given to pre-
medical students.
JOHN J. LOUIS, JR. '47 SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1976 by the late John J. Louis, Jr., former
Trustee of Williams, for general scholarship purposes. Preference is given to students from Illinois.
RALPH PERKINS '09 SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1960 by the family of Ralph Perkins, a
member of the class of 1909. Preference in this award is to be given to students from Ohio.
FREDERICK H. ROBINSON '20 MEMORIAL SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1988 by the late
Mrs. Dorothy S. Robinson in memory of her husband, a member of the Class of 1920. Preference in the
award is to be given to students who demonstrate interest in music.
SPENCER FAMILY SCHOLARSHIP--Established at Williams in 1991 by Mrs. Harriet Spencer, a
former Trustee of the College, in honor of her husband's (Edson W. Spencer '48) 65th birthday and her
great affection and respect for Williams College. Preference in this award is to be given to students of Na-
tive American, African-American, Latino, or Asian-American descent.
Expenses
 22 
C. V. STARR SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1981 by the C. V. Starr Foundation with prefer-
ence to be given to international students.
FRANCIS LYNDE STETSON SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1921-22 by Francis Lynde Stetson,
Class of 1867. Preference in these awards is to be given to students from northern New York.
JACOB C. STONE SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1928 by Jacob C. Stone, a member of the Class
of 1914, a Trustee of Williams, and a native of North Adams, Massachusetts. Preference in this award is to
be given to students from Berkshire County.
STEPHEN H. TYNG SCHOLARSHIP--Established in 1940 through the bequest of Mrs. Juliet Tyng,
in memory of both her husband and son. These scholarships are the most distinctive awards presented each
year to six to eight of the most promising scholars in the first-year class. Tyng Scholars are also eligible for
assistance for up to three years of graduate/professional study.
Alumni Funded Tutorials
Tutorials bring a professor and two students together in weekly sessions that epitomize President James
A. Garfield's (Class of 1856) legendary statement: "The ideal college is Mark Hopkins on one end of the
log and a student on the other." They forge student-professor bonds, teach students about arguments, about
arriving at and defending a position, and about responding on the spot to questions, criticisms, and sugges-
tions. They also promote critical reading, the writing of succinct analyses, and oral defense.
The College recognizes the Classes of 1953, 1954, and 1979 with deepest gratitude for supporting tuto-
rials with their generous 25th and 50th Reunion gifts. Williams is also pleased to recognize the following
individuals and families who have created generous endowments to support tutorials, many in honor of
their 25th and 50th Reunions: Hugh Germanetti 1954, David A. Gray 1954, Robert L. Guyett 1958, The
Hunter Family, John D. Mabie 1954, and John H. Simpson 1979, The Testa Family.
23
PREPARATIONFORGRADUATEAND PROFESSIONALSTUDY
Although the principle function of Williams is to provide a broad and solid liberal education that will be of lasting value no matter what the vocation
a student may pursue, the College recognizes that no fundamental conflict exists between a liberal education and preparation for a professional career;
on the contrary, a foundation of liberal studies increases professional competence in any field. A student should plan his or her program of study so as to
provide as much educational breadth and enrichment as circumstances permit. A student should also give serious consideration to post-college plans
early in the college career.
Each departmental major provides the foundation for graduate study in the corresponding field. Students should consult the departmental programs
listed under "Courses of Instruction" for requirements, and for special advice regarding preparation for graduate study. Students should also consult
with the appropriate departmental chairman or the special faculty advisors as early as possible in their college careers to make certain they have taken
all the necessary factors into consideration.
Particular attention is called to the foreign language requirements of graduate study. Candidates for the degree of doctor of philosophy at almost all
graduate schools are required to have a reading knowledge of both French and German. Under certain circumstances another language may replace
French. Many graduate schools require also a knowledge of Latin for students of English and Romantic Languages. Candidates for the master of arts
degree are required to have a reading knowledge of either French or German. Students should consult departmental chairmen or the faculty advisors for
the requirements in specific fields of study.
Visual Arts
Students interested in graduate studies in art or architecture should meet with faculty with whom they have completed advanced work in the areas
they wish to pursue. Their counsel and that of the Department of Art Academic Advisor, Ed Epping, can help the student narrow the search of pro-
grams that would best match the student's needs. The specific requirements of all art and architecture schools offering Master of Arts and/or Master of
Fine Arts is available from their online resource.
The College Art Association (CAA) has written:
"Admission to (graduate) programs should be based on the nature, extent, and quality of under-
graduate preparation, including courses in studio, art history, and other academic subjects. Quality
of studio preparation can best be judged on the basis of careful evaluation of work done at the un-
dergraduate level; therefore, a portfolio review (usually represented by slides) is regarded as an
absolute necessity in the admission process.
While many institutions consider the BFA to be the standard qualifying degree, the fact that the
applicant has attended a BA- or BS-granting institution does not necessarily rule out acceptance
in most MFA programs. Whatever the undergraduate degree, most entering graduate students tend
not to be completely prepared in one or more of the areas cited above and will require remedial
make-up work...
Some institutions use the MA degree as a qualifying prerequisite for final acceptance into MFA
candidacy, allowing the student to apply the earned credits toward the higher degree."
Students are advised to take into consideration not only current minimum requirements but also recommended courses.
Business Administration
Williams offers no special course in preparation for a business career for graduate study in business administration. The qualities which are impor-
tant to succeed in business, and which graduate business schools are seeking, are an ability to reason and to express oneself logically and clearly in
written and oral exposition; a good understanding of the physical and social environment in which business operates; a solid background in quantitative
skills; and an appreciation of human motivations and goals. This means that a broad liberal arts program is preferred over a highly specialized one.
Within this broad prescription it may be desirable to have at least one year of economics and one year of mathematics (including statistics and
calculus). For those interested in production management or operation research, additional work in any quantitative course and/or a course in computer
science would be helpful.
But there is no particular major at Williams that is designated as preparation for the business profession. Students interested in futures in business are
encouraged to undertake a broad educational program in the arts, humanities, and sciences. It is important that one gets involved in extra-curricular
activities, one holds a leadership position, and pursuing relevant summer internships is critical.
Students interested in graduate work in business administration should consult with the Pre-MBA Advisor, Robin Meyer, at the Office of Career
Counseling.
Engineering
Many Williams graduates enjoy productive careers in engineering, applied science, or technical management. Successful engineers need to
be able to communicate effectively, reason logically, and understand both the technical and the social dimensions of a problem. A prospective
engineer should major in one of the sciences (usually physics, chemistry, computer science, or mathematics), while pursuing a broad liberal arts
education at Williams. Most often he or she will complete a Williams B.A. in the usual four years and then go to an engineering school for
professional training leading to a master's degree or doctorate in engineering. While it may be necessary to make up a few undergraduate engi-
neering courses, the opportunities at Williams to participate in scientific research and the breadth of a liberal arts education prepare Williams
graduates to succeed in engineering graduate study and in their careers.
The "Pre-Engineering" webpage can be found in the Physics Department section of the College website. It contains a list of Williams courses
recommended to prospective engineers. Students interested in engineering also have the opportunity to take undergraduate engineering courses
at other institutions. Williams maintains exchange programs with California Institute of Technology, Thayer School of Engineering at Dart-
mouth College, and Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. Williams students can arrange to study at one of these leading engineering schools for one
or two semesters, typically during the junior year. Please see the "Exchange Programs" section of this catalog for more information. The 3-2
program offers an opportunity to study engineering at the undergraduate level at Columbia. Please see the "Combined Program in Liberal Arts
and Engineering" section for information.
24
The pre-engineering advisor, Professor Jefferson Strait, will be happy to help plan course selections and to discuss the possible paths to a career in
engineering. Many more details about pre-engineering.
Law
Williams graduates regularly proceed directly to law schools on the strength of their liberal arts education. As a rule, law schools do not require
particular pre-law curriculum for undergraduates. Consequently, application and admission to law school is open to qualified students from all academ-
ic disciplines. This does not mean, however, that law schools are indifferent to one's undergraduate academic experience. In fact, law schools will be
very conscious of the quality and rigor of one's undergraduate education. A serious student, considering law school, will heed this advice and undertake
a challenging program.
Students intending to study law should consult with the Pre-Law Advisor, Dawn Dellea, at the Office of Career Counseling. Also, on a regular basis,
law schools from around the country will visit Williams to provide information and to answer questions from potential applicants. Check the OCC
calendar for notice of these visits.
The Health Professions
Many Williams graduates elect to pursue a career in medicine, dentistry, veterinary medicine, public health, or other health-related fields. All are
welcome to seek guidance from the Health Professions Office within the Office of Career Counseling.
Students interested in medicine and related fields should pursue a broad liberal arts education, letting enthusiasm for subjects be a guide. In most
cases, a student should acquire volunteer service and field-specific internship experience in an effort to confirm interest in the chosen field. With careful
planning, any major can be studied.
In order to pursue a career in a health-related field, a student must pay particular attention to the courses required for graduate school admission. In
certain fields, upwards of twelve courses are listed as prerequisites. The general requirements for many programs are outlined in "Choosing First Year
Courses," but each student considering advanced study in health fields should meet with the Health Professions Advisor early in the college career to
ensure that planned coursework will meet satisfy admissions requirements.
Jane Cary, the Health Professions Advisor, will be happy to discuss goals and specific steps that might help a student realize them. Detailed informa-
tion is available at the Health Professions website (www.williams.edu/go/careers/prehealth_welcome.php).
Pre-College and College Teaching/Research
A central qualification for careers in teaching at any level is proficiency in a major. Students interested in college teaching and research should
prepare themselves at Williams for graduate work in the subject of their choice. Those interested in teaching at the elementary or secondary level
should plan to attain state certification and/or earn an MAT or M.Ed at a good graduate school. There are many opportunities to do teaching internships
and study education as an undergraduate while at Williams.
Students interested in college teaching should consult with the chairs of the departments in which they intend to major. Those interested in teaching
at the elementary and secondary level should consult with the Director of the Program in Teaching. Additional advice for both of these options is also
available at the Office of Career Counseling.
Teaching After Williams
There are many options for teaching after Williams, including independent and public school teaching. Many states now offer streamlined programs
to certify public school teachers, and many states offer a wide range of options for acquiring certification while you teach.
Students interested in teaching may want to consider participating in the Program in Teaching at Williams which is designed to enable undergradu-
ates to study the ideas, questions, and practices involved in good teaching at all levels. The program is open to any student interested in education and
offers opportunities for all levels of interest, including those who want to find out about certification and graduate study (see page ? for more details).
Students should contact Susan Engel, the Director of the Program, to find out how they might participate in the program.
Students who want career advice should contact the Office of Career Counseling which has a very active on-campus educational recruiting program
that includes many private schools as well as Teach for America and similar programs. The program begins in the fall and continues through the spring.
Students interested in teaching at independent elementary- or secondary-level schools or participating in the Teach for America or similar programs
directly after graduation from Williams (certification is not required) should consult with the Office of Career Counseling.
Religious Study
There is no particular path through the Williams curriculum designed or recommended for students intending to prepare for a career as a religious
professional, enroll in a seminary or pursue theological education. Undergraduate study in many fields within the liberal arts curriculum can be useful
to the prospective minister, priest, rabbi, imam, or teacher of religion.
Students contemplating advanced academic work in religious studies in preparation for a career in teaching or scholarship should give serious con-
sideration to concentrated undergraduate study in the field, in consultation with faculty advisors in the Department of Religion.
Students with vocational interests that may include ordination or certification as a religious professional in a field such as chaplaincy or religious
education are urged to make themselves known to one of the chaplains (or, where appropriate, one of the local clergy) as soon as these interests begin to
come into focus. Ordination requirements vary widely depending on the particular religious community or tradition; in some cases it may be possible to
make progress on certain credentials in academic study or field experience during the college years. A basic foundation in the study of religion is
certainly helpful--sacred texts, scriptural languages, history, philosophy, phenomenology and comparative studies, etc. Undergraduate study in other
disciplines --music and the arts, political science and economics, anthropology, psychology and sociology--may also enhance preparations at the
graduate level for future service to communities of faith.
25
GRADUATE PROGRAMS AT WILLIAMS
Master of Arts in Policy Economics
The Center for Development Economics (CDE), which opened at Williams College in 1960, offers an intensive one-year program in economic
analysis leading to the degree of Master of Arts in Policy Economics. The program is specifically designed for economists from developing countries
who have already embarked on professional careers in the public sector. The curriculum requires courses in development economics, macroeconom-
ics, public finance, and econometrics. CDE fellows choose among other courses in lecture, seminar, and tutorial formats. Course electives for
2011-2012 include the following: developing country macroeconomics II; finance and development; empirical methods in macroeconomics; comput-
able general equilibrium modeling; tax policy; institutions and governance; international trade; environmental policy; international financial institu-
tions;development successes; the role of social safety nets; the practice and empirics of monetary policy; and micro-simulation for policy analysis.
Williams undergraduates who satisfy course prerequisites, with the consent of the individual instructor, are encouraged to take courses at the CDE.
Admission to the master's degree program is highly selective, with several hundred applicants each year for approximately 25 to 30 places. Candidates
normally have a B.A. or B.Sc. degree with honors in economics or a related field, two or more years of relevant work experience, and an effective
command of spoken and written English. CDE fellows are often nominated for the program by public agencies from which they will be on leave.
More information is available on the CDE website, cde.williams.edu . All communications relating to the degree of Master of Arts in Policy Eco-
nomics should be addressed to the CDE, Assistant Director, 1065 Main Street, Williams College, Williamstown, MA 01267, or e-mail cde@wil-
liams.edu.
Master of Arts in the History of Art
In cooperation with the Sterling and Francine Clark Art Institute, Williams College offers a two-year course of study leading to the degree of Master
of Arts in the History of Art. The objective of the program is to offer to a small number of students a thorough professional preparation for careers in
teaching and museums, and to enable them to pursue further research whether independently or at other institutions offering higher degrees. The curric-
ulum consists of seminars in a wide range of art historical subjects. Opportunities are provided for practical experience in museum work at The Clark,
the Williams College Museum of Art, and the Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art. The study of primary materials is further extended by
field trips to other collections. The degree is normally awarded after two years of resident graduate study. To earn the degree, students must take ten
courses, of which at least six must be graduate seminars (including ARTH 504). In connection with the preparation of a paper for the Graduate Sympo-
sium, students will register for an eleventh course (ARTH 509), to be graded pass/fail, in their fourth semester. A demonstration of proficiency in
reading two foreign languages is required. Of these two, German is required, and French is recommended. In January of the first year, students partici-
pate in a European study trip with selected faculty; in January of the second year, students must complete a Qualifying Paper. In addition to all course
work, students must, at the end of the second year, present a shortened version of the Qualifying Paper in a graduate symposium to be held on Com-
mencement weekend. To enter the program a successful applicant must have been awarded the degree of Bachelor of Arts or its equivalent from an
accredited institution. An undergraduate major in art is not required for acceptance to the program.
For further information, write: The Director, Graduate Program in the History of Art, Box 8, Williamstown, Massachusetts 01267, telephone (413)
458-9545, or email gradart@williams.edu. More information is available on the Graduate Program website, www.williams.edu/gra-
dart.
26
PRIZES AND AWARDS
Click here for the names of persons to whom awards have been made in 2010-2011.
George Olmsted Jr., Class of 1924 Prizes
Awarded for excellence in teaching to four secondary school teachers nominated by members of the senior class.
Prizes in Special Studies
JOHN SABIN ADRIANCE 1882 PRIZE IN CHEMISTRY. From a fund given by John Sabin Adriance, 1882, a cash prize is given to the student who has
maintained the highest rank in all courses offered by the department of chemistry.
ROBERT G. BARROW MEMORIAL PRIZE FORMUSICCOMPOSITION. Established in 1989 in memory of Robert Barrow, professor of music at Williams
1939-1976, to be awarded to a qualified music student on the basis of his/her accomplishment in music composition at Williams College and on
promise as a composer.
ERASTUS C. BENEDICT 1821 PRIZES. From a sum of money given by Erastus C. Benedict, 1821, once an instructor in the College, first and
second cash prizes are awarded for excellence in biology, French, German, Latin, Greek, history and mathematics.
RUSSELL H. BOSTERT THESIS PRIZE IN HISTORY. A cash prize established in 1990 by Roger L. Headrick 1958 in honor of Professor Bostert, Stan-
field Professor of History, on the occasion of his retirement after forty-two years as a member of the Williams faculty, and awarded to an Honors
student for the best thesis in American History, with special consideration to inter-American relations or Sino-American relations.
KENNETH L. BROWN 1947 PRIZE IN AMERICAN STUDIES. From a fund established by his parents in memory of Kenneth L. Brown, 1947, a cash
prize is awarded annually to a senior majoring in American Studies.
NATHAN BROWN PRIZE IN HISTORY. In honor of Nathan Brown, a member of the class of 1827 who was a distinguished linguist and missionary
to several Asian countries, the department of history awards a book to the first-year student or sophomore who writes the best essay in a course in
African, Asian, Latin American, or Middle Eastern history.
DAVID TAGGART CLARK PRIZE IN LATIN. Established by a bequest from the estate of David Taggart Clark, a cash prize is awarded annually to a
sophomore or first-year student who excels in Latin declaration or recitation.
JAMES BRONSON CONANT AND NATHAN RUSSELL HARRINGTON 1893 PRIZE IN BIOLOGY. A cash prize founded by the class of 1893 in memory of two
of their classmates is awarded upon the recommendation of the chairman of the department of biology for outstanding work done in biology.
S. LANE FAISON, JR. 1929 PRIZE. S. Lane Faison Jr. '29 (19072006) was among the most influential art educators of the twentieth century, and
taught several generations of America's leading museum directors, curators and scholars. He did so by setting the highest standards for looking
carefully and sensitively at paintings and sculpture. As a curator and art critic for the influential journalThe Nation, he was an important voice in
the world of contemporary art, which he wrote about with the same clarity, precision and wit that he brought to the great art of the past.The S. Lane
Faison, Jr. 1929 Prize is awarded to the student whose paper best reflects his high standards in the critical engagement with an object of art.
DORIS DE KEYSERLINGK PRIZE IN RUSSIAN. A book awarded annually by the department of Russian in honor of Doris de Keyserlingk, teacher of
Russian at Williams College from 1958 to 1971, to a student who has earned distinction in Russian studies.
GARRETT WRIGHT DE VRIES 1932 MEMORIAL PRIZE IN ROMANCE LANGUAGES. From a fund in memory of Garrett De Vries, 1932, given by his
father, Dr. Joseph C. De Vries, a cash prize is awarded annually on recommendation of the department of Romance languages for excellence in
Spanish.
JEAN DONATI STUDENT EMPLOYEE AWARD IN MUSIC. Established in 1988 by colleagues and friends, in recognition of Jean Donati's service to the
music department in management of both office and concert operations (1966-1988). Awarded to a senior who has done the most for the music
department as a student employee during his/her years at Williams.
HENRY A. DWIGHT 1829 BOTANICAL PRIZE. From a fund created by the bequest of Nellie A. Dwight to establish a prize in memory of her father,
Henry A. Dwight, 1829, a cash prize is awarded annually to the student who maintains the highest standing in botany or a related area of study.
ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES COMMITTEE AWARD. For outstanding contributions to the Environmental Studies community at Williams.
THE NICHOLAS P. FERSEN PRIZE IN RUSSIAN. A book awarded annually by the Department of Russian to a student whose intellectual vitality and
passion for Russian culture reflect the spirit of Nicholas Fersen, professor of Russian at Williams from 1960-1988.
FREEMAN FOOTE PRIZE IN GEOLOGY. Established in 1986 by a group of alumni in honor of Professor Emeritus of Geology Freeman Foote. For an
outstanding senior thesis in Geology.
ROBERT W. FRIEDRICHS AWARD IN SOCIOLOGY. Established in 1986 by parents of a graduating senior, to be awarded to a senior major for excel-
lence in sociology.
FULKERSON AWARD FOR LEADERSHIP IN THE ARTS. Awarded to a graduating senior or Williams-Clark graduate student in art history for his/her
initiative in raising awareness of the visual arts on campus and showing the characteristics of a future arts leader.
GILBERT W. GABRIEL 1912 MEMORIALPRIZE INTHEATRE. From afund established in 1953 by a group of friends in memory of Gilbert W. Gabriel,
1912, a cash prize is awarded to that senior who has made the most notable contribution to the advancement of theatre at Williams College. The
committee of award includes the director of the Adams Memorial Theatre, one other faculty member, and the president of the Gargoyle Society.
SAM GOLDBERG COLLOQUIUM PRIZES. Established in 1985 by a gift from Professor Sam Goldberg of Oberlin College. For the best colloquium
presentations in mathematics and in computer science.
PATRICIA GOLDMAN-RAKIC PRIZE IN NEUROSCIENCE. Established in 2008 by Toni Ianniello and George Chuzi, parents of Sarah Chuzi, 2007, in
recognition of Patricia Goldman-Rakic for her contributions to the field of neuroscience and her support of neuroscience education at Williams
College. Awarded to a student who has demonstrated exceptional achievement in research within the field of neuroscience.
FRANK C. GOODRICH 1945 AWARD IN CHEMISTRY. Established by Mrs. L. Carrington Goodrich to honor her son, Professor Frank C. Goodrich
,1945. An award in Chemistry given each year to a student (or students), chosen by the chemistry faculty who demonstrated excellence in chem-
istry research. This award supports travel to professional meetings where the student may present his or her research.
WILLIAM C. GRANT, JR. PRIZE IN BIOLOGY. A cash award to recognize that graduating biology major who has demonstrated the highest excel-
lence and greatest insights in integrating different fields within the biological sciences.
LAWRENCE S. GRAVER PRIZE IN THEATRE. A cash prize to a junior or senior showing great potential in the performing arts as exemplified through
excellence in criticism and scholarship.
FREDERICK C. HAGEDORN, JR. 1971 PREMEDICAL PRIZE. From a fund created in 1971 by friends and the family of Frederick C. Hagedorn, Jr.,
1971, in his memory, a cash prize is awarded to a premedical student entering the senior class, on the advice of the Faculty Premedical Advisory
Committee, "in recognition of academic achievement and the embodiment of the principles of the medical profession."
G. STANLEY HALL 1867 PRIZE IN PSYCHOLOGY. Established in 2008 by Toni Ianniello and George Chuzi, parents of Sarah Chuzi, 2007, in recog-
nition of G. Stanley Hall, 1867, a pioneer in the science of psychology, known for establishing the first psychological research laboratory in the
United States and serving as the first president of the American Psychological Association. Awarded to a student who has demonstrated excep-
tional achievement in research within the field of psychology.
TOMHARDIE 1978 MEMORIAL PRIZE IN ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES. Established in 1976 by friends and members of his family in memory of Thom-
as G. Hardie III, 1978. Awarded for the best student work in environmental studies judged in an annual competition. The prize consists of a
certificate and publication of the work of the Tom Hardie Memorial Series.
CHARLES W. HUFFORD BOOK PRIZE. Established in 1988 in memory of Charles W. Hufford, 1989, by his family, friends, and classmates and
awarded to the student teaching assistant in Political Science who has served with the same high enthusiasm and excellence exhibited in that
capacity by Charles Hufford.
27
CHARLES W. HUFFORD MEMORIAL FELLOWSHIP. Established in 1988 in memory of Charles W. Hufford, 1989, by his family, friends, and class-
mates and awarded to a member of the junior class to support independent research or work in the field of political economy or political science
during the summer before the senior year.
THEJEFFREYOWENJONES1966 FELLOWSHIP INJOURNALISM. Established in 2009 by a group of friends and family of Jeffrey Owen Jones, Class of
1966, to honor his memory. The fellowship is an annual award to a graduating senior for postgraduate work or study in the field of journalism,
the profession Jeff practiced with dedication and distinction over the course of his lifetime.
ARTHUR JUDSON PRIZE IN MUSIC. Established in 1984 by a gift of $10,000 from the Arthur Judson Foundation. Selection to be made by the
Faculty of the Music Department. Awarded to a student for achievement in music, with preference given to those "choosing or planning a career
in Music Management or Music Administration."
LAWRENCEJ. ANDCAROLYNM.KAPLANPRIZE FORDEDICATION TO ANDLEADERSHIP IN THEWILLIAMSCOLLEGEJEWISHASSOCIATION. Established in honor
of Professor (Williams Chemistry Department, 1971) and Mrs. Kaplan's dedication and commitment to enriching the lives of the Jewish stu-
dents at Williams College, this prize is awarded annually to a senior who has shown sincere participation, responsibility, engagement, and
menschlichkeit on behalf of the Williams College Jewish Community throughout his/her college career. In addition to a cash prize, a book of
Jewish interest, to be selected by the Jewish Chaplain, the faculty advisor to the WCJA, and/or the professors in Jewish Studies, will be given to
the recipient. A copy of this book will be donated to the library in the Jewish Religious Center in honor of the recipient. The selection of the
recipient or recipients is made by a committee of the student leaders of the WCJA in consultation with the Jewish Chaplain or, in the event there is
no Jewish Chaplain, the faculty advisor of the WCJA and/or Dean of the College.
ARTHURC.KAUFMANNPRIZE IN ENGLISH. In memory of Arthur C. Kaufmann, 1899, a fund has been established by his fellow workers for a book
prize awarded annually on the recommendation of the English department for excellence in English.
MUHAMMAD KENYATTA 1966 COMMUNITY SERVICE PRIZE. Established in 1993 to honor the memory of Muhammad Kenyatta, '66, this prize will
be awarded each year to the graduating senior whose undergraduate experience reflects outstanding community service involvement with Berk-
shire County.
WILLIAM W. KLEINHANDLER PRIZE FOR EXCELLENCE IN MUSIC. Established in 1991 in memory of William Kleinhandler, 1950, as an annual prize
for excellence by a student in the department of Music.
ROBERT M. KOZELKA PRIZE IN STATISTICS. In 2000, the new Department of Mathematics and Statistics established the annual Kozelka Prize in
Statistics to recognize an excellent statistics student. The prize honors the former chair and statistician, Robert M. Kozelka, who was widely
recognized for his applications of statistics in the social sciences, especially anthropology.
RICHARD W. KROUSE PRIZE IN POLITICAL SCIENCE. From a fund established in 1987 by the political science department in memory of Professor
Richard W. Krouse (1975-1986), awarded annually to a junior or senior who has done distinguished work in Political Science and who best
exemplifies the intellectual and humane qualities that characterized the life of Professor Krouse.
JACK LARNED 1942 INTERNATIONAL MANAGEMENT PRIZES. In memory of Jack Larned, 1942, two annual prizes are awarded for student papers of
superior quality dealing with the management of development in governments and private or public enterprises in African, Asian, or Latin Amer-
ican countries. One award will be for undergraduate students at Williams. The other will be for graduate students at the Center for Development
Economics. Selection of the winners will be made by faculty members who specialize in economic development and related fields.
LINENSENIORPRIZES INASIANSTUDIES. Three prizes to graduating seniors who achieve distinction and show outstanding promise. One prize to
an Asian Studies major; one prize each to any senior, whether a major in the Department of Asian Studies or not, who has taken Chinese language
and Japanese language during her/his Williams career.
LINEN SENIOR THESIS PRIZE IN ASIAN STUDIES. Prize to a graduating senior who writes an outstanding honors thesis, with preference given to
majors in the Department of Asian Studies, but also open to non-majors who write a highest honors thesis, with a substantial focus on Asia,
supervised by a member of the Asian Studies faculty.
H.GANSELITTLE,JR.PRIZE IN RELIGION. Established in 1997 by former students to honor Professor Little, who taught in the religion department
at Williams from 1963-1997, to be awarded to a senior major for excellence in the study of religion.
DAVID N. MAJOR 1981 PRIZE IN GEOLOGY. Established in 1984 in memory of David N. Major, 1981, who died in an accident aboard an oceano-
graphic vessel in June 1980. Awarded to an outstanding graduating senior in geology.
NANCY MCINTIRE PRIZE IN WOMEN'S AND GENDER STUDIES. A cash prize established by Gwen Rankin, 1975, for impressive contributions by a
graduating senior to Women's and Gender Studies.
LEVERETT MEARS PRIZE IN CHEMISTRY. From a fund established by a member of the class of 1906, a cash prize is awarded to that senior majoring
in chemistry who has been admitted to graduate study in the medical sciences or to medical school, and who, in the opinion of the members of the
chemistry department, has had a distinguished record in chemistry and shows outstanding promise.
WILLIS I. MILHAM PRIZE IN ASTRONOMY. Established in 1968 by Betsey M. Milham, a cash prize is awarded to a senior who is majoring in
science or mathematics, is a member of Phi Beta Kappa and has a grade of `A' in at least one year course in the department of astronomy.
JOHN W. MILLER PRIZE IN PHILOSOPHY. A group of grateful alumni who studied under Professor John W. Miller have established a fund as a
continuing symbol of their appreciation of his teaching. The income shall be used to purchase a book prize to be awarded to the individual se-
lected by the chairman of the philosophy department as the outstanding philosophy student for the year.
MORGAN PRIZE IN MATHEMATICS. A cash prize established in 1993 by Frank Morgan, Professor of Mathematics, and awarded at commence-
ment to a senior major for accomplishment and promise in applied math or math teaching.
RICHARD AGER NEWHALLBOOK PRIZE IN EUROPEANHISTORY. In honor of Richard Ager Newhall, distinguished historian and teacher of history at
Williams College, 1924-1956, the department of history awards a book to the first-year student or sophomore who writes the best essay in an
introductory course in European History.
JAMES ORTON AWARD IN ANTHROPOLOGY. Established in commemoration of James Orton, 1855, a naturalist and explorer, to be awarded to a
senior major for excellence in Anthropology.
FREDERICK M. PEYSER PRIZE IN PAINTING. Awarded annually by a faculty selection committee to a student for a distinguished painting.
JAMES LATHROP RICE 1854 PRIZE IN CLASSICAL LANGUAGES. From the bequest of James Lathrop Rice, 1884, for the encouragement of Latin and
Greek scholarship, a cash prize is awarded to a junior or senior for distinguished work in Latin studies, and a similar prize is awarded for distin-
guished work in Greek.
ROBERTF.ROSENBURGPRIZE FOREXCELLENCE INENVIRONMENTALSTUDIES. Established in 1989 and awarded to a member of the graduating class in
recognition of outstanding scholarship, potential for solving local, national, or international environmental problems, and strong prospects for
leadership in the environmental community.
ROBERT F. ROSENBURG PRIZE IN MATHEMATICS. Established in 1991 from the bequest of Robert F. Rosenburg, 1937, a cash prize is awarded by
the mathematics faculty to a senior for excellence in mathematics.
SIDNEY A. SABBETH PRIZE IN POLITICAL ECONOMY. Established in 1988 by Michael G. Sabbeth, 1969, in memory of his father, a cash prize for a
senior majoring in political economy who best combines the disciplines of political science and economics with a sense of compassion and
respect for the dignity of the human spirit. The selection to be made by the chair of the program after consultation with the Advisory Committee.
BRUCE SANDERSON 1956 PRIZE IN ARCHITECTURE. From a fund established by the friends, family, and classmates in memory of Bruce Sander-
son, 1956, who died while serving in the United States Navy. Since Bruce Sanderson found his special interest at Williams and at graduate school
in architecture, a cash prize is awarded to the senior who, in the opinion of the faculty members who teach architecture, shows the greatest
achievement and promise in this field.
RUTH SCOTT SANFORD MEMORIAL PRIZE IN THEATRE. Established in 1969 by Marshall D. Sanford, to be awarded to a graduating senior with
demonstrated ability in the theatre, with preference given to a candidate who intends graduate study in theatre, the selection being made by the
theatre faculty.
28
RUTH SCOTT SANFORD MEMORIAL FELLOWSHIP IN THEATRE. Established in 1969 by Marshall D. Sanford, to be awarded to any Williams under-
graduate who has been active in the college theatre program and would like to participate in the Williamstown Theatre Festival program as an
Apprentice or, if qualified, in some other capacity.
SCHEFFEY AWARD. This award, in the name of Lewis and Andrew J. W. Scheffey (the first director of the Center for Environmental Studies) is
given in recognition of outstanding environmental leadership.
ROBERT C. L. SCOTT PRIZE FOR GRADUATE STUDY IN HISTORY. A cash prize from a fund established by former students of Professor Robert C. L.
Scott to honor his years of service to Williams and awarded to asenior Honors students in history who is planning to attend graduate school in the
field of American or European history.
SENTINELS OF THE REPUBLIC ADVANCED STUDY PRIZE. From a fund established in 1944 by the Sentinels of the Republic, this prize designates an
unusually gifted senior as the Sentinels of the Republic Scholar, who receives a substantial stipend to cover costs associated with a year-long
advanced research project in American politics under the direction of the Political Science faculty.
EDWARD GOULD SHUMWAY 1871 PRIZE IN ENGLISH. In memory of Edward Gould Shumway, 1871, a fund has been established by his daughter,
Mary Shumway Adams, from which a cash prize is awarded annually to a senior majoring in English who has, in the judgment of the English
department, done the most distinguished work in English literature.
JAMES F. SKINNER PRIZE IN CHEMISTRY. Established in 1988 by the family, friends, and former students of James F. Skinner, 1961, Professor of
Chemistry 1966-1988, in memory of his dedicated service to his students, Williams College, the chemistry department, and the community. A
cash prize is awarded annually to a member of the graduating class who has been admitted to graduate study in chemistry, has had a distinguished
record in chemistry, and shows outstanding promise for both teaching and scholarship.
THEODORE CLARKE SMITH BOOK PRIZE IN AMERICAN HISTORY. In honor of Theodore Clarke Smith, distinguished historian and teacher of history
at Williams College, 1903-1938 and 1943-44, the department of history awards a book to the first-year student or sophomore who writes the best
essay in a course in American History.
HOWARD P. STABLER PRIZE IN PHYSICS. Awarded to the student who has demonstrated initiative, creativity, perseverance, and achievement, es-
pecially in a senior thesis. The award is named for Professor Emeritus Howard Stabler. It was established in gratitude for Professor Stabler's
excellent direction of so many honors theses in Physics over the years.
SHIRLEY STANTONPRIZE INMUSIC. Established in 1982 by family and friends in memory of Shirley Stanton, who served the college community
through the music department and the Conference Office. Awarded to that student who has best fulfilled his or her potential in music while at
Williams.
TOMPKINS AWARD IN EXCELLENCE IN JAPANESE. This award is given to an undergraduate who has performed with distinction in Japanese
301-302. The award is open to juniors, sophomores, or first year students, whether majors in the Department of Asian Studies or not. It consists of
round-trip transportation to Japan, plus up to $1,000 to cover expenses for attending an approved seminar or conference, or to conduct an ap-
proved independent research project.
CARL VAN DUYNE PRIZE IN ECONOMICS. Established in 1983 by family, colleagues, friends, and the Philip H. Seaman Fund in memory of Carl
Van Duyne, Associate Professor of Economics at Williams who died in 1983. Selection made by the economics department faculty from among
juniors who are economics or political economy majors who have exhibited "not only a technical excellence in economics but also the inquisitive
mind and motivation of a true scholar." This prize provides a "stipend for the senior year as well as another for the first year of graduate school if
the recipient goes on to do graduate work in economics. In addition, the Van Duyne Scholar receives a stipend if he is able to devote the summer
before the senior year to full-time research in Economics."
LASZLO G. VERSENYI MEMORIAL PRIZE. In memory of Laszlo G. Versenyi, Mark Hopkins Professor of Intellectual and Moral Philosophy, who
taught at Williams from 1958 until 1988. This is a cash prize awarded by the Philosophy department to a senior who is planning to attend graduate
school in Philosophy. Special consideration is given to students who plan to make Latin, Greek, or German a part of their continuing study of
Philosophy, in recognition of Professor Versenyi's brilliant abilities in those languages.
HAROLDH. WARRENPRIZE INCHEMISTRY. Established in 1984 by Peter W. Wege, 1971 in recognition of Professor Harold H. Warren's outstand-
ing contribution to the department of chemistry from 1950 to 1984. Awarded for excellence in introductory organic chemistry.
KARL E. WESTON 1896 PRIZE FOR DISTINCTION IN ART. In appreciation of Karl Weston's, 1896, great service to Williams College as teacher and
as Director of the Lawrence Art Museum, abook prize is awarded each year at commencement to a senior majoring in art whose work has shown
unusual brilliance, imagination, and industry.
WITTE PROBLEM SOLVING PRIZE. Awarded to a mathematics student who has demonstrated creativity and ingenuity in solving challenging
mathematical questions appearing either in class or in related activities.
Essay Prizes
GAIUS C. BOLIN, 1889, PRIZE IN AFRICANA STUDIES. A cash prize established in memory of the first black graduate of Williams and prominent
Poughkeepsie lawyer, for the best scholarly work submitted by a Williams' undergraduate in the field of Africana Studies.
THEMICHAELDAVITTBELLPRIZE. This prize established by Michael Davitt Bell, Professor of English and American literature, annually recog-
nizes the best essay on a topic in American literature. The essay can be a Senior Honors Thesis or any other outstanding American literature essay
submitted by a Williams student.
BULLOCK POETRY PRIZE. A cash prize awarded by the department of English for the best poem or group of poems by an undergraduate. The
prize was made possible originally by a bequest of Mrs. Mary Cummings Eudy, a former member of the Academy, and is now continued through
the generosity of an anonymous donor. Twenty-four colleges and universities in various parts of the United States participate.
HENRY RUTGERS CONGER MEMORIAL LITERARY PRIZE. From a fund established by members of the class of 1899, in memory of their classmate,
Henry Rutgers Conger, a cash prize is awarded annually for the best contribution of prose or poetry submitted to aliterary magazine published by
the undergraduates of the College, as judged by a committee from the department of English.
ARTHUR B. GRAVES PRIZES. Established by Arthur B. Graves, 1858, for the best six essays prepared by seniors on subjects assigned by the
following departments: art, economics, history, philosophy, political science, religion. The fund also provides a cash award or awards for the best
report or reports delivered in the senior political economy project.
C. DAVID HARRIS JR. 1963 BOOK PRIZE IN POLITICAL SCIENCE. In memory of C. David Harris Jr., 1963, who died during his college career, a book
is awarded annually to the Political Science major who writes the best paper in political philosophy or empirical political science. The prize was
donated by his classmates through the Williams College Social Council, of which David was a member, and the winner is selected by the political
science department.
RICHARD LATHERS 1877 ESSAY PRIZE IN GOVERNMENT. From a fund given by Richard Lathers, 1877, a prize given to the senior who writes the
best essay of not less than one thousand words on the duty or relation of citizens to the government.
THE URSULA PRESCOTT ESSAY PRIZE IN POLITICAL SCIENCE. Established in 1999 from a bequest to the Political Science Department given by Ur-
sula Prescott, a Williamstown resident who audited many political science classes in her retirement, a cash prize is awarded to the senior who
writes the best essay on international relations or comparative politics.
ROBERTC.L.SCOTT PRIZE INHISTORY. A cash prize from a fund established by former students of Professor Robert C. L. Scott to honor his years
of service to Williams and awarded to the best senior Honors thesis in the field of American or European history.
SENTINELS OF THE REPUBLIC ESSAY PRIZE IN GOVERNMENT. Established in 1944 by a gift from the Sentinels of the Republic, a cash prize awarded
by the political science department to the student who has written the best essay in the course of the year on some subject relating to the American
federal system of government, the preservation of civil liberty, the maintenance of free enterprise, and the proper distribution of powers and
responsibilities between the Federal and State Governments.
SHIRIN SHAKIR, 2003, PRIZE IN POLITICAL SCIENCE. Established in 2006 in memory of Shirin Shakir, Class of 2003, a book prize awarded to the
graduating senior who writes the best essay in an international relations senior seminar.
29
STANLEY R. STRAUSS 1936 PRIZE IN ENGLISH. Established in 1985 by friends of Stanley R. Strauss, 1936, in honor of his 70th birthday on June 3,
1985. Awarded to a member of the senior class majoring in English who has written the most outstanding critical Honors thesis, judged on the
quality of research as well as on the quality of exposition.
WILLIAM BRADFORDTURNER 1914 PRIZE IN HISTORY. From the income of a fund given by the family of William Bradford Turner, 1914, who was
killed in action in France in September, 1918, a cash prize is awarded for the best thesis or essay in the field of American history or institutions.
BENJAMIN B. WAINWRIGHT 1920 PRIZE IN ENGLISH. From a bequest of Benjamin B. Wainwright, 1920, a cash prize for the best short story sub-
mitted by a student, to be judged by a committee of the department of English.
DAVID A. WELLS PRIZE IN POLITICAL ECONOMY. From a bequest of David A. Wells, 1847, a prize is awarded for an essay upon a subject in
political economy. Competition is limited to seniors and to graduates of not more than three years' standing. The successful essay may be printed
and circulated by the College.
WYSKIEL WILLIAMS MATH AWARD. Established in 2007 by Matthew Walter Wyskiel, 1991, and Christina Williams Wyskiel, 1994, in honor of
Matthew's mother Louisa Jamison Wyskiel, along-time middle-school math teacher. The Mathematics and Statistics Department awards a cash
prize to a student or students who have expressed an interest in teaching mathematics.
General Prizes
CHARLES R. ALBERTI, 1919, AWARD. Established in 1994 by gifts from his son and grandson, Charles R. Alberti '50 and C. Christopher Alberti
'75, an annual cash prize for a member of the student body who has significantly enhanced the sense of community on campus and who has the
potential for doing so in wider communities in the future.
STERLING A. BROWN, 1922, CITIZENSHIP PRIZE. Initially established in 1974 by three members of the Class of 1974 and carried on by the Afro-
American Studies Program, this prize honors Sterling A. Brown, Class of 1922, retired Professor of English at Howard University. Awarded to
the graduating senior whose undergraduate experience reflects outstanding leadership and involvement in campus affairs, academic achieve-
ment, and communication of new ideas, with preference to be given to members of the Black Student Union.
GROSVENOR MEMORIAL CUP. Given by the members of the Interfraternity Council of 1931 in memory of their fellow member, Allan Living-
ston Grosvenor. Awarded annually to the junior who has best demonstrated concern for the college community and beyond through extensive
dedicated service and who has served with the utmost integrity and reliability. The committee of award consists of the chairman and the secretary
of the College Council and three other members selected by the Council.
JAMES C. KELLOGG III AWARD. Established by his friends in memory of James C. Kellogg III, 1937, the award is to be given annually to
a Williams graduate or nongraduate for a truly distinguished career in any field.
JAMES C. ROGERSON CUP AND MEDAL. Presented by Mrs. James C. Rogerson and the class of 1892 in memory of Mr. Rogerson, a member of
that class. The cup, a permanent possession of the College, is awarded annually for one year by the President of the College to an alumnus or to a
senior for service and loyalty to the College and for distinction in any field of endeavor; a bronze medal is awarded for permanent possession of
the recipient.
WILLIAM BRADFORD TURNER CITIZENSHIP PRIZE. From a fund established in memory of William Bradford Turner, 1914, who was killed in action
in France in September, 1918, a cash prize is awarded to the member of the graduating class who, in the judgment of the faculty and of the
graduating class, has best fulfilled her or his obligations to the College, to fellow students, and to self. The committee of award, appointed by the
President of the College, is composed jointly of faculty members and members of the graduating class.
WILLIAMS COLLEGE COMMUNITY BUILDER OF THE YEAR. Given to the graduating senior who demonstrates outstanding leadership in developing
Multiculturalism and building community as a Williams College Community Builder.
WILLIAMSCOLLEGEMULTICULTURALCENTERSTUDENT OF THEYEARS. Given to the graduating senior who, in his/her four years at Williams, perso-
nified the tenets and ideals of Multiculturalism and through his/her activism worked towards its realization.
Rhetorical Prizes
DEWEY PRIZE. A cash prize, founded by Francis Henshaw Dewey, 1840, is awarded to the member of the graduating class who presents the
most creditable oration in point of composition and delivery at the commencement exercises.
MURIEL B. ROWE PRIZE. In appreciation to Muriel B. Rowe for nearly a quarter of a century of dedication and commitment to The Williams
College Chapter of the Phi Beta Kappa Honor Society, the prize is awarded annually to the Phi Beta Kappa Speaker.
ELIZUR SMITHRHETORICAL PRIZE. Established in the year 1866, this cash prize is awarded each year to encourage excellence in public speaking.
A.V.W. VAN VECHTEN PRIZE. A cash prize established by A. V. W. Van Vechten, 1847, awarded for impromptu speaking. The assignment of
this prize is made by a committee of the faculty on the basis of a public competition.
Athletic Prizes
FRANCIS E. BOWKER, JR. SWIMMING PRIZE. A cup given by the late Francis E. Bowker, Jr., 1908, on which is engraved the name of the first-year
student of the men's swimming team who exhibited high qualities of performance, leadership, and sportsmanship.
JAMES R.BRIGGS '60BASEBALL AWARD. Presented annually to a member of the varsity baseball team regardless of graduating class who, in the
opinion of his teammates, best embodies the ideals of leadership, teamwork, and the values of the student-athlete.
BELVIDEREBROOKS MEMORIALMEDAL. From afund established by alumni of the College, friends of Captain Belvidere Brooks, 1910, who was
killed in action at Villesavoye, France, August 21, 1918, this medal is presented to the members of the team whose playing during the season has
been of the greatest credit to the College. No person shall receive the medal more than once.
BOURNE-CHAFFEEWOMEN'STENNIS AWARD. Presented in 1978 by members and former members of the Williams Women's Tennis Team for the
varsity player who best embodies the qualities of leadership, skill, spirit, and sportsmanship that exemplify the traditions of women's tennis at
Williams College.
BRZEZINSKI TRACK PRIZE. Awarded annually to the female track athlete who has exhibited loyalty to the team, determination, perseverance
under adversity, and hard working dedication to reach the maximum of her potential goal.
J. EDWIN BULLOCK WRESTLING TROPHY. Presented in 1960 by his fellow coaches and awarded annually to that varsity wrestler who because of
his superior performance, courage, and loyalty has been of credit to his college.
W.MARRIOTTCANBY 1891 ATHLETIC SCHOLARSHIP PRIZE. A cash prize established by W. Marriott Canby, 1891, and awarded at commencement
to the senior who has attained the highest average standing in scholarship during his or her course. The recipient must have been in college since
the beginning of his or her junior year, and must have represented the College in a recognized intercollegiate athletic contest.
CLASS OF 1981 BASKETBALL AWARD. Established to promote excellence in the sport, this award is presented to that woman who best combines
the attributes of skill, desire, leadership, and coachability in order to help further the team's progress toward its goals. The award is a pewter bowl,
and the athlete will have her name inscribed on a permanent plaque.
CLASS OF 1986 MOST IMPROVED AWARD. Awarded to that member of the men's lacrosse team who in his second year of varsity competition has
shown the most improvement.
CLASS OF1925 SCHOLAR-ATHLETE AWARD. Presented in 1977 by the Class of 1925. Awarded annually to that senior woman athlete whose com-
mitment and excellence in athletics and scholarship are an inspiration to the Williams community. The recipient will have her name inscribed on
a permanent trophy and receive a replica for her possession. The selection committee consists of the Dean, the Chairman of the Faculty Commit-
tee on Athletics, coaches of two women's teams or clubs named by the Director of Athletics, a woman student, preferably a member of the
Faculty Committee on Athletics, and the Director of Athletics.
DANIEL A. CREEM MEMORIAL TRACK PRIZE. Awarded annually to the male track athlete who has exhibited loyalty to the team, determination,
perseverance under adversity, and hard working dedication to reach the maximum of his potential goal.
30
BRIAN DAWE AWARD. Presented to Williams College by the 1977 men's crew to show their appreciation to Brian Dawe for his efforts in build-
ing a crew at Williams. To be awarded annually to that oarsman who, in the opinion of his coaches, best combines those qualities necessary to
achieve excellence in rowing.
DR. I. S. DRIBBEN 1924 AWARD. Presented annually as a tribute to two Williams College golf coaches, Richard Baxter and Rudy Goff.
Awarded on the basis of dedication, sportsmanship, and perseverance.
FOXMEMORIAL SOCCERTROPHY. In tribute to the inspiring qualities of leadership and integrity which distinguished Myles Fox, 1940, Williams
soccer captain, killed in action on Tulagi while serving with the United States Marine Corps. Each year there shall be inscribed on the trophy the
name of the soccer player whose achievements of character and sportsmanship best typify those of the "Skipper." The trophy was awarded
anonymously by a Williams alumnus in 1953.
KATE HOGAN 27TH ANNIVERSARY OF WOMEN IN ATHLETICS AWARD. First established on the 25th Anniversary of Women's Athletics at Williams
College and renamed in memory of Kate Hogan, 1987, a participant on the Varsity Soccer and Lacrosse teams, the Junior Varsity Lacrosse and
Squash teams, as well as an avid intramural basketball player and runner. Awarded annually at Class Day to the senior woman who has distin-
guished herself in her commitment and contributions to the Department of Physical Education, Athletics and Recreation. The winner will have
engaged in any of the activities offered by the department and will have been an example of the joy and pleasure derived by participation in such
activities.
WILLARD E. HOYT, JR. MEMORIAL AWARD. Presented by the Alpha Delta Phi Class of 1960 in memory of Willard E. Hoyt, Jr., 1923. Awarded
annually to that senior male athlete whose spirit and superior efforts on behalf of Williams athletics have been combined with a genuine academic
interest. The selection committee consists of the Dean, a varsity coach named each year by the Director of Athletics, the President of the Purple
Key Society, the Chairman of the Faculty Committee on Athletics, and the Director of Athletics.
TORRENCE M. HUNT '44 Tennis AWARD. Presented to the men's and women's player who, by their effort, dedication, enthusiasm and quality of
play, made a significant contribution to Williams College tennis.
NICKELS W. HUSTON MEMORIAL HOCKEY AWARD. Established in 1984 by Ford Huston in memory of his brother, Nickels W. Huston, 1950, and
to be awarded annually to the first-year player who contributes the most to the success of the hockey team.
ROBERT W. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL TROPHY. Presented by the members of Delta Kappa Epsilon in memory of Robert Woodall Johnston, 1949.
Awarded annually to the most valuable varsity baseball player.
KIELER IMPROVEMENT AWARD. Given in honor of Dr. and Mrs. Charles B. Kieler by their son to that member of the men's squash team who
works hardest during the year to improve racquet skills, physical conditioning, and competitive spirit.
CHRIS LARSON MASON FIELD HOCKEY AWARD. Awarded to the player selected by the coach and team who has shown great sportsmanship, skill,
hard work, and team work.
CHRIS LARSON MASON LACROSSE AWARD. The Women's Lacrosse Award was established in 1977 by the women's lacrosse team in order to
promote excellence in the sport. It is to be awarded each year to the person who, in the opinion of the team, has demonstrated excellence in all
levels of women's lacrosse--sportsmanship, skill, and team spirit.
WILLIAME. MCCORMICK COACH'S AWARD. In thirty-six years, from 1953 to 1989, at the helm of the Williams College hockey program, William
McCormick served as a teacher, coach, and friend to two generations of athletes. He also set a high standard of personal service to the Williams
College community. In recognition of this legacy, this award is presented each year to the member of the hockey team who best exemplifies the
qualities and ideals for which Coach McCormick stood during his years behind the bench: leadership, loyalty, a selfless devotion to the team, a
youthful delight in the game of hockey, and above all, a strong personal commitment to community service. This award was established with a
respect, affection and deep appreciation of his former players.
MOSTIMPROVEDWOMEN'SLACROSSEAWARD. Presented to the player who has completed the first year of her varsity competition and has shown
the most improvement as voted by her teammates.
ROBERT B. MUIR MEN'S SWIMMING TROPHY. Presented in 1960 by Mr. and Mrs. George S. Dively, parents of Michael A. Dively, 1961. Awarded
annually to the outstanding male varsity swimmer on the basis of performance, leadership, and sportsmanship.
ROBERT B. MUIR WOMEN'S SWIMMING TROPHY
. Presented in 1977 by Peggy and Sam Maples, 1944, a former Williams College swimmer.
Awarded annually to the outstanding woman varsity swimmer on the basis of performance, leadership, and sportswomanship.
FRANKLIN F. OLMSTED MEMORIAL AWARD. Given in 1963 by Mrs. Franklin F. Olmsted in memory of her husband, 1914, who was a member of
the first Williams cross country team. Awarded annually to a member of the men's cross country team on the basis of character, perseverance, and
sportsmanship.
ANTHONY PLANSKY AWARD. Given in 1953 by George M. Steinbrenner III, 1952, and awarded annually to the best varsity track athlete on the
basis of performance, leadership, and sportsmanship.
LEONARD S. PRINCE MEMORIAL SWIMMING PRIZE. In memory of Leonard Sidney Prince, 1914, donated by his father, S. S. Prince. Presented to
the outstanding first-year student or sophomore woman member of the swimming team who best exemplifies the qualities of leadership, perfor-
mance, and sportswomanship.
PURPLE KEY TROPHIES. Two trophies for the senior man and senior woman letter-winners who best exemplify leadership, team spirit, ability,
and character. Chosen by the Director of Athletics, president of the Purple Key, two members of the Athletic Department, and one faculty mem-
ber chosen by the Purple Key.
MICHAEL E. RAKOV MEMORIAL AWARD. Presented in 1957 by the members of Alpha Delta Phi, to be awarded annually to the member of the
varsity football team who, in the opinion of his coaches, is the most improved lineman, and who possesses superior qualities of leadership,
aggressiveness, and determination.
PAUL B. RICHARDSONSWIMMING TROPHY. Presented by Mr. Paul B. Richardson of Belmont, on which is recorded each year the name of the male
swimmer or diver winning the greatest number of points in dual collegiate meets during the swimming season.
ROCKWOOD TENNIS CUP. In memory of Lieutenant Richard Burton Rockwood, 1916, who was killed in action in France, his mother, Mrs. R. L.
Rockwood, has given a fund to provide a cup to be awarded annually to the winner of the singles in the fall tennis tournament.
CHARLES DEWOODY SALMON AWARD. Presented in 1960 by his former teammates in memory of Captain Charles D. Salmon, USAF, former
Little All-American guard and captain of the 1951 Williams College football team, killed in the service of his country. Awarded to that member of
the varsity football squad who, in the opinion of the coaching staff, has made the most significant contribution to the varsity football team in his
sophomore or first year of eligibility. Presented by the team of 1951 in the sincere hope that it will serve to inspire the recipients in the years to
follow to seek the same supreme qualities of performance and leadership which Chuck Salmon exemplified.
SCRIBNER MEMORIAL TENNIS TROPHY. Presented in 1954 by his friends in memory of Frederick M. Scribner, Jr., 1949, killed in action in Korea
on February 20, 1953, this trophy is awarded annually to the member of the men's varsity tennis team who best combines sportsmanship, team
spirit, and character.
EDWARD S. SHAW 1962 MEMORIAL SQUASH AWARD. Awarded annually to that member of the Varsity Squash team who best exemplifies the
ideals of sportsmanship, character, and team spirit.
WILLIAME. SIMONIMPROVEMENTAWARD. Given in the name of William E. Simon by his son, William E. Simon, Jr., 1973, to that member of the
tennis team who improves most during the course of the year by demonstrating the same dedication to maximizing one's God-given talents with
a firm sense of fair play which William E. Simon sought to instill in his son, a former member of the Williams College Tennis Team.
CAROL GIRARD SIMON SPORTSMANSHIP AWARD. Given in the name of Carol Girard and Simon her son, Williams E. Simon, Jr., 1973, to that
member of the tennis team who displays the outstanding level of good sportsmanship which Carol Girard Simon sought to instill in her son, a
former member of the Williams College Tennis Team.
SQUASH RACQUETS PRIZES. Presented by the donors of the squash racquets building, Clark Williams, 1892, John P. Wilson, 1900, and Quincy
Brent, 1901, as a permanent trophy to be competed for in an annual elimination tournament for students.
31
WOMEN'S SQUASH AWARD. Established in 1980, for the most valuable player of the season as voted by the Squash Letter Award Winners.
OSWALD TOWER AWARD. A plaque in honor of the contribution of Oswald Tower, 1907, to basketball, as editor of the Basketball Rules for
forty-four years and as a basketball rules interpreter. Presented in 1960 by former Williams players to the most valuable player of the men's
varsity in the opinion of the coaches and manager.
DOROTHY TOWNE TRACK AWARD. Given in 1985 by Zbigniew Brzezinski and awarded annually to the best woman track athlete on the basis of
performance, leadership, and sportsmanship. On the trophy will be inscribed the name of the winner, who will receive a smaller trophy for her
possession.
RALPH J. TOWNSEND SKI TROPHY. Presented in 1959 by former members of the Williams skiing teams for the men's varsity skier who best
exhibits the qualities of sportsmanship, competition, and team spirit associated with Williams and skiing.
WILLIAMS ALUMNAE SKIING AWARD. This pewter pitcher was donated in 1976 by Deborah Marshall, 1974, and Carmany Heilman, 1976, lead-
ers of the first Williams Women's Ski Team. This award recognizes the woman who best embodies the values of sportsmanship traditionally held
by women skiers at Williams: leadership, competitiveness, and commitment to her team.
WILLIAMS COLLEGE ALUMNI ASSOCIATION OF MARYLAND LACROSSE AWARD. Presented in 1959 by the Williams College Alumni Association of
Maryland as a permanent trophy on which is inscribed each year the name of the outstanding men's varsity lacrosse player.
WILLIAMS COLLEGE ALUMNI ASSOCIATION OF MARYLAND WOMEN'S LACROSSE AWARD. Awarded to the most valuable player of the year.
WILLIAMS WOMEN'S HOCKEY MOST VALUABLE PLAYER AWARD. To be presented to the most valuable player of the year.
ROBERT B. WILSON '76 MEMORIAL TROPHY (Most Improved Player). The purpose of this award is to honor that member of the men's intercolle-
giate hockey program who, in the opinion of the athletic director and coach, has shown the most improvement over the course of the season,
while displaying "teamwork, hustle, spirit, and friendship."
YOUNG-JAY HOCKEY TROPHY. Presented by George C. Young, 1938, and John C. Jay, 1938. For a member of the Williams varsity hockey team
notable for loyalty and devotion to the interest of Williams hockey: courage, self-control, and modesty; perseverance under discouraging cir-
cumstances; and a sense of fair play towards his teammates and his opponents.
Fellowships Awarded by Williams College
Faculty Selection Committees examine candidates for the awards listed below. Application must be made through the Dean's Office or ap-
propriate department.
RUSSELL H. BOSTERT FELLOWSHIP. A summer fellowship to support student summer travel and research with preference awarded to students in
Division II, with a preference to History majors. Application is through the Fellowships Office.
HORACE F. CLARK 1833 PRIZE FELLOWSHIPS. Established in 1894 under the provisions of the will of Madame Marie Louise Souberbeille in
memory of her father, 1833. One or two awards to help support one year of graduate study to members of the senior class chosen on the basis of
superior scholarship, general ability, and interest in scholarly research.
CLASS OF1945FLORENCECHANDLERFELLOWSHIP. Provided through the generosity of the Class of 1945, this fellowship is awarded annually to a
senior to support one year of post-graduate intellectual and personal development while living abroad. It does not support formal academic study
but is meant to foster travel and learning that lead to an enhancement of international understanding.
CLASS OF 1945STUDENT WORLD FELLOWSHIP. Designed to support independent summer research and travel abroad for sophomores and jun-
iors. This grant is intended to support study that can promote conflict resolution, international understanding, and world peace, although other
worthwhile projects not directly linked to these aims will be considered.
DOROTHY H. DONOVAN MEMORIAL FELLOWSHIP. Established in 1978 by Hedley T. Donovan in memory of his wife, Dorothy H. Donovan. The
income is directed to the support of Williams graduates at Oxford University, initial use for those attending Exeter or Worcester with the hope that
Hertford College might eventually be included.
FRANCIS SESSIONS HUTCHINS 1900 MEMORIAL FELLOWSHIP PRIZE. Established in 1931 by friends of Mr. Francis Sessions Hutchins, 1900. To
assist students in continuing and completing their college course and in obtaining a start in business or professions in the early years following
their graduation, the selection to be made by the President. To be awarded to students "situated as Hutchins himself was when in college. . .giving
promise. . .of becoming, as he did, a useful, worthy, and lovable citizen."
HUBBARD HUTCHINSON 1917 MEMORIAL FELLOWSHIP. Established in 1940 by Mrs. Eva W. Hutchinson in memory of her son, 1917. Awarded to a
member or members of the graduating class who produce the most creative work in music composition, poetry, fiction, painting, sculpture,
photography or choreography; then to those who show unusual talent and promise in performance; then to those majoring in philosophy or the
sciences. The purpose of the award is to assist in continuing work in the special field of interest for a period of two years following graduation.
JEFFREY OWEN JONES 1966 FELLOWSHIP IN JOURNALISM. Established in 2009 by classmates, friends and family to honor the memory of Jeffrey
Owen Jones '66. The award is made to a graduating senior wishing to pursue a career in journalism, the profession Jeff practiced with dedication
and distinction over the course of his lifetime. The award is intended to help its recipient make a start on a career in journalism, here broadly
defined to include both traditional and new media. Consideration will be given to a wide range of pursuits, from entry level newspaper job to
independent blog to investigative reporting project. While the intent is to cast a wide net in search of candidates and proposals, the overall goal is
to select the person who best embodies the qualities for which Jeff was so widely admired: integrity, talent, independence of mind, wit, strength of
character, skepticism of authority, and concern for others.
CHARLES BRIDGEN LANSING 1829 FELLOWSHIP IN LATIN AND GREEK. Established in 1929, by bequest of Mrs. Abby S. L. Selden in memory of her
father, Charles Bridgen Lansing, 1829. Awarded either at the graduate or undergraduate level.
MARY ANDNATHANIEL LAWRENCE MEMORIALTRAVELFELLOWSHIP. Established in 1986 by family and friends of Nathaniel Lawrence, Professor of
Philosophy at Williams from 1960 to 1986. To support a student traveling fellowship, the award "not based on grades, but on originality, merit,
and feasibility".
ALLEN MARTIN FELLOWSHIP. Established by Allen Martin, himself a Carroll A. Wilson Fellow, this fellowship helps to support a Williams
graduate studying at Worcester College, Oxford for a term of two years. Applicants are not restricted by major or other interest and may pursue
undergraduate or graduate degrees at Worcester.
MELLON MAYS UNDERGRADUATE FELLOWSHIP. Established in 1989 and funded by the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, this two-year fellowship
is awarded to five rising African American, Latino/a, or Native American juniors who show the academic potential and commitment to pursue
PhD's in the humanities and certain fields in the social sciences and natural sciences. Fellows receive funding to conduct faculty-mentored re-
search for two summers and four semesters.
JOHN EDMUND MOODY 1921 FELLOWSHIP. Established in 1927 by Mr. John Moody in memory of his son, Class of 1921. To enable a graduate of
Williams College to pursue studies at Oxford University for the two years following graduation. The recipient is chosen from those who have
majored in Greek, Latin, English, history, political science, philosophy, religion, or economics. The basis of award is general intellectual ability
as shown in the major field of study, with special reference to character, need of assistance, and promises of original and creative work.
RUCHMAN STUDENT FELLOWSHIPS. Established in 1993 by Allan B. Ruchman '75 and Mark C. Ruchman '71, this fellowship provides a re-
search stipend to two Williams seniors who demonstrate a firm commitment to graduate study and intention to pursue a career in teaching at the
college level. Ruchman Fellows take part in the activities of the Oakley Center for the Humanities and Social Sciences during their senior year.
DR. HERCHEL SMITH FELLOWSHIPS. Established in 1979 by Dr. Herchel Smith to enable five or more graduates of Williams College to pursue
studies at Emmanuel College, Cambridge for the two years following graduation. One recipient is chosen from those who have majored in the
humanities or social sciences; the other from those who have majored in mathematics or the natural sciences. One set of criteria includes general
intellectual ability and attainment in the major field of study with special reference to the promise of original and creative work, and character; the
other set of criteria includes leadership, scholastic attainment, and physical vigor after the manner of selection of Rhodes scholars.
FREDERICK EUGENE STRATTON 1872 FELLOWSHIP IN BIOLOGY. Established in 2010 by Arthur Frederick Stocker 1934 in memory of his grandfa-
ther, F. E. Stratton 1871. To help support graduate study in Biology at an institution belonging to the American Association of Universities.
Candidates must be seniors.
32
STEPHEN H. TYNG AND STEPHEN H. TYNG, JR. FOUNDATION FELLOWSHIP. Holders of Tyng Scholarships in their undergraduate years are eligible for
Tyng Fellowships for a maximum of three years of graduate or professional study in any field of learning at any recognized university.
WILLIAMS IN AFRICA EPRI FELLOWSHIP. Established in 2010, this newly created post-graduate fellowship at the Economic Policy Research
Institute in Cape Town, South Africa provides recent Williams graduates the opportunity to work on cutting edge policy research focused on
tackling poverty and promoting socio-economic progress in developing countries. Fellows work side by side with senior researchers at the Insti-
tute for 15 months beginning in June 2011. The fellowship provides a modest income and covers travel expenses to and from South Africa.
WILLIAMS COLLEGE UNDERGRADUATE RESEARCH FELLOWSHIP. Established in 1999 to replace the McNair Postbaccalaureate Achievement Pro-
gram, this fellowship is available to five rising juniors who are from a group traditionally underrepresented in academia. The fellows must show a
commitment to attending graduate school and are funded for two years of faculty-mentored research.
ROBERT G. WILMERSJR.,1990INTERNSHIPPROGRAM. These internships were created in memory of Robert G. Wilmers, Jr., and offer challenging
summer work opportunities in developing countries for rising juniors and seniors.
ROBERT G. WILMERS JR., 1990MEMORIAL STUDENT TRAVEL ABROAD FELLOWSHIP. Given in memory of Robert G. Wilmers, 1990, this grant pro-
vides support for summer travel and research for students in their sophomore or junior year at Williams.
CARROLL A. WILSON FELLOWSHIP IN MEMORY OF JOHN E. WILSON. Established in 1949 by the will of Carroll A. Wilson, 1907, in memory of his
son, who was killed in the World War II crossing of the Rhine, March 28, 1945. The income to be devoted to scholarships for attendance at Oxford
University, for members of the senior class chosen "after the manner of Rhodes Scholarships, with special attention to leadership, scholastic
attainment, and physical vigor."
George J. Mead Fund
In 1951 Williams College received a substantial gift from the Estate of George J. Mead. Mr. Mead expressed in his will an intention "that this
gift shall be used to improve the quality of leadership and service in all branches of government, whether Federal, State, or municipal, by encour-
aging young people of reliability, good sense and high purpose to enter with adequate preparation those fields of politics and constitutional gov-
ernment upon which must rest the future of this nation."
A portion of this gift constitutes a Scholarship Fund that directly assists promising students with inadequate means who are specializing in
political science, history, American Studies, political economy, or economics. The remaining portion, or Special Fund, is primarily intended to
finance a summer intern program in government involving selected sophomores and juniors.
Teaching Fellowships, Hong Kong and Guangzhou
UNITED COLLEGE, CHINESE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG. Begun in 1961, this two-year fellowship is offered to a member of the graduating class
for teaching English and possibly other subjects at United College, one of three sister colleges comprising the Chinese University of Hong Kong.
The appointee, known as a Teaching Fellow or Tutor, also studies Chinese (Mandarin or Cantonese) and selected aspects of Chinese culture.
Students are chosen by a selection committee, chaired by Professor Crane. Interested students should contact Professor Crane for application
forms. Deadline November 30th.
33
COURSES OF INSTRUCTION 2011-2012
COURSE NUMBERING SYSTEM
Courses designated by a single number are semester courses.
Year courses are designated by an odd number and an even number joined by a hyphen; the work of the two semesters constitutes an integral, indivisible
course. Therefore, if a student does not pass the second half of a year-long course, he or she forfeits credit for the first half and incurs a deficiency as a result of the
forfeiture. Students who register for a year course are required to do both semesters of that course within the same academic year.
In some departments, course numbers have special meanings that are explained in their listings.
THESE SYMBOLS ARE USED IN DEPARTMENTAL MASTHEADS TO INDICATE FACULTY STATUS:
*On leave for the year
* *On leave fall semester
* * *On leave spring semester
Visiting or adjunct, part-time fall semester
 Visiting or adjunct, part-time spring semester
  Adjunct WSP
REGISTRATION REMINDERS:
On-campus students must register online with SELFREG.
1) A course in which registration is deemed insufficient may be withdrawn at the beginning of the semester without prior notice.
2) An instructor has the right to: a) require a student to drop a course if the student does not attend the first scheduled meeting of that course; b) refuse permis-
sion to add a course if a student has not attended the first scheduled meeting of that course.
3 a) First-year students may take no more than one course with the same course prefix, nor more than two in one department, in a semester.
b) Sophomores may take no more than two courses with the same course prefix, nor more than three in one department, in a semester.
c) Sophomores may take no more than three courses with the same course prefix, nor more than four in one department, during the full year.
d) A student may take no more than a total of five courses with the same course prefix, nor more than eight in one department, during the first two years.
e) Any exception to the above early concentration rule may be requested by a petition (goldenrod) to the Committee on Academic Standing (C.A.S.) filed
at the time of registration.
4) An incoming junior must declare a major by filing a "Major Declaration Form" during preregistration. A current junior or senior may change or add a major
by filing a "Major Declaration Form" subject to the approval of the C.A.S.
5) Declaration of two majors is subject to the approval of the C.A.S. Contract majors are ineligible for a second major.
6) Students wishing to undertake an independent study must submit a petition to the C.A.S. before the start of the semester in which the student plans to take the
independent study.
7) Forms for any of the above requests may be obtained at the Registrar's Office or at the website.
8) When choosing a course cross-listed in two or more subjects, students should specify which designation they wish to have recorded--at the time they
register for that course.
9) Courses normally meet three times a week in fifty-minute periods, twice a week in seventy-five-minute periods, or once a week for 150 minutes as indi-
cated within the course description. The days of the week that courses meet are represented by the first letter of each day, for example, M for Monday
(except that R is used for Thursday).
(10) Tutorials may not be taken on a pass/fail basis. Students may not drop a tutorial after 4:00 PM on the day before the first scheduled day of organizational
meeting each semester.
AFRICANA STUDIES (Div. II)
Chair, Professor SHANTI SINGHAM
Core Faculty: BENSON, BRAGGS, LONG, J. MANIGAULTBRYANT,, R. MANIGAULTBRYANT, MUTONGI, ROBERTS, SINGHAM,
D.L. SMITH, WILLINGHAM.
Visiting Sterling Brown Professor: FORNA.
GENERAL PROGRAM DESCRIPTION
The Africana Studies Program is an interdisciplinary concentration offering students an indepth understanding of the history, politics, religion, and culture of
peoples of African descent, especially in the Americas. We use music, dance, literature, the arts, and scholarly works to explore the origins of this field of study in
the fulcrum of African American and Caribbean movements of resistance. A transnational program, intellectually influenced by scholars from W. E. B. Du Bois
to the present, Africana Studies encourages students to study abroad, especially in our Williams in Africa program, and offers travel Winter Study courses de-
signed to expose students to experiential learning settings outside of the classroom.
CONCENTRATION IN AFRICANA STUDIES
Candidates for a concentration in "Africana Studies: African Americans, Africans, and the Diaspora" complete two required core courses and three electives,
for a total of five courses. The required core courses are AFR 200 as an introductory course (generally team-taught); and one of the two AFR 400-level senior
seminar capstone courses, which emphasize special topics or themes each year. In 2011-2012, the two senior seminar choices are AFR 405 (F) Africana Studies
and the Disciplines, and AFR 444 (S) The Black Republic: Haiti in History and Imagination (same as HIST 444). Additional courses may be taken with affiliated
faculty and visiting professors associated with the program. We encourage students to take at least one course in a program/department other than Africana
Studies and consider an experiential learning Winter Study session; however, the majority of your courses should be selected from among those offered by
Africana Studies core faculty, including our visiting Sterling Brown Professor.
HONORS PROGRAM IN AFRICANA STUDIES
An honors thesis or project, undertaken with the permission of the program chair and mentoring faculty, is an option for students who wish to conduct ad-
vanced research and study. In addition to the five courses normally required for the concentration in Africana Studies, honors candidates will enroll in either AFR
491 or 492 plus a Winter Study in their senior year, and complete a substantial written thesis or an equivalent project in the performing or studio arts. An honors
project should demonstrate creativity, depth, and intellectual rigor. Honors candidates are encouraged to pursue non-traditional projects, such as presentations in
the performing arts, visual arts, or creative writing, as well as more conventional research projects. A student who wishes to become a candidate for honors in
Africana Studies should secure a faculty sponsor and apply to the program chair in writing before spring registration of his/her junior year.
AFRICANA STUDIES AND OTHER PROGRAMS
Students concentrating in Africana Studies are encouraged to pursue concentrations in American Studies, Environmental Studies, Latino/a Studies, Perfor-
mance Studies , and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies. Many of the courses counted for these concentrations may also earn credit toward the Africana
Studies concentration.
Africana Studies courses required for the concentration:
AFR 200 Introduction to Africana Studies
AND one of the following two AFR 400-level Senior Seminar capstone courses (not all 400-level courses meet the requirement for the concentration):
AFR 405(F) Africana Studies and the Disciplines
AFR 444(S) The Black Republic: Haiti in History and Imagination (same as History 444)
ELECTIVES (a total of three required for the concentration)
Most electives are included below. However, students should check with the program chair to see if other courses not listed here might count as electives
toward the concentration.
100-Level Courses
34
AFR 103 The City in Africa: Nairobi and Johannesburg (Same as History 103) (W) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under HIST 103 for full description.) MUTONGI
AFR 104 Travel Narratives and African History (Same as History 104) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under HIST 104 for full description.) MUTONGI
AFR 121(F) Music in African Religious Experience (Same as Music 129 and Religion 262) (D)
(See under MUS 129 for full description.) OKIGBO
AFR 122(S) African-American Music (Same as Music 122) (D)
(See under MUS 122 for full description.) E. D. BROWN
AFR 129(F) Twentieth-Century Black Poets (Same as English 129) (W)
(See under ENGL 129 for full description.) D. L. SMITH
AFR 130 History of Jazz (Same as Music 130) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under MUS 130 for full description.) E. D. BROWN
AFR 132 Contemporary Africana Social and Political Philosophy (Same as Political Science 132) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
This introductory seminar investigates the relationship between three major schools of thought in contemporary Africana social and political philosophy, name-
ly the African, Afro-American, and Afro-Caribbean intellectual traditions. We will discuss a range of thinkers including Aim Csaire, Angela Y. Davis,
douard Glissant, Lewis R. Gordon, Kwame Gyekye, Paget Henry, bell hooks, Charles W. Mills, Nkiru Nzegwu, Lucius Outlaw, Oyrnke Oyewmi, Tom-
mie Shelby, and Sylvia Wynter. A primary goal of the course is to provide students with the intellectual resources to decipher problems central to philosophical
discourse and to allow students an opportunity to apply what they learn to critical issues in current geopolitics. This seminar is part of the Exploring Diversity
Initiative, and as such we shall investigate-via the authors mentioned-comparative philosophical analyses, critical theorization, and the plurality of global
thinking in contemporary social and political philosophy.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on attendance and participation, two 5- to 7-page essays, and one 10-page final paper.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 12). Enrollment preference: first- and second-year students.
ROBERTS
AFR 149(F) The 1959 Cuban Revolution: Precedents, Processes, and Legacies, 1898-2009 (Same as History 149) (W)
(See under HIST 149 for full description.) BENSON
AFR 164 Slavery in the United States (Same as History 164) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under HIST 164 for full description.) L. BROWN
AFR 180 Foundations of Afro-Caribbean Thought (Same as Political Science 206) (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course is an introduction to the foundations of Afro-Caribbean thought, a branch of study within the larger field of Africana thought. Africana thought
encompasses ideas from Africa, the Caribbean, North America, and other regions containing African Diasporic populations. In this class, we will examine the
contours of the Afro-Caribbean intellectual and political tradition by analyzing important historical figures and movements, the African philosophical roots of
the tradition, processes of enslavement and creolization, identity formation, nationalism, anti-colonialism, the role of gender, and the function of mass revolu-
tion. We will discuss in particular two influential branches of thought outlined by Paget Henry in the seminal text Caliban's Reason: the poeticists and the
historicists. Afro-Caribbean thought distinguishes itself not only by its unique categories of poetic and historical knowledge production, but also by the collapse
of barriers between poetics and history in the domain of politics. Evaluating the moments of tension and symbiosis between the poeticist and historicst schools
will allow us to investigate further the tradition comprehensively. A key objective of the course is to provide students with the necessary preparation to engage
in higher level courses in this field of inquiry.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based upon attendance and participation, one 5- to 7-page midterm essay, class presentation, and one 10- to
12-page final paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25. Preference given to first- and second-year students.
ROBERTS
AFR 193(F) Black Power Abroad: Decolonization in Africa, the Caribbean and Europe (Same as History 193) (D) (W)
Obama's recent successful bid for the Presidency has reminded Americans of the strong links between African-Americans and Africans and of the international
dimensions of the struggle for racial justice. This struggle has its roots in the post-World War II transformation of the world associated with the decolonization
struggles led by individuals like C.L.R. James, Aim Csaire, Kwame Nkrumah, Franz Fanon and Nelson Mandela. This course will examine this movement,
focusing on activists in the Caribbean and Africa, the new ideas and cultural movements they inspired (Pan-Africanism, Negritude, and Socialism), their organi-
zational activities in London and Paris, and their success in breaking free of European imperialism only to be confronted with American and Russian Cold War
rivalry. By comparing and contrasting different experiences of independence--in the Caribbean, in independent Ghana, and in anti-apartheid South Africa--this
course will grapple with the ways in which racism, political power, and cultural difference affected relations between Blacks, mulattoes, whites, and Indians in
these countries as they fought for independence. The comparative and transatlantic scope of this course, combined with its focus on race relations, power, and
privilege helps it meet the requirements of the Exploring Diversity Initiative.
Format: discussion. Requirements: Evaluation will be based on class participation, oral reports, 1 short paper, and a 10- to 12-page research paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to first-year students, and then sophomores who have not previously taken a 100-level
seminar: Preference also given to future Africana Studies concentrators.
Groups B and C
Meets the EDI requirement.
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M SINGHAM
200-Level Courses
AFR 200(F,S) Introduction to Africana Studies
This course introduces students to the content and contours of Africana Studies as a vibrant field of knowledge. Through exploration of the genealogy, disciplin-
ary diversity, and evolution of the field, we will examine the depth and range of experiences of African-descended peoples throughout the Americas, the Caribbe-
an, Europe, and Africa. We will also give some attention to how members of the Diaspora remember and encounter Africa, as well as their diverse responses to
the history of enslavement, colonialism, apartheid, racism, and globalization. Through materials that embrace both historical and contemporary perspectives, we
seek to help students develop critical frameworks for understanding African diasporic experience while simultaneously illumining disjunctures and challenges for
the field. This course features two pedagogical strategies: 1) a rotational, interdisciplinary approach that includes the expertise, methods, and specializations of
Africana faculty; and 2) the incorporation of aesthetic materials--film, photography, music, dance, performance, and artwork--to enhance student ability to draw
ongoing connections between visual and textual sources covered in the course. Close textual analysis, vibrant debate, and engaging discourse are expected!
Format: discussion/lecture. Evaluation will be based upon class participation, weekly reading response papers, two short essays, and a final research project.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit fall: 20; spring: none (expected fall: 15; expected spring 25). Preference to underclassmen who are considering concentrating
in Africana Studies.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR First Semester: R. MANIGAULT-BRYANT
11:20-12:35 TR Second Semester: BRAGGS and BENSON
AFR 201(F) African Dance and Percussion (Same as Dance 201)
(See under DANC 201 for full description.) BURTON and Kusika Musical Director
AFR 203 A Survey of Modern African History (Same as History 203) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under HIST 203 for full description.) MUTONGI
35
AFR 204(S) Introduction to Francophone Studies (Same as French 203) (D)
(See under RLFR 203 for full description.) PIEPRZAK
AFR 205(F) Introduction to African Literature: Witness Literature (Same as English 269)
After the television images, the photographs and the news stories, come the writers. In the words of Nobel prizewinning South African writer Nadine Gordimer,
it is the role and duty of the writer "to bear inward witness," for the power to transform traumatic events through literature is the "awesome responsibility of their
endowment with the seventh sense of the imagination." `Witness literature' is an emerging canon, the concept of which can be applied to much African literature
of the past fifty years, including the work of Aminatta Forna, novelist and memoirist who will lead this course. From this perspective we'll study novels, novellas
and short stories and examine how a range of writers portray political events through their writing, work to extract meaning from violence, convey the ways of
resistance and demonstrate the power of memory. We will read the work of Ngugi wa Thiongo, Ahmadou Kourouma and Chinua Achebe, as well as those of the
continent's new voices: Helon Habila, Brian Chikwava, Petina Gappah and Uwem Akpan.
Format: discussion/seminar. Requirements: active class participation and two/three papers totaling about 2025 pages.
No prerequisites; this is an introductory course, so no prior knowledge of African literature is necessary. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 20). Preference given to
firstyear students, sophomores, English majors and Africana Studies concentrators.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MW FORNA
AFR 207(S) Picturing Race: From Early Modern Europe to Now (Same as ArtH 205) (D)
(See under ARTH 205 for full description.) ERICKSON
AFR 210(F) Culture and Incarceration (Same as American Studies 210, INTR 210, Political Science 210 and Women's, Gender and
Sexuality Studies 210)
(See under PSCI 210 for full description.) JAMES
AFR 211(F) Race and the Environment (Same as Environmental Studies 211 and Sociology 211) (D)
In contemporary societies, race remains an enduring impediment to the achievement of equality. Generally understood as a socially meaningful way of classify-
ing human bodies hierarchically, race manifests itself in a number of arenas, including personal experience, economic production and distribution, and political
organization. In this course, we will explore how race emerges in local and global environmental issues, like pollution and climate change. We will begin with a
review of some of the landmark texts in Environmental Studies that address "environmental racism," like Robert Bullard's Dumping in Dixie and David Pellow's
Garbage Wars. We will examine how and to what extent polluting facilities like landfills, oil refineries, and sewage treatment plants are disproportionately located
in communities of color; we will also pay attention to how specific corporations create the underlying rationale for plotting industrial sites. After outlining some of
the core issues raised in this scholarship, we will turn to cultural productions--like literature, film, and music--to understand how people of color respond to
environmental injustice and imagine the natural world. By exploring the myriad ways in which people of color confront, negotiate and challenge dominant U.S.
hierarchies of race and environmental injustice, this class fulfills the EDI requirement.
Format: discussion/lecture. Evaluation will be based on class participation, 2-3 short papers (5-7 pages), and a self-scheduled final examination.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 20). If this class is overenrolled, preference will go to Africana Studies concentrators.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR J. MANIGAULT-BRYANT
AFR 212(F) Jazz Theory and Improvisation I (Same as Music 212)
(See under MUS 212 for full description.) JAFFE
AFR 213(F) Theory and Practice of Civil Rights Protest (Same as Political Science 213)
(See under PSCI 213 for full description.) A. WILLINGHAM
AFR 214 Jazz Theory and Improvisation II (Same as Music 213) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under MUS 212 for full description.) JAFFE
AFR 217(F) Race(ing) Sports: Issues, Themes and Representations of Black Athletes (Same as English 255) (D)
Althea Gibson to the Williams Sisters. Julius (Dr. J) Irving to Michael Jordan. Jesse Owens to Tommie Smith and John Carlos. Throughout the 20th century, black
athletes have broken through Jim Crow restraints, challenged racial stereotypes, and taken their sports to new heights of achievement. In this course, students will
explore a range of black athletes in the 20th century, paying particular attention to the attitudes, stereotypes and experiences they endured. In addition, this course
will prompt students to analyze the representation, perception, and commodification of black athletes in popular media forms. Students will trace trends, shifts
and themes in representations of blackness across different sports and historical periods. Topics under study may include resistance against and affirmation of
athletes as role models, racial slurs in sports broadcasting, common themes in commercialized images of the black male athlete, and distinctions in media cover-
age based on race and gender. Texts will include everything from critical essays and sociological studies to commercials and documentary films. In their final
projects, students may put their newfound knowledge to the test by exploring their campus or hometown to investigate the role that race plays on their own
playing field. This EDI course explores the experiences and expressions of the culturally diverse peoples of African descent in the New World, as well as the
myriad ways in which representations of black athleticism are manipulated to increase financial strength and institutional power, reaffirm dominant U.S. and/or
European hierarchies of race, gender and class, and signal inequality in order to combat it.
Format: discussion/lecture. Evaluation will be based upon class participation, short weekly reading and/or listening assignments, one 5-page paper, final group
project.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 20). If this class is overenrolled, preference will go to Africana Studies concentrators.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR BRAGGS
AFR 221T Racial-Sexual Violence (Same as INTR 221 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 221) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(W)
(See under INTR 221 for full description.) JAMES
AFR 229(S) European Imperialism and Decolonization (Same as History 229) (D)
(See under HIST 229 for full description.) SINGHAM
AFR 231(S) Nothin' But the Blues (Same as Music 231) (D)
(See under MUS 231 for full description.) E. D. BROWN
AFR 234 Afro-Pop: Urban African Dance Music (Same as Music 234) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under MUS 234 for full description.) E. D. BROWN
AFR 235 African Rhythm, African Sensibility (Same as Music 235) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under MUS 235 for full description.) E. D. BROWN
AFR 240(S) Introduction to the Music of Duke Ellington (Same as Music 240) (W)
(See under MUS 240 for full description.) JAFFE
AFR 241(F) Performing Race: From Shakespeare to Spike Lee (Same as Comparative Literature 241 and Theatre 241) (D)
(See under THEA 241 for full description.) P. ERICKSON
AFR 242 Introduction to the Music of John Coltrane (Same as Music 241) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under MUS 241 for full description.) JAFFE
AFR 248 History of the Caribbean: Race, Nation, and Politics (Same as History 248) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
This course explores the history of the Caribbean from pre-Columbian times to the present. The goal of the class is to trace the emergence of modern Caribbean
nations from the slave colonies of the not-so-distant past. We will show that though they may be picturesque vacation destinations, the islands of the Caribbean
have played a central role in global history. In particular, the course will introduce you to the Caribbean through sustained attention to two simultaneous and
36
related long-term developments: the maintenance of European and North American imperial enterprises and the elaboration of racial ideologies around the
diversity that has characterized the island populations. Through this prism, we will explore issues such as colonialism, piracy, sugar revolutions, slavery and
emancipation, national independence, tourism, and Caribbean migrations. Cuba, Haiti, and Jamaica will be the main areas under consideration for this semester;
however, we will also examine texts from other islands such as the Dominican Republic, Puerto Rico, and Martinique when appropriate. Sources will include
speeches, song lyrics, films, testimonios, and other primary documents that shed light on the history of Caribbean nations.
This EDI course explores the experiences and expressions of the culturally diverse peoples of African descent in the New World (and the Old), as well as the
myriad ways in which they confront, negotiate, and at times challenge dominant U.S. and/or European hierarchies of race, culture, gender and class.
Format: lecture/Discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, a map quiz, short weekly writing assignments, and three 5- to 7-page papers.
No prerequisites. No enrollment limit (expected: 20-30). Open to all.
BENSON
AFR 250 African Music: Interdisciplinary Studies (Same as INTR 287 and Music 233) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under MUS 233 for full description.) E. D. BROWN
AFR 256(F) Politics of Africa (Same as Political Science 256)
(See under PSCI 256 for full description.)
AFR 257 Leaders in Africa: Prophets, Autocrats Tyrants (Same as Leadership Studies 257 and Political Science 257) (Not offered
2011-2012)
(See under PSCI 257 for full description.) MUNEMO
AFR 267(S) Race in the Americas (Same as Sociology 267) (D)
This course is designed to provide students with a fundamental understanding of the historical development and changing dynamics of race in North America, the
Caribbean, and South America. In doing so, we will take on the fundamental position that race is a meaningful classification of human bodies. The question we
will keep in front of us at all times is this: How does social milieu determine the meaningfulness of race? Racial classifications, like all classifications, are collec-
tively imagined, and appear mired in various spheres of social life. We will devote a fair amount of attention to the meaning of race in personal experience,
economic production and distribution, political organization, and popular culture. The complexity of race will be explored within a number of writings by authors
such as Michael Hanchard, Edwidge Dandicat, and Patricia Hill Collins. This EDI course explores the experiences and expressions of the culturally diverse
peoples of African descent in the New World, as well as the myriad ways in which they confront, negotiate, and at times challenge dominant U.S. and/or Euro-
pean social hierarchies.
Format: discussion/lecture. Evaluation will be based on class participation, 2-3 short papers (5-7 pages), and a self-scheduled final examination.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 20). Preferences to Africana Studies and Sociology Majors.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MW J. MANIGAULT-BRYANT
AFR 280(S) African American History: An Introduction (Same as History 280) (D)
(See under HIST 280 for full description.) LONG
AFR 281 African-American History, 1619-1865 (Same as History 281) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under HIST 281 for full description.) LONG
AFR 282 African-American History From Reconstruction to the Present (Same as History 282) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under HIST 282 for full description.) L. BROWN
300-Level Courses
AFR 302 Rastafari: Dread, Politics, Agency (Same as Political Science 234 and Religion 261) (Not offered 2011-2012)
The emergence of Rastafari in the twentieth-century marked a distinct phase in the theory and practice of political agency. From its heretical roots in Jamaica,
Garveyism, Ethiopianism, and Pan-Africanism, Rastafari has evolved from a Caribbean theological movement to an international political actor. This course
investigates the political theory of Rastafari in order to develop intellectual resources for theorizing the concept of agency in contemporary Africana thought and
political theory. We will analyze texts and audio-visual works on the political economy of late colonial Jamaica, core Rastafari thinking, political theology, the
role of reggae music, the notion of agency, and the influence of Rastafari on global politics.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based upon one 5- to 7-page midterm essay, a group lyrics and politics project, and one 8- to 10-page final exam.
No prerequisites; open to all. No enrollment limit (expected 35).
ROBERTS
AFR 304(F) South Africa and Apartheid (Same as History 304) (D)
(See under HIST 304 for full description.) MUTONGI
AFR 305(S) The Sociology of Black Religious Experience (Same as Religion 315 and Sociology 305)
The United House of Prayer For All People. The Nation of Islam. New Birth Missionary Baptist Church. The African-American Buddhist Retreat at Spirit Rock
Meditation Center. While each of these groups reflects a different spiritual tradition, all are examples of the rich religious expressions of Black Americans. This
course will introduce students to the landscape of Black religious practices in the United States. We will begin with a historical survey of the literature on Black
religions. Our review will yield some of the primary themes of the Black religious experience--the injustices of modern racism, the significance of liberation, and
continued meaning of Africa as a homeland. We will then investigate how secular processes like industrialization, commodification, and the modern media, alter
understandings of the sacred in Black experience.
Format: seminar/discussion. Evaluation will be based upon class participation, 2-3 short papers, and a final research paper .
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 15). Preference to Africana Studies concentrators and Anthropology/Sociology majors.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR J. MANIGAULT-BRYANT
AFR 307 Contemporary Short Stories from North Africa: Fast Cars, Movies, Money, Love and War (Same as French 309) (Not offered
2011-2012)
(See under RLFR 309 for full description.) PIEPRZAK
AFR 308 Gender and Society in Modern Africa (Same as History 308 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 308) (Not offered
2011-2012)
(See under HIST 308 for full description.) MUTONGI
AFR 309 (formerly 273) Scriptures and Race (Same as Latina/o Studies 309 and Religion 309) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under REL 309 for full description.) HIDALGO
AFR 310(F) Womanist/Black Feminist Thought (Same as Religion 310 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 310) (D)
This course explores the genealogy and development of black feminist and womanist thought. We will investigate the expansion of womanist thought from a
theologically dominated discourse to a broader category of critical reflection associated more commonly with black feminism, analyze the relationship between
womanism and black feminism, and review the historical interventions of black feminism. As critical reflections upon western norms of patriarchy, heterosexism,
and racism, womanism and black feminism begin with the assumption that the experiences of women of color--particularly black women--are significant
standpoints in modern western society. Through the examination of interdisciplinary and methodological diversity within these fields, students will be introduced
to key figures including Alice Walker, Zora Neale Hurston, and Katie Cannon, and will engage materials that draw from multiple fields, including, but not limited
to, literature, history, anthropology, and religious studies. Fulfilling the EDI requirement, this course will explore how womanism/black feminism can be a bridge
for empathetic understanding of diverse experiences, and will examine the varied social, political, and historical contexts that led to the formulation of womanism/
black feminism as a tool to critique power and privilege.
Format: discussion/lecture. Evaluation will be based on class participation, three short response papers, and the completion of an original research paper or proj-
37
ect.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 20). Preference given to Africana Studies concentrators, Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies majors,
Religion majors.
Hourl 2:35-3:50 MR R. MANIGAULT-BRYANT
AFR 311 Black Ministerial Imaginations: Griots, Athletes, and Maestros (Same as Religion 311) (Not offered 2011-2012)
In one of the most memorable lines from the classic Souls of Black Folk, W. E. B. Du Bois described the Black minister as "the most unique personality
developed on U. S. soil." This course will draw from Du Bois's social-psychological portrait of the minister to explore how the ministerial personality appears
across a number of social arenas beyond the religious sphere, including politics, sports, and music. We will investigate the complex social dynamics of race and
gender surrounding Black ministerial expressions, such as Barack Obama's campaign for the U.S. presidency; Mike Singletary's career as a Hall of Fame
linebacker for the Chicago Bears, motivational speaker, and Head Coach for the San Francisco 49ers; and John Coltrane's "A Love Supreme."
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based upon class participation, a few short papers, and a final research paper.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 10). Preference given to Africana Studies concentrators.
J. MANIGAULT-BRYANT
AFR 312(F) Francographic Islands (Same as Comparative Literature 312 and French 312) (D)
(See under RLFR 312 for full description.) PIEPRZAK
AFR 314(F) Groovin' the Written Word: The Role of Music in African American Literature (Same as American Studies 314, Comparative
Literature 321, English 314 and Music 214)
In an interview with Paul Gilroy, Toni Morrison once said, "Music provides a key to the whole medley of Afro-American artistic practices." Morrison is not the
only one who believes that music speaks to numerous aspects of the African American experience. From Sterling Brown and Zora Neale Hurston to John Edgar
Wideman and Suzan Lori-Parks, many African American authors have drawn on music to take political stands, shape creative aesthetics, and articulate black
identity. In this course, students will explore the work of these authors and more, investigating music's ability to represent and critique African American culture
in their literature. Texts will cover a range of literary forms including poetry, plays, short stories and novels alongside theoretical and critical essays. Students will
discuss such key issues as assimilation into mainstream culture, authenticity claims on black music, and music used as a tool for protest. Additionally, class
assignments will include musical examples in spirituals/gospel, blues, jazz, and rock/rhythm and blues. While this class requires students to practice in-depth
literary and performance analysis skills, students are not required to have technical musical knowledge.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based upon class participation, short weekly reading responses and/or listening assignments, one 6- to 8-page paper
comparing two works, final group project (possibly producing a radio show/ podcast), and a final written component.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 20). Preference given to Africana, Comp Lit, American Studies concentrators, and English majors.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF BRAGGS
AFR 316(S) Sacred Cinema: Black Religion and the Movies (Same as Religion 265)
Although they represent different genres, what popular films Madea's Family Reunion (2006), First Sunday (2008), The Princess and the Frog (2009) have in
common is that they each offer complex and at times contradictory images of black religious expression in North America. These films, which present varied
perspectives of African American experience, implicitly and explicitly engage themes inherent to the study of religion, such as the role of faith in decision-making
processes and the use of religious tradition as a means of reinforcing or contesting socio-cultural norms. This course is as much about the use of film to study black
religious expression as it is about the use of paradigms of religious thought to study the intersections of gender, race, and religion in film. We will study films of
different genres to facilitate discussion about the various dimensions of black religious expression. Conversely, we will use images, metaphors, and teachings
found in Religious Studies to discuss what appears on screen. Through interdisciplinary, critical approaches in Film Studies and Popular Culture Studies, this
course will examine how black religious expression pervades modern cinema, and will offer constructive strategies for engaging in dialogue with this phenome-
non.
Format: seminar/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, film viewings, two review essays, and the completion of an original documentary/
short film.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 20). Preference given to Africana Studies concentrators, Religion majors/minors.
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M R. MANIGAULT-BRYANT
AFR 317(S) Black Migrations: African American Performance at Home and Abroad (Same as Comparative Literature 319, Dance 317,
English 317 and Theatre 317)
In this course, students will investigate, critique and define the concepts migration and diaspora with primary attention to the experiences of African Americans in
the United States and Europe. Drawing on a broad definition of performance, students will explore everything from writing and painting to sports and dance to
inquire how performance reflects, critiques and negotiates migratory experiences in the African diaspora. For example, how did musician Sidney Bechet's migra-
tion from New Orleans to Chicago to London influence the early jazz era? How did Katherine Dunham's dance performances in Germany help her shape a new
black dance aesthetic? Why did writer James Baldwin go all the way to Switzerland to write his first novel on black, religious culture in Harlem? What drew
actor/singer Paul Robeson to Russia, and why did the U.S. revoke his passport in response to his speeches abroad? These questions will lead students to investi-
gate multiple migrations in the African diasporic experience and aid our exploration of the reasons for migration throughout history and geography.
Format: discussion. Evaluation based upon class participation, one 5- to 7-page paper analyzing a performance/text, student-led class facilitation, final perfor-
mance/ presentation, and a final paper.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 20). Preference given to Africana Studies and Comparative Literature concentrators and English
majors.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR BRAGGS
AFR 318 Voting Rights and Voting Movements (Same as Political Science 318) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under PSCI 318 for full description.) A. WILLINGHAM
AFR 319(S) Ethnographic Approaches to Africana Studies (Same as American Studies 319 and Sociology 319)
Ethnography is the systematic study and recording of human cultures. It involves the collection and analysis of information from multiple sources including (but
not limited to) first-person accounts, life histories, interviews, observations, and autobiographical materials. Within Africana Studies, ethnographic approaches
have been utilized to reflect complex narratives of black experience throughout the Diaspora. This seminar is a critical introduction to the theory, method, and
practice of ethnography in Africana studies. We will explore a variety of cultures and settings, and discuss the practical, methodological, and ethical issues related
to ethnography. Three broad questions will dominate our discussions: 1) What are the theoretical, practical, and stylistic tools needed to fashion compelling
ethnographies that get to the heart of what it means to document Africana experience? 2) What are the ethical and political implications of representing Africana
perspectives in fieldwork studies? 3) What are the strengths and limitations of ethnography as a research method in Africana studies? Each student will utilize the
materials covered in the course to research and write his or her own ethnography.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based upon class participation, weekly response papers, a 5- to 7-page critical book review, and the construction of a mini-
ethnography.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 15). Preference given to Africana Studies concentrators, especially juniors, Women's, Gender and Sexuality
Studies concentrators, and Religion/Sociology/Anthropology majors.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W R. MANIGAULT-BRYANT
AFR 330T(F) Non-Profit Organization and Community Change (Same as Political Science 331T) (W)
(See under PSCI 331 for full description.) A. WILLINGHAM
AFR 338 Garveyism (Same as Political Science 338) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
This course explores the life, work, political thought, and activism associated with the Jamaican Pan-Africanist Marcus Mosiah Garvey and the transnational
movementGarveyismthat Garvey ushered into the modern world. We will investigate the founding of Garveyism on the island of Jamaica, the evolution of
Garveyism during the early twentieth century across the Americas and in Africa, Garveyism in Europe in the mid-twentieth century, and the contemporary
branches of the Garvey movement in our own late modern times. The implications of Garvey's conflict with W. E. B. Du Bois and the subsequent cleavages in
political thought and allegiances among their respective adherents will be addressed, along with various other core issues including: the relationship between
race, nation, and empire; transnationalism; the meaning of power; the limitations of understanding Garveyism by the phrase "Back-to-Africa"; the moral phi-
38
losophy of respect, reparation, and redemption; prophetic political theory; Pan-Africanism; the impact of Garveyism on political theological movements, such
as the Nation of Islam and the Rastafari; women in the Garvey movement; and Garveyite strategies for forging models of political solidarity in dark times.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based upon attendance and participation, weekly online reading response papers, two 5- to 7-page essays, and
one 12- to 15-page final research paper.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15)
ROBERTS
AFR 344(F) Envisioning Blackness (Same as American Studies 345 and English 345)
(See under ENGL 345 for full description.) D. L. SMITH
AFR 345(F) "In Our Own Backyard?" U.S. and Latin American Relations (Same as History 345)
(See under HIST 345 for full description.) BENSON
AFR 346(F) History of Modern Brazil (Same as History 346) (D)
(See under HIST 346 for full description.) KITTLESON
AFR 364(F) History of the Old South (Same as History 364)
(See under HIST 364 for full description.) DEW
AFR 365 History of the New South (Same as History 365) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under HIST 365 for full description.) DEW
AFR 370(S) Displaying, Collecting and Preserving the Other: Museums and French Imperialism (Same as Comparative Literature 370 and
French 370)
(See under RLFR 370 for full description.) PIEPRZAK
AFR 371 Women Activists and Social Movements (Same as INTR 371, Political Science 371 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality
Studies 370) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under INTR 371 for full description.) JAMES
AFR 375 History of American Childhood (Same as History 375) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under HIST 375 for full description.) LONG
AFR 379(S) Black Women in the United States (Same as History 379 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 379) (D)
(See under HIST 379 for full description.) LONG
AFR 381 From Civil Rights to Black Power (Same as History 381) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under HIST 381 for full description.) L. BROWN
400-Level Courses
AFR 402 The Political Thought of Frantz Fanon (Same as Philosophy 360 and Political Science 360) (Not offered 2011-2012)
Martinican psychiatrist, philosopher, and revolutionary Frantz Fanon was among the leading critical theorists and Africana thinkers of the twentieth-century.
Fanon ushered in the decolonial turn in critical theory, a move calling on those both within and outside of Europe to challenge the coloniality of the age and to
forge a new vision of politics in the postcolonial period. This course is an advanced seminar devoted to a comprehensive examination of Fanon's political
thought. We will begin with an analysis of primary texts by Fanon and end by considering how Fanon has been interpreted by his contemporaries as well as
activists and critical theorists writing today.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based upon attendance and participation, weekly 1-page reading response papers, a class presentation, and one 25-page
final research paper containing an abstract, keywords, text, and endnotes.
Prerequisites: open to Juniors and Seniors with a background in Africana Studies, political philosophy, and/or political theory (or permission of instructor).
Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15). Preference will be given to Senior Africana Studies concentrators.
ROBERTS
AFR 403 New Asian American, African American, Native American, and Latina/o Writing (Same as American Studies 403,
Comparative Literature 375, English 375 and Latina/o Studies 403) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under AMST 403 for full description.) WANG
AFR 404(F) Making it in Africa (Same as History 403 and Leadership Studies 403)
(See under HIST 403 for full description.) MUTONGI
AFR 405(F) Africana Studies and the Disciplines
Of the many things that distinguish Africana Studies from other fields of knowledge, most remarkable are its creative uses and critiques of disciplinary perspec-
tives. In some instances, a scholar in the field might move between disciplines; in others, a scholar might integrate two or more disciplines into one point of view.
Disciplinary creativity accommodates the array of information--written texts, music, visual art, film--that contributes to our understanding of the African Dias-
pora. This seminar will illuminate the disciplinary nuances and challenges of studying people of African descent. After outlining genealogies of Africana Studies
and the field's complicated relationships to social science disciplines, students will closely read classic texts by some of the pioneers in the field and explore their
uses of disciplinary perspectives. In the latter half of the course, students will have the opportunity to design and conduct their own research projects with the
aforementioned disciplinary concerns in mind.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based upon class participation, a couple of short papers and the completion of a final research paper or project.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 10). Preference given to Africana Studies concentrators.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W J. MANIGAULT-BRYANT
AFR 430 Heretical Political Theory--Hannah Arendt and C.L.R. James (Same as Political Science 430) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under PSCI 430 for full description.) ROBERTS
AFR 443 Slavery, Race and Ethnicity in Latin America (Same as History 443) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under HIST 443 for full description.)
AFR 444(S) The Black Republic: Haiti in History and Imagination (Same as History 444) (D)
This senior Africana capstone course/History seminar explores the central role of Haiti in the American and the transnational panAfrican imaginations. As home
to the world's only successful slave rebellion, Haiti has been a role model of tremendous importance, stimulating slave rebellions in America and throughout the
Caribbean, playing an instrumental role in the liberation of South America from the Spaniards, and inspiring decolonization movements in Africa and the Carib-
bean in the 20th century. Not surprisingly, it has had tumultuous relations with both its colonial occupier, France, and its most powerful neighbor, the United
States. From isolation and sanctions, to occupation and U.S. supported dictatorship, this seminar traces the historical silencing suffered by Haiti at the hands of
western historians, the vivid images Haitians evoke in the American imagination--from boat people and carriers of Aids, to practitioners of voodoo and creators
of a uniquely African-Caribbean art--and the role of the French and American governments in the recent coup against President JeanBertrand Aristide. Film,
dance, literature, music, history, anthropology and religion will be explored in this interdisciplinary course, with an eye towards helping students produce an
original work of their own as the final project. By examining Haiti's fraught racial relations--particularly between Haitian blacks and mulattoes--and her early
and unique black power movemen--noirisme--this class fulfills the requirements of the Exploring Diversity Initiative.
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on student participation, a short paper, and the completion of an original research paper or project (all projects will
39
have some written component, but may include a dance performance, spoken word, fieldwork etc.)
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15). Preference given to Africana Studies concentrators and History majors.
Group D
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M SINGHAM
AFR 448 Latin American and Caribbean Narratives: Testimonios, Historical Novels, and Travel Accounts (Same as History 448) (Not
offered 2011-2012)
(See under HIST 448 for full description.) BENSON
AFR 450(S) Melville, Mark Twain, and Ellison (Same as English 450) (D)
(See under ENGL 450 for full description.) D. L. SMITH
AFR 456(F) Civil War and Reconstruction (Same as History 456)
(See under HIST 456 for full description.) DEW
AFR 459 Jim Crow (Same as History 459) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under HIST 459 for full description.) L. BROWN
AFR 481T(S) Race and Revolution in Latin America (Same as History 481) (W)
Are Latin American societies really postracial? Since the period of independence and abolition, many Latin American intellectuals and policy makers have
made such claims. Yet, others, including many AfroLatin American activists have challenged this view. This course will examine the centrality of discourses
about race in Latin America by reading both classic works such as Gilberto Freyre, The Master and the Slaves (1933) and Jos Vasconcelos, The Cosmic Race
(1926) along with the newest transnational scholarship on the spread of racial ideologies throughout the Americas. We will also explore how and why some 20th
century revolutionary movements chose to incorporate promises of racial equality in their platforms when others did not. In doing so, the course seeks to answer
questions such as: Why has racism persisted in Latin America despite political revolution? What historically have been the benefits and challenges of postracial
discourses? And how have AFRoLatinos and indigenous populations been both incorporated and excluded from Latin American nations?
Format: tutorial. Students will meet with the instructor in pairs for one hour each week. Every week, one student from the pair will write a short 56 page response
of the week's reading. The other student will respond orally with a 23 page critique of their partner's paper. Evaluation will be based on class attendance, weekly
essays, critiques, and a final written exercise.
Enrollment limit: 10 (expected 10). Preference given to Africana Studies concentrators and History majors.
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. BENSON
AFR 482T(F) Fictions of African-American History (Same as History 482) (W)
(See under HIST 482 for full description.) LONG
AFR 483T African Political Thought (Same as History 483T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under AFR 483 for full description.) MUTONGI
AFR 491(F)-W30, W30-492(S) Senior Project
Non-honors candidates do a regular winter study project offered by the program or a "99." Candidates for honors in Africana Studies must do W30 for the
winter study period following 491 or prior to taking 492.
AFR 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
AMERICAN STUDIES (Div. II)
Chair, Professor: LIZA JOHNSON
Faculty 2011-2012: Professor: L. JOHNSON. Associate Professors: CEPEDA, RA**. Assistant Professor: WANG. Senior Lecturer: CLEGHORN.
Visiting Assistant Professor: UM. Bolin Fellow: VIGIL.
GENERAL PROGRAM DESCRIPTION
The American Studies Program, an eleven-course major, uses interdisciplinary approaches to develop students' understanding of the complexity of the cul-
ture(s) usually labeled "American." Examining history, literature, visual media, performance, and other forms of expression, we explore the processes of cultural
definition as contested by diverse individuals and groups. We ask new questions about aspects of American life long taken for granted; we also use American
culture as a laboratory for testing classic and contemporary theories about how cultures work.
NON-MAJORS, FIRST-YEAR STUDENTS, AND SOPHOMORES
American Studies 201 is open to non-majors including first-year students. All elective courses are open to students who meet the requirements of the depart-
ments that sponsor those courses. Courses designated as junior or senior seminars are open to non-majors with permission of the instructor.
COURSES AND COURSE NUMBERING
American Studies offers courses at all levels. Our 100-level courses, which give preference to first-year students, explore a substantive topic in-depth without
seeking to introduce the field as a whole. Our introductory course, AMST 201, explores questions of American identity but also stresses the interdisciplinary
approach and diverse cultural artifacts that distinguish American Studies as a form of inquiry. Both this course and our occasional 200-level electives are ap-
propriate for students at all levels, including first-years. The intermediate electives at the 300 level are offered primarily for juniors and seniors, although, when
space and instructor policy permits, they are open to sophomores who have had AMST 201. Beginning with the class of 2012, all majors are required to take
AMST 301, the junior seminar, which teaches students how to employ theories and methods central to the field. The 400-level courses designated as Senior
Seminars are designed for senior majors, though open to others with suitable preparation.
THE MAJOR
Required major courses:
American Studies 201
American Studies 301, Junior Seminar (required of majors beginning with the class of 2012)
one 400-level course designated Senior Seminar
Elective courses:
Eight courses: five should be chosen from one of the specializations listed below, the other three chosen from among any of the electives listed, but
students must draw their remaining courses from two of the other specializations. Students are also required to take at least one course covering pre-1900
American history or culture; this need not be and additional courses, but can be one of the eight electives.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN AMERICAN STUDIES
Candidates for honors in American Studies will undertake a substantial, year-long independent project during their Senior year. Applicants should have a
consistent record of high achievement in courses taken for the major, and normally will have done work in the field of study of their proposed thesis. Students who
wish to write or produce an honors project should consult with a prospective faculty advisor in their junior year. Formal application to pursue honors should be
made by the time of spring registration in the junior year. Students must submit a 1- to 2-page preliminary proposal describing the proposed project to the Chair of
the American Studies Program at this time. Final admission to the honors thesis program will depend on the AMST advisory committee's assessment of the
qualifications of the student and the merits and feasibility of the project (including the availability of relevant faculty advisors). If the proposal is approved, the
student will be permitted to register for AMST 491, W30, and AMST 492 the following year. The completed project is due in mid-April. Each student will
present a short oral presentation of his or her thesis at the end of spring semester. Honors Theses count as one of the eleven courses required for the major.
ADVISING
All majors will be assigned a faculty advisor. Majors must meet with their advisor during the first week of classes during the fall semester and at the time of the
spring semester registration period in order to have their courses and plans for the American Studies major approved. Both majors and non- majors are encour-
aged to talk at any time with the program chair or other affiliated faculty about the major.
40
AMERICAN STUDIES AND OTHER PROGRAMS
Students majoring in American Studies are encouraged to consider pursuing concentrations in Africana Studies, Environmental Studies, Latina/o Studies,
Performance Studies, and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies. Many of the courses counted for those concentrations may also earn credit toward the Ameri-
can Studies major.
STUDY AWAY FROM WILLIAMS
We encourage students to pursue cross-cultural comparative studies. A major in American Studies can be combined with study away from Williams for a
semester or a year if plans are made carefully. Many courses that will be approved for College credit may also count toward the American Studies major if their
subject matter is American culture.
Students planning to be away in the junior year should have taken American Studies 201 before they leave; those who can take the Junior Seminar before they
go away are encouraged to do so. Students should consult as early as possible with the chair or their advisor about their plans for fulfilling the requirements of the
major.
AMST 101 Artists Respond to Contemporary Events (Same as ArtS 101) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under ARTS 101 for full description.) L. JOHNSON
AMST 108 First-Hand America (Same as English 244) (Not offered 2011-2012)
Gonzo journalism, the nonfiction novel, literary journalism, the "new new journalism." Before "American Studies" was named and developed as an academic
field the study of American culture thrived in the able hands of writers, reformers and amateur anthropologists whose works continue to form the basis of the
curriculum. This course is an introduction to American culture through the eyes of extraordinary writers who work as public intellectuals, addressing a reader-
ship that reaches beyond the university. We will travel to Alaska with John McPhee, to Miami with Joan Didion, to Sing Sing prison with Ted Conover, and to
the Hmong community of Northern California with Ann Fadiman, examining at every stop both the cultures in which these acute observers immerse them-
selves and their interpretive techniques. Works will be drawn from the following list of authors: Jane Addams, Zora Neal Hurston, Truman Capote, Hunter S.
Thompson, Tom Wolfe, Studs Terkel, John Edgar Wideman, Peggy Orenstein, Jon Krakauer, Susan Orlean, and Mitchell Duneier.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, and a combination of critical/analytical writing and creative nonfiction.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected 19). Preference given to first-year students.
CLEGHORN
AMST 113(F) Exploring 20th Century American Experimentalism: The New York School Composers and Visual Artists (Same as Music 113)
(See under MUS 113 for full description.) J. ROBERTS
AMST 144(S) American Ethnic Detective Fictions and Variations (Same as English 144) (W)
(See under ENGL 144 for full description.) UM
AMST 201(F,S) Introduction to American Studies (D)
To be an "American" means something more than U.S. citizenship. In this course, we focus on the problems and possibilities of American identity. Access to
Americanness is shaped by factors such as class, race, ethnicity, gender, sexuality, religion, and region--categories which themselves change in meaning over
time. Given the geographical, racial, and cultural diversity of the United States, the ways in which Americans imagine nation inevitably vary over time, according
to place, and among different individuals and groups. Rather than a survey of any one aspect or period of American history, literature, or popular culture, this
course is an introduction to the interdisciplinary field of American Studies, a field defined both by the range of texts we read (essays, novels, autobiographies,
photographs, films, music, architecture, historical documents, legal texts), and by the questions we ask of them: How have different Americans imagined what it
means to be an American? What ideas about national history, patriotism, and moral character shape their visions of Americanness? How do the educational
system, mass media, government policies regarding citizenship and immigration shape American identities? How are boundaries of inclusion and exclusion in
the nation drawn? What uses have been made of the claim to an American identity, and what is at stake in that claim? How have Americans imagined a national
landscape, a national culture, and to what ends?
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on a midterm, two papers, two short response papers, and class participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 per section (expected: 19 per section). Preference given to sophomores and first-year students. Two sections in the fall; one
section in the spring.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR, 8:30-9:45 TR First Semester: WANG, UM
9:55-11:10 TR, 11:20-12:35 TR Second Semester: CLEGHORN, RUA
AMST 203(S) Introduction to Native American Studies (Same as Antropology 203) (D)
From Longfellow's The Song of Hiawatha (1855) and D.H. Lawrence's Studies in Classic American Literature (1923) to Disney's Pocahontas (1995) and James
Cameron's Avatar (2009), representations of the indigenous as Other have greatly shaped cultural production in America as vehicles for defining the nation and
the self. This seminar introduces students to the broad field of Native American studies, engaging a range of texts from law to policy to history to art and literature
as well as music and film. In addition to visual culture analysis, we'll examine literary texts and refer to historical inquiries. By keeping popular culture, represen-
tation, and the nature of historical narrative in mind, we will consider the often mutually constitutive relationship between American identity and Indian identity as
we pose the following questions: How have imaginings of a national space and national culture by Americans been shaped by a history marked by conquest and
reconciliation with indigenous peoples? And, how has the creation of a national American literary tradition often defined itself as both apart from and yet indebted
to Native American cultural traditions? This course also considers how categories like race, class, ethnicity, gender, sexuality, and religion have defined identities
and changed over time with particular regards to specific Native American individuals and tribal nations. Students will be able to design their own final research
projects that may focus on either a historically contingent or contemporary issue related to Native American people in the United States. This course is an Explor-
ing Diversity Initiative course, because it encourages students to reflect critically on how difference has shaped cultural production and political decision-making
in the United States with regards to the sovereignty of distinct indigenous societies.
Format: discussion. Requirements: regular discussion question posts via "Glow," active participation in all class discussions and online formats, facilitation of at
least one class reading, formal presentations, and original research culminating in a final paper, which is no more than 15 papges in length.
No prerequisites:. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 12). Preference given to first-years and sophomores..
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR VIGIL
AMST 209(F) Ecologies of Place: Culture, Commodities and Everyday Life (Same as Anthropology 209 and Environmental Studies 209)
(See under ENVI 209 for full description.) HOWE
AMST 210(F) Culture and Incarceration (Same as Africana Studies 210, INTR 210, Political Science 210 and Women's, Gender and
Sexuality Studies 210)
(See under PSCI 210 for full description.) JAMES
AMST 215(F) Experimental Asian American Writing (Same as Comparative Literature 215 and English 217)
Asian American literature did not begin in the 1980s with Amy Tan's The Joy Luck Club. Nor has the writing primarily been confined to autobiographical
accounts of generational conflict, divided identities, and glimpses of Chinatown families. Asian American literature in English began with poetry in the late
nineteenth century, and has encompassed a variety of aesthetic styles across the last century--from Modernism to New York School poetry to protest poetry to
digital poetics. This course will explore Asian American writings that have pushed formal (and political) boundaries in the past 100+ years, with a particular focus
on avant-garde writers working today. We will look at such authors as Jose Garcia Villa, Chuang Hua, Wong May, John Yau, Theresa H., Cha, Adrian Tomine,
Tan Lin, Pamela Lu, Prageeta Sharma, Bhanu Kapil, Linh Dinh, and Tao Lin.
Format: seminar. Requirements: two papers (6-8 pp. and 10-12 pp.) plus in-class presentation, brief response papers, and class participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 18). If the course is overenrolled, preference will be given to American Studies Majors.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR WANG
AMST 219 Arabs in America: A Survey (Same as Arabic 219 and Comparative Studies 219) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under ARAB 219 for full description.) NAAMAN
AMST 221 Introduction to Urban Studies: Shaping and Living the City (Same as Environmental Studies 221 and Latino/a Studies 220) (Not
offered 2011-2012)
(See under LATS 220 for full description.) RA
41
AMST 224(S) U.S. Latina/o Religions (Same as Latina/o Studies 224 and Religion 224) (D)
(See under LATS 224 for full desciption.) HIDALGO
AMST 225 Religions of North America (Same as Religion 225) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under REL 225 for full description.) SHUCK
AMST 226(F) New Religions in North America (Same as Religion 226)
(See under REL 226 for full description.) SHUCK
AMST 227(S) Utopias and Americas (Same as Environmental Studies 227, Latina/o Studies 227 and Religion 227)
(See under REL 227 for full description.) HIDALGO
AMST 228T North American Apocalyptic Thought (Same as Religion 228T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under REL 228 for full description.) SHUCK
AMST 238(S) Racial Formations and Transformations in America: 1945-Present (Same as English 238) (D)
Sociologist Howard Winant has argued that World War II heralded a significant "break" in racial order: that is, it signaled the beginning of marked shifts in how
people--and the State--perceived, thought about, and managed race and racial inequality. Subsequent decades in the United States witnessed the end of segrega-
tion, passage of Civil Rights, liberalization of immigration policies, and the rise and dominance of "multiculturalism" in social, political, and academic spheres.
These landmark events and shifts contributed to a narrative of progress as the defining story of race in post-war America. However, as Winant cautions, the
"break" neither resolved nor abolished racism and racial hierarchies. Our class will examine how this narrative of racial progress has been constructed, as well as
the ways in which it has been critiqued and complicated. In doing so, we will also pay attention to: shifting perception(S) of race/racial difference in global and
transnational contexts, representations of race in cultural texts and discourse, cross-racial connections and formations, and inter-articulation of gender, sexuality,
and class formations with race. This course reflects the goals of the Exploring Diversity Initiative through its comparative approaches to study of race and in its
emphasis on the centrality of racial formations to the structure and logic of national life.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active in-class participation, 3-4 short response papers, final project (8-10 pages) and an in-class workshop/presentation of final
project.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 20). Preference given to American Studies majors.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR UM
AMST 240(S) Latina/o Language and Literature: Hybrid Voices (Same as Comparative Literature 210 and Latina/o Studies 240) (D)
(See under LATS 240 for full description.) CEPEDA
AMST 256 Literature of the Americas: Transnational Dialogues on Race, Violence and Nation-Building (Same as Comparative Literature
272, Latina/o Studies 272 and Spanish 272) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
(See under COMP 272 for full description.) FRENCH
AMST 264(F) American Art and Architecture, 1600 to Present (Same as ArtH 264)
(See under ARTH 264 for full description.) M. LEWIS
AMST 283 Topics in Asian American Literature (Same as English 287) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
This course examines a sampling of Asian American texts from the late nineteenth century to the present and contextualizes them historically. Produced by
writers from various Asian American groups and in a variety of styles, these works by such writers as Maxine Hong Kingston, Jose Garcia Villa, Younghill
Kang, Hisaye Yamamoto, and Linh Dinh, provide a sense of heterogeneity of Asian American literature. They also force us to examine the intersections,
material and psychic, of historical events/larger structural forces with individuals and groups. Our readings will prod us to call into question assumptions we
make about what is "Asian American" but also, crucially, what is "American." Both domestic issues (e.g., American politics, racism, links with other minority
groups) and global considerations (e.g., U.S. immigration and foreign policies, the three wars with Asian countries in the last century)-and how they have
shaped Asian American histories and literatures-will figure importantly in our discussions.
Format: seminar. Requirements: two papers, one midterm, and class participation.
No prerequisites. No enrollment limit (expected: 25).
WANG
AMST 284(F) Topics in Asian American History (Same as Asian Studies 284 and History 284) (D)
(See under HIST 284 for full description.) WANG
AMST 301(F) Theories and Methods in American Studies (Junior Seminar)
This course aims to provide a "how to" of American Studies from an integrative, multiracial, and socio-cultural perspective. Taking American culture as a site for
testing classic and contemporary theories about how cultures work, the Junior Seminar in American Studies serves as an introduction to resources and techniques
for interdisciplinary research. Students will be exposed to and experiment with a wide range of current theoretical and methodological approaches employed in
American Studies and contributing disciplinary fields, and in the process gain a working competence in all four tracks of the major (Space and Place; Compara-
tive Studies in Race, Ethnicity and Diaspora; Arts in Context; and Critical and Cultural Theory). The goal of the course is not only for students to develop knowl-
edge of main currents in the field of American Studies but also to become practitioners through a series of assignments that will permit students to exercise their
newfound skills. Students will thus, for instance, develop rhetorical analyses, gather ethnographic data, and "read" assorted spaces and buildings, as the class
explores such problems or topics as national narratives, ethnoracial formations, the American prison system, and the circulation of commodities.
Format: discussion. Requirements: evaluation will be based on class participation and a wide variety of student assignments, ranging from postings to the class
Glow site, to short, analytical essays (5 pp.), to field work exercises, to in class presentations.
Prerequisites: AMST 201, junior or senior standing, or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 12). Preference given to juniors majoring in
American Studies.; required of junior majors.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MW CLEGHORN
AMST 302 Public Sphere/Public Space (Same as Political Science 335) (Junior Seminar) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
The "public sphere," one of the core concepts of modern democratic thought, has taken on renewed significance in intellectual life today. This writing-intensive
seminar looks briefly at the evolution of the term, but concentrates on its relevance to contemporary politics. Our investigations will center on the character and
meanings of public space. We will look at space both as a key metaphor in political theory and as a medium of everyday practical struggle: that is, we will
examine not only some of the most influential conceptions of public life, but also the political forces shaping and shaped by the practical design and use of the
built environment. These examinations will combine critical reading and analytical writing with field observations, group work, and oral presentations. Our
primary focus will be on the following topics: the relationship between ideas of citizenship and models of the public; the racing, gendering, and class-stratifica-
tion of spaces (civic, residential, commercial, etc.); urbanity and suburbanization; the kinds of spaces and politics opened and closed by the internet and contem-
porary mass media; the effects of contemporary processes of globalization on political identity and democratic practices. Likely authors include Arendt, Ber-
man, Davis, Delany, Foucault, Fraser, Gamson, Habermas, Hall, Harvey, Holston, Sennett, Sunstein, Virilio.
Format: discussion. Requirements: regular participation in class and on line, one 3-page paper, three 6-page papers, and two ethnographic field exercises/pre-
sentations.
Prerequisites: prior work in theory or permission of the instructor; not open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 18 (expected: 18).
Political Theory Subfield
REINHARDT
AMST 303T(F) Four American Poets (Same as English 301) (W)
(See under ENGL 301 for full description.) CLEGHORN
AMST 305(S) Cities of the Anglophone Chinese Imagination (Same as Asian Studies 305, Comparative Literature 303 and English 374)
(D)
The current academic vogue for the "diasporic" and the "transnational" has shifted the emphasis away from viewing ethnic literatures solely, or primarily, as
minority national literatures and towards reading them more "globally." Such a reframing, while potentially exciting, raises new questions. For example, what
exactly is shared by subjects in a given diaspora? Does the term "diaspora"
42
necessarily invoke the specter of racial essentialism? What happens to concepts of of race, racialization and racism when one moves away from local and national
politics? Is the idea of a diasporic subject much less vexing than the idea of a racially minoritized person? How important a role does the shared English language
play in these diasporas? In this course, we will look at the works of a specific diasporic literary group, Englishlanguage writers of Chinese descent, living in
England, former British settler colonies (the United States, Canada, Australia) and other sites in Asia formerly colonized by the British. We will consider how
geographic sites function as material spaces and places of the imagination and how the English language is itself a material and imaginary space.
Format: discussion/seminar. Evaluation will be based on one 5- to 7-page paper, one 8- to 10-page paper, short response papers, participation.
Prerequisites: those taking this as an English class must have previously taken a 100-level English course. Enrollment limit: 17 (expected: 10). Preference given to
American Studies majors.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 T WANG
AMST 306 Latinos and Cultural Citizenship (Same as Latina/o Studies 306) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under LATS 306 for full description.) BEZ
AMST 308 California: Myths, Peoples, Places (Same as Latina/o Studies 308) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under LATS 308 for full description.) HIDALGO
AMST 310 Latino Cityscapes: Mapping Place, Community, and Latinidad in U.S. Urban Centers (Same as Latina/o Studies 310) (Junior
Seminar) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under LATS 310 for full description.) RA
AMST 311(F) Ethnographies of Diaspora and Popular Culture (Same as Latina/o Studies 311)
(See under LATS 311 for full description.) BEZ
AMST 312(S) Chicago (Same as Environmental Studies 313 and Latina/o Studies 312)
(See under LATS 312 for full description.) RA
AMST 313 Gender, Race, Beauty, and Power in the Age of Transnational Media (Same as Comparative Literature 313, Latina/o Studies 313
and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 313) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under LATS 313 for full description.) CEPEDA
AMST 314(F) Groovin' the Written Word: The Role of Music in African American Literature (Same as Africana Studies 314, Comparative
Literature 321, English 314 and Music 214)
(See under AFR 314 for full description.) BRAGGS
AMST 319(S) Ethnographic Approaches to Africana Studies (Same as Africana Studies 319 and Sociology 319)
(See under AFR 319 for full description.) R. MANIGAULT-BRYANT
AMST 329(F) Cultures of War: U.S. Wars in Asia and American Culture (Same as English 329)
The nations and continent of Asia have often figured as sites onto which the U.S. has projected various hopes, anxieties, and desires since the 18th century.
Throughout the 20th century, the rise of U.S. as a global power has been inaugurated and marked perhaps most prominently through its wars in Asia-in the
Philippines, Pacific Islands, Korea, Viet Nam. This class explores how America's military interventions in Asia have impacted and shaped numerous aspects of
American life: how have representations and remembrances of different wars been instrumental in shaping national identities and narratives? How have these
wars also been central to our understandings of and discourse about race in America? And why and how has the work of "culture" been central to wars and vice
versa? While the main focus of the class is on the making of American culture, we will also examine non-U.S. centric texts and critiques and in doing so, our
approaches and methods of analyses will seek to be mindful of ways in which certain ideas of "America"--and nationalism--gets privileged.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active in-class participation, four unit projects/papers (3-5 pages; length will vary depending on the unit and the assignment),
including at least one in-class workshop and informal presentation on unit project, and a final paper (8-10 pages).
Prerequisites: if registered through English, a 100-level English class, or with consent of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 16 (expected: 15). Preference given to
American Studies majors, then English majors.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF UM
AMST 332 Latinos and Education: The Politics of Schooling, Language, and Latino Studies (Same as Latina/o Studies 332) (Junior
Seminar) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
Schools have often become the focal point for debates over the relationship between cultural identity, intellectual abilities, and the production of knowledge.
What should be taught, who should be taught, and how they should be taught frame the politics of schooling. Language has often taken center stage in these
debates. This course examines the effects of educational policies and practices on the development of Latina/o students and communities. We will also consider
how these students and communities have resourcefully carved out spaces and made demands to meet their educational needs. Topics include school desegre-
gation, bilingual education, student walk-outs and sit-ins, as well as the origins and advancement of Chicano Studies, Puerto Rican Studies, and more recently
Latino Studies programs on college campuses. Students will critically engage the major themes of the course in two essays as they also engage each other in the
form of peer-reviews and other in-class writing workshop exercises. This course explores the experiences and expressions of racially and culturally diverse
Latinas and Latinos, focusing on the myriad ways in which they confront, negotiate, and at times challenge dominant U.S. hierarchies of race, culture, gender
and class.
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, writing workshop participation (and related assignments), group presentations, and two
essays (12-15 pages).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 12). Preference given to Latina/o Studies concentrators.
RA
AMST 336(F) Global Migration (Same as Sociology 336)
(See under SOC 336 for full description.) RULIKOVA
AMST 338(S) Literature of the American Renaissance (Same as English 338)
(See under ENGL 338 for full description.) ROSENHEIM
AMST 339 Popular Culture and the Dynamics of the Everyday (Same as Comparative Literature 338 and Latina/o Studies 338) (Not
offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
(See under LATS 338 for full description.) CEPEDA
AMST 345(F) Envisioning Blackness (Same as Africana Studies 344 and English 345)
(See under ENGL 345 for full description.) D. L. SMITH
AMST 346(S) Latinas/os and the Media: From Production to Consumption (Same as Comparative Literature 359 and Latina/o Studies 346)
(W) (D)
(See under LATS 346 for full description.) CEPEDA
AMST 356T(S) Feeling Queer: Theories of Emotion and Affect in Literary and Cultural Studies (Same as Comparative Literature 356,
English 356 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 355) (W) (D)
(See under ENGL 356 for full description.) KENT
AMST 364 Imagining Urban America, Three Case Studies: Boston, Chicago, and L.A. (Same as History 466) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under HIST 466 for full description.) DALZELL
43
AMST 372T(S) American Modernist Fiction (Same as English 372T) (W)
(See under ENGL 372T for full description.) LIMON
AMST 379(S) American Pragmatism (Same as Philosophy 379)
(See under PHIL 379 for full description.) GERRARD
AMST 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
AMST 403 New Asian American, African American, Native American, and Latina/o Writing (Same as Africana Studies 403,
Comparative Literature 375, English 375 and Latina/o Studies 403) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
Critics reading minority writing often focus on its thematic--i.e., sociological--content. Such literature is usually presumed to be inseparable from the "identi-
ty"/body of the writer and read as autobiographical, ethnographic, representational, exotic. At the other end of the spectrum, avant-garde writing is seen to
concern itself "purely" with formal questions, divorced from the socio-historical (and certainly not sullied by the taint of race). In the critical realm we currently
inhabit, in which "race" is opposed to the "avant-garde," an experimental minority writer can indeed seem an oxymoron. In this class we will closely read recent
work by Asian American, African American, Native American and Latino/a writers which challenges preconceptions about ethnic literature, avant-garde writ-
ing, genre categorization, among other things. The writing done by these mostly young, mostly urban, poets and fiction writers is some of the most exciting
being written in the United States today; their texts push the boundaries of aesthetic form while simultaneously engaging questions of culture, politics, and
history. Reading them forces us to re-think our received notions about literature. Authors to be read include Will Alexander, Sherwin Bitsui, Monica de la Torre,
Sesshu Foster, Renee Gladman, Bhanu Kapil, Tan Lin, Tao Lin, Ed Roberson, James Thomas Stevens, Roberto Tejada, and Edwin Torres..
Format: seminar/discussion. Evaluation will be based on either one 16- to 18-page seminar paper or two shorter papers (one 7-8 pages and one 9-10 pages);
short response papers; participation.
Prerequisites: Those taking this as an English class must have previously taken a 100-level English course. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15). Preference
given to American Studies majors.
WANG
AMST 403 American Music (Senior Seminar) (Not offered 2011-2012)
One way to write the cultural history of music is to trace the authority with which different people can say "You are hurting my ears' at any given historical
moment." So writes Carlo Rotella, one of the historians whose work we will read in this course as we approach American popular music as an object of cultural
studies. We will study particular performers and styles (e.g. Elvis, Selena, punk and hip hop), but we do so in the context of the histories of labor; social
migration; political and economic shifts; ideologies; and of the culture industry. Moving from the late-nineteenth-century to the present, and through agrarian to
industrial to postindustrial social configurations, we will study music as a means of expressing resistance and accommodation and as the basis of community-
formation and disruption. We will pay special attention to the recent recovery by American musicians of folk musics originating outside of American borders:
Celtic, African and Cuban in the context of global capitalism and American hegemony. Texts include works of history, cultural criticism and ethnomusicology;
audio performance recorded in the field, in the studio, and in concert; and documentary and fiction films.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on a number of written assignments.
Prerequisites: prior work in American Studies. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to senior American Studies majors.
CLEGHORN
AMST 405 Home and Belonging: Displacements, Relocations, and Place-Making (Same as Latina/o Studies 405) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(Senior Seminar) (W) (D)
The metaphor of "home" and idea of "belonging" bring insight to theories and investigations centered on community building and identity formation within
and across national borders. These constructions give us an indication of what people value, what is worth fighting for, as well as what is considered expend-
able. Our objective in this course is to interrogate constructions of home and belonging by studying how individuals, communities, and nations are transformed
by experiences of dislocation, migration, and renewed place-making. What are the ways a sense of belonging shapes these identities and the investments made
in these formations? Working with ethnography, history, memoir, literature, critical essays, and documentary film, we will consider the personal and political
uses and meanings of memory, nostalgia, and imagination in "rooting" migrating subjects in place and time. Among the many case studies we will examine are
the politics of homeland among Cuban-Americans, Native American and West Indian festive forms, and place-claiming and racial sincerity among African
Americans. This course explores the experiences and expressions of racialized populations in the United States, focusing on the myriad ways in which they
confront, negotiate, and at times challenge dominant U.S. hierarchies of race, culture, gender and class.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class participation, annotated bibliography, short essay, writing workshop participation (and related assignments),
research paper related assignments, and a final research paper and presentation.
Prerequisites: Prior courses in Latino Studies, American Studies, or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected 15). Preference given to senior
Latino Studies concentrators and American Studies majors.
RA
AMST 408 Envisioning Urban Life: Objects, Subjects, and Everyday People (Same as Latina/o Studies 408) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(D)
(See under LATS 408 for full description.) RA
AMST 409(F) Transnational Lives in Global Context (Senior Seminar) (Same as Latina/o Studies 409) (W) (D)
In the age of satellite television, e-mail, and readily available international phone cards, transnationalism has rapidly become the norm as opposed to the excep-
tion. However, what does it really mean to "be transnational"? How do the lived experiences of transnational individuals and communities merge with (and differ
from) theoretical notions of the transnational? How do the practices and concepts of diaspora, globalization, and transnationalism overlap? How does the growing
number of transnational citizens and residents in this country shape "American" identity on the local, national, and global scales? In this interdisciplinary, compar-
ative course we will analyze contemporary theories regarding the origins and impacts of transnationalism, key critiques regarding the field of transnational studies
itself, and transnationalism's role in the "New" American Studies. Case studies examined in this course include China, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Haiti,
India, Mexico and the Philippines.
Format: discussion. Evaluation to be based on student participation, the completion of an original research paper conducted in stages (abstract, annotated bibliog-
raphy, outline, and multiple drafts), and peer editing.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 10). Preference to Latina/o Studies concentrators and to American Studies majors.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W BAEZ
AMST 410(S) American Avant Garde Poetry Since 1950 (Same as English 410)
This course examines American poetry from what one critic has called "the other side of the century"-the lineage of poetry descending from two Modernist
forebears, Ezra Pound and Gertrude Stein. Focusing on experimental poetry since 1950, we will read poems and essays by those working in Black Mountain,
New York School, Beat, Black Arts, Language, Conceptual, Flarf, and digital poetries and poetics.
Format: seminar. Requirements: several short assignments (presentation, response papers), class participation, and {either} one long seminar paper (20-25 pp.) or
two shorter papers (one 8-10 pp., the other 12-15 pp.).
Prerequisites: AMST 201 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 16 (expected: 15). Preference given to American Studies senior majors, then other Ameri-
can Studies and English majors.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W WANG
AMST 462 Art of California: "Sunshine or Noir" (Same as ArtH 462 and Latina/o Studies 462) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under ARTH 462 for full description.) CHAVOYA
AMST 491(F)-W30, W30-492(S) Senior Honors Project
SPECIALIZATION FIELDS
To provide focus for work in the major, each student will choose one of the Specialization Fields listed below and record this choice when registering for the
major. (This commitment can be revised, in consultation with the chair.) At least five electives will be taken from among those designated to support a specializa-
44
tion field. In extraordinary cases, students who wish to do so may be permitted to design their own specialization field. All such arrangements must be approved
by the American Studies Advisory Committee.
ARTS IN CONTEXT
This specialization is for students interested in American arts, literature and media. Its approaches are interdisciplinary: it trains students to examine cultural
artifacts with attention to aesthetic form and to the contexts--historical, social, political--that determine and situate those forms. Broadly, it asks how history has
shaped the arts and media and how the arts and media have shaped how we think and who we are. Students in this specialization take courses across a range of
genres and media: poetry, fiction, music, film and video, pop culture, visual culture, performance, experimental and activist art.
Students can check with the department coordinator to see if other courses not listed here might count as
electives.
Elective courses:
AFR 160/COMP 214/ENGL 251 Defining the African Diaspora
AFR 245/MUS 245 Monk and the Bebop Revolution
AFR 302/PSCI 234/REL 261 Rastafari: Dread, Politics, Agency
[AFR 305//SOC 305/WGSS 305 The Hip-Hop Generation: Power, Identity, and Social Change--last offered fall 2008]
AMST 108/ENGL 244 First-Hand America
AMST 203 Introduction to Native American Studies
AMST 283/ENGL 287 Topics in Asian American Literature
AMST 302/ENGL 388 Asian-American Writing and the Visual Arts
AMST 305/ASST 305/COMP 303/ENGL 374 Cities of the Anglophone Chinese Imagination
AMST 406/English 407 Twentieth-Century American Poetic Movements
ARTH 201/ENVI 201 American Landscape History
[ARTH 205/AFR 205 Picturing Race: From Early Modern Europe to Now--last offered fall 2008]
ARTH 264/AMST 264 American Art and Architecture, 1600 to Present
ARTH 265 Pop Art
ARTH 462/AMST 462/LATS 462 Art of California: "Sunshine or Noir"
ARTH 464/LATS 464 Latina/o Visual Culture: Histories, Identities, and Representation
ARTH 470 American Orientalism, Then and Now
ARTS 101/AMST 101 Artists Respond to Contemporary Events
ARTS 106/AMST 106 Topics in Nonfiction Film/Video
ENGL/AMST 118 Reading and Writing Creative Nonfiction
ENGL/AFR/AMST 131 Vertigo/Verticality
ENGL 138/AMST 138/AFR 138 A Love for Literature
[ENGL 140 American Cinema in the 70's: The Other American Renaissance--last offered fall 2008]
ENGL 151 Writing About Autobiographical Writing
[ENGL 207T Hollywood Directors: Hawks, Lubitsch, and Sturges last offered fall 2008]
ENGL 210AMST 210 American Modernism
ENGL 215 Imagining Immigrants
ENGL 219 Introduction to Asian American Literature
ENGL 220/AMST 220/AFR 220 Introduction to African American Writing
ENGL/AMST 254 American Fiction in War and Peace
ENGL 258 Poetry and the City
ENGL 338/AMST 338 Literature of the American Renaissance
ENGL 341/WGSS 341 American Genders/American Sexualities
[ENGL 342/WGSS 342 Representing Sexualities last offered fall 2007]
ENGL 343 Whitman and Dickinson in Context
ENGL/AMST 372 American Modernist Fiction
ENGL 381/AFR 380/AMST 381 Black Modernisms and the Great Migration
ENGL 390 Shocking Recognitions and American Renaissance
HIST 359 Autobiography as History: An American Character?
HIST 395/WGSS 395 Fashioning Bodies: Dress, Consumption, and Gender from the Renaissance to the Present
HIST 482/AFR 482 Fictions of African-American History
LATS 203/ARTH 203 Chicana/o Film and Video
LATS 230/THEA 230/WGSS 231 Approaching Performance Studies
LATS 235/AMST 235/COMP 268/THEA 235/WGSS 235 Latina/o Theatre and Performance, 1950-2000
LATS 240/AMST 240/COMP 210/LING 254 Latina/o Language and Literature; Hybrid Voices in Contemporary Context
LATS 258/ARTH 258 Latina/o Installation and Site-Specific Art
[LATS 330/AMST 330/COMP/330/THEA 330/WGSS 330 Aesthetics of Resistance: Contemporary Latino/a Theatre and Performance--last offered spring
2009]
[LATS 331/AFR 331/AMST 331/THEA 331/WGSS 331 Sound and Movement in the Diaspora: Afro-Latin Identities last offered fall 2008]
LATS 346/AMST 346/COMP 359 Latinos/as and the Media: From Production to Consumption
MAST 231/ENGL 231 Literature of the Sea
MUS 114 American Music
MUS 122/AFR 122 African-American Music
MUS 130/AFR 130 History of Jazz
[MUS 210 American Pop Orientalism--last offered spring 2007]
[MUS 231 Nothing But the Blues--last offered spring 2007]
MUS 240 Introduction to the Music of Duke Ellington
MUS 241 Introduction to the Music of John Coltrane
RLSP 230/COMP 230 Violent States, Violent Subjects: Nation-Building and Atrocity in 19th-Century Latin America
RLSP 306/COMP 302 Latino Writing: Literature by U.S. Hispanics
THEA 241/AFR 241/COMP 241 Performing Race: From Shakespeare to Spike Lee
COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN RACE, ETHNICITY, AND DIASPORA
This interdisciplinary specialization examines the role of race, ethnicity, and diasporic movements in the construction of American identities. Students explore
how experiences and concepts of race and ethnicity are transformed through the processes of diaspora and immigration. These courses may encompass a broad
spectrum of fields such as history, literature, religion, politics, anthropology, gender studies, media and the performing arts, among others. NOTE: Concentrators
in this area are required to take a combination of courses that will allow them to comparatively assess the experiences of at least two ethno-racial groups in the
Americas.
Elective courses:
AFR 131 Contemporary Africana Social and Political Philosophy
AFR 160/COMP 214/ENGL 251 Defining the African Diaspora
AFR 180/PSCI 206 Foundations of Afro-Caribbean Thought
AFR 200 Introduction to Africana Studies
AFR 202/AMST 202 Blackness 2.0: Race and New Technologies
[ARTH 205/AFR 205 Picturing Race: From Early Modern Europe to Now--last offered fall 2008]
[AFR 229/LATS 229/SOC 229 Race, Ethnicity, and Education in the United States--last offered fall 2008]
AFR 260/COMP 258/ENGL 252 South African and American Intersections
AFR 266 Womanist/Black Feminist Thought
AFR 267 Race in American Life
AFR 302/PSCI 234/REL 261 Rastafari: Dread, Politics, Agency
[AFR 305//SOC 305/WGSS 305 The Hip-Hop Generation: Power, Identity, and Social Change--last offered fall 2008]
AFR 311 Black Ministerial Imaginations: Griots, Athletics, and Maestros
45
[AFR 329/SOC 329 The African American Family--last offered spring 2009]
AFR 338 Garveyism
AFR 400/COMP 369/ENGL 365/WGSS 400 Race, Gender, Space
[AFR 400/WGSS 400 Senior Seminar: Black Feminist Theory and Practice--last offered spring 2007]
AFR 402/PSCI 360/PHIL 360 The Political Thought of Frantz Fanon
AFR 405 Africana Studies and the Disciplines
AMST 203 Introduction to Native American Studies
AMST 215/AFR 215 Capitalism and Slavery
[AMST 236 South Asians in America--last offered spring 2009]
AMST 283/ENGL 287 Topics in Asian American Literature
AMST 302 The United States and the Pacific
AMST 302/ENGL 388 Asian American Writing and the Visual Arts
AMST 305/ASST 305/COMP 303/ENGL 374 Cities of the Anglophone Chinese Imagination
[AMST 311 Asian American Film--last offered fall 2006]
AMST 403/COMP 375/ENGL 375/AFR 403/LATS 403 New Asian American, African American, Native American, and Latina/o Writing
AMST 407/HIST 369 Senior Seminar: Imperialism and the United States
ARTH 245 From Slave Quilts to Post-Black Canvases: Introduction to African American Art
ENGL 144/AMST 144 Whodunnit? The Ethnic Detective Novel and its Permutations
ENGL 215 Imagining Immigrants
ENGL 219 Introduction to Asian American Literature
ENGL 220/AMST 220/AFR 220 Introduction to African American Writing
ENGL 381/AFR 380/AMST 381 Black Modernisms and the Great Migration
ENGL 383/AFR 383/AMST 383 Theorizing Pluralisms
HIST 128T Conquistadors in the New World
HIST 148 The Mexican Revolution: 1910 to NAFTA
HIST 152/WGSS 152 The Fourteenth Amendment and the Meanings of Equality
HIST 162 "New Worlds for All": European-Indian Encounters in Colonial North America
HIST 164/AFR 164 Slavery in the American South
HIST 166/AFR 166 The Age of Washington and DuBois
HIST 243 Modern Latin America, 1822 to the Present
HIST 281/AFR 281 African-American History, 1619-1865
HIST 282/AFR 282 African-American History From Reconstruction to the Present
HIST 284/ AMST 284 Topics in Asian American History
HIST 353/ENVI 353 North American Indian History: Pre-Contact to the Present
HIST 356/WGSS 356 Race, Gender, and Sexuality in U.S. History
HIST 359 Autobiography as History: An American Character?
HIST 364 History of the Old South
HIST 365 History of the New South
HIST 368/AMST 368 Cultural Encounters in the American West
HIST 379/AFR 379 African American Electoral Politics in Historical Perspective
HIST 380 Comparative American Immigration History
HIST 381/AFR 381 From Civil Rights to Black Power
HIST 384 Comparative Asian-American History, 1850-1965
HIST 385 Contemporary Issues in Recent Asian-American History, 1965-Present
HIST 387/WGSS 387/LATS 387 Community Building and Social Movements in Latino/a History
HIST 443 Slavery, Race and Ethnicity in Latin America
HIST 456 Civil War and Reconstruction
HIST 459/AFR 459 Jim Crow
HIST 482/AFR 482 Fictions of African-American History
INTR 210/PSCI 302/AFR 210 Race, Culture, and Incarceration
INTR 326/AFR 326/WGSS 326/PSCI 306 Black Women in National Politics, 1964-present
LATS 105 Latina/o Identities: Constructions, Contestations, and Expressions
LATS 203/ARTH 203 Chicana/o Film and Video
LATS 235/AMST 235/COMP 268/THEA 235/WGSS 235 Latina/o Theatre and Performance, 1950-2000
LATS 241 Redefining the "Helping Hand:" Community-based Approaches to Latinas/os in the Northern Berkshires
LATS 286/HIST 286 Latino(a) History from 1846 to the Present
[LATS 330/AMST 330/COMP/330/THEA 330/WGSS 330 Aesthetics of Resistance: Contemporary Latino/a Theatre and Performance--last offered spring
2009]
[LATS 331/AFR 331/AMST 331/THEA 331/WGSS 331 Sound and Movement in the Diaspora: Afro-Latin Identities last offered fall 2008]
LATS 332/AMST 332 Latinos and Education: The Politics of Schooling, Language, and Latino Studies
LATS 338/AMST 339/COMP 338 Theorizing Popular Culture: Latinas/os and the Dynamics of the Everyday
LATS 346/AMST 346/COMP 359 Latinos/as and the Media: From Production to Consumption
LATS 382 Latina/o Politics
LATS 386/WGSS 386/HIST 386 Latinas in the Global Economy: Work, Migration, and Households
LATS/AMST 408 Envisioning Urban Life: Objects, Subjects, and Everyday People
LATS 409/AMST 409 Senior Seminar: Tracing the Roots of Routes: Comparative Transnationalisms
LATS 471/HIST 471 Comparative Latina/o Migrations
LATS 481 Locating Latino Studies: Approaches to Latinidad
MUS 122/AFR 122 African-American Music
MUS 130/AFR 130 History of Jazz
PSCI /AMST 210 Culture and Incarceration
PSCI 213/AFR 213 Theory and Practice of Civil Rights Protest
PSCI 248 The USA in Comparative Perspective
PSCI 307 Black Politics
PSCI 318/AFR 318 Voting Rights and Voting Movements
PSCI 349T Cuba and the United States
PSYC 341/WGSS 339 Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination
RLSP 306/COMP 302 Latino Writing: Literature by U.S. Hispanics
[THEA 210 Multicultural Performance--last offered spring 2007]
[THEA 211/AMST 211/AFR 211 Topics in African American Performance: The 1960s, the Civil Rights and Black Arts Movement--last offered fall 2006]
THEA 241/AFR 241/COMP 241 Performing Race: From Shakespeare to Spike Lee
CRITICAL AND CULTURAL THEORY
Critical and cultural theory is for students who want their American Studies work to combine philosophy, aesthetics, and social thought. Its approach is meth-
odological, conceptual, and problem-driven. Students combine courses in feminist theory, anti-imperial and postcolonial theory, literary theory, critical race
theory, queer theory, psychoanalysis, Marxism, and other counter-traditions in political theory and philosophy.
Elective courses:
AFR 131 Contemporary Africana Social and Political Philosophy
AFR 180/PSCI 206 Foundations of Afro-Caribbean Thought
AFR 266 Womanist/Black Feminist Thought
AFR 302/PSCI 234/REL 261 Rastafari: Dread, Politics, Agency
AFR 402/PSCI360/PHIL360 The Political Thought of Frantz Fanon
AMST 302/PSCI 335 Public Sphere/Public Space
ANSO 206 Social Theory
ANTH 328T Emotions and the Self
COMP 340/ENGL 363 Literature and Psychoanalysis
46
ENGL 117/COMP 117 Introduction to Cultural Theory
[ENGL 249 Hitchcock and Psychoanalytic Theory--last offered fall 2006]
[ENGL 256 Culture and Colonialism: An Introduction--last offered fall 2006]
ENGL 341/WGSS 341 American Genders, American Sexualities
[ENGL 342/WGSS 342 Representing Sexualities last offered fall 2007]
[ENGL 346/ARTH 307/COMP 356/INTR 346 The Human Face in the Modern Imagination--last offered fall 2007]
ENGL 383/AFR 383/AMST 383 Theorizing Pluralisms
[ENGL 386/WGSS 388/COMP 342 Psychoanalysis, Gender, and Sexuality--last offered spring 2007]
ENGL 416 Adorno
HIST 483T African Political Thought
[HIST 489/WGSS 489 History and the Body--last offered spring 2007]
INTR 210/PSCI 302/AFR 210 Race, Culture, and Incarceration
INTR 309/WGSS 309/AFR 309 Black Gender Theory: Intimacy, Memory and Violence
INTR 313/PHIL 313/PSCI 313 The Origins of Totalitarianism
LATS 230/THEA 230/WGSS 231 Approaching Performance Studies
LATS 338/AMST 339/COMP 338 Theorizing Popular Culture: Latinas/os and the Dynamics of the Everyday
PHIL 201 Reading the Critics of Reason
PHIL 228/WGSS 228 Feminist Bioethics
PHIL 271/WGSS 271 Woman as "Other"
PHIL 304 Authenticity: From Rousseau to Poststructuralism
PHIL 305 Existentialism and Phenomenology
PHIL 327/WGSS 327 Foucault
PHIL 379/AMST 379 American Pragmatism
PHIL 393 Hegel: Freedom and History
POEC 250/ECON 299/PSCI 238 Economic Liberalism and Its Critics
[PSCI 203 Intro to Political Theory (Marasco, fall 2006, fall 2007)]
PSCI 205/LEAD 205 Leaders in Contemporary Conservative Thought
PSCI 230 American Political Thought
PSCI 235 Multiculturalism and Political Theory
PSCI 326 Empire and Imperialism
PSCI 336/WGSS 336 Sex, Gender, and Political Theory
PSCI 338 Critical Theory, Violence and Sacrifice
PSCI 339 Politics and Aesthetics
PSCI 430/AFR 430 Senior Seminar in Political Theory: Heretical Political Thought-Hannah Arendt and C.L.R. James
REL 204/JWST 204/PHIL 204 Endtimes: Messianism in Modernity
REL 303/JWST 280/PHIL 282 The Turn to Religion in Post-Modern Thought
REL 304/COMP 344 From Hermeneutics to Post-Coloniality
REL 305 Foucault
SOC 214T Exploring the American Culture Wars
[SOC 225/WGSS 227 Sex and Gender--last offered spring 2007]
SOC 345/ASST 345/HIST 392 Producing the Past
[THEA 322/COMP 322 Performance Criticism--last offered fall 2006]
WGSS 101 Introduction to Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies
WGSS 202 Introduction to Sexuality Studies
WGSS 225/PHIL 225 Introduction to Feminist Thought
WGSS 402 Transformations and Entanglements: Identity and Agency
SPACE AND PLACE
This route focuses on the human landscape and the built environment. Courses listed below variously undertake the reading of geographical regions, patterns
of habitation, imagined spaces, property relations and/or artifacts.
Elective courses:
AFR 400/COMP 369/ENGL 365/WGSS 400 Race, Gender, Space
AMST 302/PSCI 335 Public Sphere/Public Space
AMST 305/ASST 305/COMP 303/ENGL 374 Cities of the Anglophone Chinese Imagination
ARTH 201/ENVI 201 American Landscape History
ARTH 264/AMST 264 American Art and Architecture, 1600 to Present
ARTH 311/ENVI 311 North American Suburbs
ARTH 405 Seminar in Architectural Criticism
ECON 383 Cities, Regions and the Economy
ENVI 101 Nature and Society: An Introduction to Environmental Studies
ENVI 307/PSCI 317 Environmental Law
GEOS 105 Geology Outdoors
GEOS 201/ENVI 205 Geomorphology
GEOS 206/ENVI 206 Renewable Energy and the Sustainable Campus
HIST 364 History of the Old South
HIST 365 History of the New South
HIST 373/ENVI 373 Va Va Vroom!-A Nation on Wheels
HIST 380 Comparative American Immigration History
HIST 466/AMST 364 Imagining Urban America, Three Case Studies: Boston, Chicago, and L.A.
LATS 220/AMST 221 Introduction to Urban Studies: Shaping and Living the City
LAST 258/ARTH 258 Latina/o Installation and Site-Specific Art
LATS 312/AMST 312 Chicago
LATS 405/AMST 405 Home and Belonging: Comparative Explorations of Displacements, Relocations, and Place-Making
LATS/AMST 408 Envisioning Urban Life: Objects, Subjects, and Everyday People
MAST 352/HIST 352 America and the Sea, 1600-Present
PSCI 349T Cuba and the United States
SOC 215 Crime
SOC 268 Space and Place
ANTHROPOLOGY AND SOCIOLOGY (Div. II)
Chair, Professor JAMES NOLAN
Professors: M. F. BROWN*, D. EDWARDS, FOIAS, JACKALL, JUST, NOLAN. Associate Professor: SHEVCHENKO*. Assistant Professor:
VALIANI. Visiting Assistant Professors: RULIKOVA, OSBAKKENЁ. Lecturer: GUTSCHOW. Affiliated Faculty: MANIGAULT-BRYANT,
HOWE.
The Department of Anthropology and Sociology at Williams aims to help students achieve an integrated understanding of biography, history, culture, and
social structure in both traditional and modern societies.
Anthropology explores the full range of human experience by introducing students to the study of tribal and peasant societies, especially those on the periphery
of the West, as well as to the cultural complexities of stratified, industrial societies such as our own. Integrated with the study of specific peoples is an examination
of the various analytical schemes anthropologists have developed to understand them. Courses offered in the department represent two of Anthropology's major
subfields: sociocultural anthropology--that is, the comparative study of human social life, institutions, and beliefs--and archaeology, the study of the origins and
lifeways of prehistoric peoples.
Sociology studies the social and institutional intricacies of modern industrial societies and the social psychological dilemmas facing the individual in our
epoch. Sociology courses introduce students to classical and contemporary social thought about men and women and society, to the systematic analysis of social
47
institutions and social interaction, and to the social analysis of modern culture. The Sociology major at Williams emphasizes the humanistic tradition of sociology,
stressing qualitative approaches to understanding how social reality is constructed.
MAJORS
The department offers separate majors in both Anthropology and Sociology, with a broad and diverse array of courses in both disciplines. The department is
committed, however, to the unity of the social sciences. To this end, Anthropology and Sociology offer joint core courses in methodology and theory, as well as
several elective courses in common. All joint courses are designated "ANSO."
Requirements
For the degree in Anthropology or Sociology, students must complete a minimum of nine courses as outlined below:
(1) Core Courses. Majors in both disciplines must take a sequence of four core courses. Three of these are joint (ANSO) courses. We strongly encourage
students to take ANSO 205 and 206 during their sophomore year. The sequences are:
Anthropology Joint (ANSO) Sociology
ANTH 101 The Scope SOC 101 Invitation to
of Anthropology Sociology
ANSO 205
Ways of Knowing
ANSO 206
Social Theory
ANSO 402
Senior Seminar
(2) Elective Courses. Majors in Anthropology or Sociology must take five elective courses from the course listings of their respective disciplines or from
the joint ANSO listings. Two of the courses chosen are normally at the 300 level or above. In close consultation with their departmental advisors, students
may take some selected courses from other disciplines to fulfill major requirements in either Anthropology or Sociology.
(3) Majors in each wing of the department are allowed to count up to two courses in the other wing towards fulfillment of their major requirements.
STATISTICS AND DATA ANALYSIS
In addition to the nine total courses required for the major, it is recommended that Anthropology and Sociology majors take Statistics 101 or a comparable
course in statistics and data analysis.
AREA STUDIES CONCENTRATION
Students who wish to combine a major in Anthropology or Sociology with an Area Studies concentration are encouraged to do so. Courses taken to satisfy an
Area Studies requirement may be counted toward the major with prior approval of a student's departmental advisor. The only exception to this rule is the Area
Studies senior seminar, which cannot ordinarily be counted toward the Anthropology or Sociology degree.
LANGUAGE STUDY, STUDY ABROAD, AND WINTER STUDY
Departmental advisors will help interested students integrate a major with study abroad, foreign language study, or field research during the winter study
period. The department encourages Williams students to take advantage of established foreign study programs in Egypt, Japan, India, Hong Kong, and other
countries. Because some foreign study programs do not offer courses that can be counted toward the Anthropology or Sociology degrees, however, sophomores
planning to study abroad in junior year must consult with the departmental advisor before declaring a major.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN ANTHROPOLOGY OR SOCIOLOGY
Honors and highest honors are normally awarded for the completion of a year-long research project that has resulted in an original thesis of high quality.
Students wishing to write an honors thesis should engage a member of the department faculty as a Thesis Advisor as soon as possible and must submit a proposal
for the thesis for department approval no later than preregistration in the spring of the junior year. If the proposal is approved, they will be permitted to register for
Anthropology and Sociology 493-W31-494, during which they will write and defend a thesis. If their overall work in the major continues to be of high quality and
the thesis is deemed of a similar quality, they may be awarded honors or highest honors in Anthropology or Sociology.
ANTHROPOLOGY / SOCIOLOGY COURSES
JOINT CORE COURSES
ANSO 205(S) Ways of Knowing
An exploration of how one makes sense of the social world through fieldwork. Some of the key questions of the course are: What are the philosophical and
epistemological underpinnings of social inquiry? How does one frame intellectual problems and go about collecting, sifting, and assessing field materials? What
are the uses and limits of statistical data? What is the importance of history to sociological and anthropological research? How can one use archival and other
documentary materials to enrich ethnographic research? What are the empirical limits to interpretation? What is the relationship between empirical data and the
generation of social theory? How does the social organization of social research affect one's inquiry? What are the typical ethical dilemmas of fieldwork and of
other kinds of social research? How do researchers' personal biographies and values shape their work? We will approach these problems concretely rather than
abstractly through a series of case studies of the habits of mind of men and women in the world of affairs who must make sense of their worlds in order to act
responsibly. There will also be some practical training in basic field methods, census and survey interpretation, and archival research.
Format: seminar. Requirements: fullparticipation in the seminar and a series of short papers.
Prerequisites: Anthropology 101 or Sociology 101 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25).
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W NOLAN
ANSO 206(F) Social Theory
An introduction to social theory in anthropology and sociology. The course explores both disciplines' stances toward the puzzles of tradition and modernity
through the works of major thinkers such as Marx, Weber, Durkheim, Freud, and others. In particular, the course examines ways in which the two disciplines
approach the fundamental problems of human experience: how do men and women in different societies and epochs construct and maintain social order? How do
they allocate authority, responsibility, and blame, as well as social prestige, power, and material wealth? How do they regulate sexual relationships and organize
work? What systems of beliefs and reinforcing symbols do they fashion to come to grips with evil, misfortune, transgression, and mortality? What epistemologic-
al frameworks underpin their worlds? What happens when social worlds fall apart? The course also reconstructs the intellectual trajectories and social histories of
both disciplines.
Format: seminar. Requirements: full participation in the seminar, class presentations, several short papers.
Prerequisites: ANTH 101 or SOC 101 or ANSO 205 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Preference given to Students who are
already declared majors in Anthropology or Sociology.
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W JACKALL
ANSO 402(S) Senior Seminar
This capstone seminar combines intensive discussion and individual research. The first half of the semester will be dedicated to the discussion of issues central to
the concerns of contemporary anthropology. The class will meet with the instructor in spring 2010 to decide on that topic. Then, in the second half of the semester,
students will pursue independent, original projects and produce a major term paper. Toward the end of the semester, students will present their projects to the
seminar. Students who are not senior majors in anthropology or sociology are admitted to this course only on the instructor's permission.
Format: seminar. Requirements: full participation, major research project and paper, class presentation.
Prerequisites: senior Anthropology and Sociology majors or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 18 (expected: 15).
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF JUST
ANTHROPOLOGY COURSES
ANTH 101(F,S) The Scope of Anthropology (D)
Is there such a thing as "human nature"? Why have human societies developed such a bewildering range of customs to deal with problems common to people
everywhere? This course addresses these questions by introducing students to the comparative study of human social life and culture. Topics surveyed in the
course include economics, language and thought, kinship and marriage, law and politics, and the wide variations in human belief systems, including religions.
48
The course also considers the ways that anthropology, a discipline that was until recently practiced almost exclusively by Westerners, approaches other societies
in search of insights on our own customs and values. Ethnographic descriptions of both "simple" tribal societies and complex modern ones are a prominent part of
the readings. This course explores differences and similarities between cultures and societies and ways in which they have interacted and responded to one
another in the past.
Format: lecture/discussion of case studies and ethnographic films. Requirements: two short essays, a final examination and class participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 30). Preference given to first-year students and sophomores. Juniors and seniors admitted only by permission of
instructor.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF First Semester: JUST
11:00-12:15 MWF Second Semester: D. EDWARDS
ANTH 103(F) Pyramids, Bones, and Sherds: What is Archaeology?
Anthropology examines not only living societies, but also prehistoric cultures whose remains are found worldwide. This course will present how archaeology
examines the various aspects of human society from the physical record of prehistory. How do we study the subsistence and settlement patterns, the political and
social organization, and the economy and ideology of prehistoric societies who have left behind mute material records? The objective of anthropological archae-
ology is to bring to life these prehistoric cultures through archaeological analysis. The different goals, approaches and methodologies of modern archaeology will
be discussed theoretically and then applied to case studies.
Format: lecture/discussion/class presentations of case studies. Requirements: class presentations, two papers, midterm and final exams.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 25).
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF FOIAS
ANTH 203(S) Introduction to Native American Studies (Same as American Studies 203) (D)
(See under AMST 203 for full description.) VIGIL
ANTH 207 North-American Indians (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)(D)
An introduction to the subsistence strategies, social life, and religious vision of native North Americans. Particular attention will be paid to the sharp differ-
ences among Native American world views and to diverse strategies for cultural survival in contemporary America. Readings will include autobiographical,
ethnographic, and historical works, as well as examples of contemporary Native American literature. This course satisfies the EDI requirement because it
assesses a range of indigenous societies and considers the multiple ways that these societies have responded to the challenge of colonialism and cultural
marginalization.
Class format: seminar, with a high level of class participation expected.
Requirements: a midterm, a final exam, and one 15-page research paper.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Priority given to Anthropology and Sociology majors.
M. F. BROWN
ANTH 209(F) Ecologies of Place: Culture, Commodities and Everyday Life (Same as American Studies 209 and Environmental Studies 209)
(See under ENVI 209 for full description.) HOWE
ANTH 214(S) The Rise and Fall of Civilizations (Same as Environmental Studies 224)
Over the centuries, philosophers and historians have asked how societies evolved from simple hunter-gatherer bands to complex urban civilizations. Human
prehistory and history have shown the repeated cycles of the rise, expansion and collapse of early civilizations in both the Old and New World. What do the
similarities and differences in the development of these first civilizations tell us about the nature of societal change, civilization and the state, and human society
itself? The course will examine these issues through an introductory survey of the earliest civilizations in Mesopotamia, Egypt, India, Mesoamerica and South
America. Classical and modern theories on the nature, origin, and development of the state will be reviewed in light of the archaeological evidence.
Format: lecture/class discussion. Requirements: midterm, final exam, paper, two quizzes.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 35).
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR FOIAS
ANTH 216 Indigenous Peoples of Latin America (Not offered 2011-2012)
An introduction to the indigenous cultural heritage of Central and South America. After a brief review of Latin-American prehistory, the course will consider
such issues as the demographic and political impact of the Conquest; the economic, social, and religious life of contemporary Indian and peasant communities;
and the dynamics of cultural redefinition and survival in the turbulent political arena of the modern Latin-American state.
Format: seminar. Requirements: two essays and a take-home exam.
No prerequisites. Open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25).
M. F. BROWN
ANTH 219(F) The Art and Archaeology of Maya Civilization: A Marriage Made in Xibalba (Same as ArtH 209)
The ancient Maya civilization was one of the most sophisticated and complex cultures of prehispanic Central America. Its complex calendrics, astronomy, mathe-
matics and hieroglyphic writing system are well known worldwide. The course will examine the trajectory and nature of ancient Maya civilization from the
combined perspectives of archaeology and art history. The origins and evolution of the Maya states during the Preclassic period (1000 B.C.A.D. 250) will be
explored first by looking at the rich archaeological evidence and at Preclassic art styles. The Classic Maya civilization (A.D. 2501000) will then be presented
through a detailed survey of the archaeology, art and hieroglyphic texts of this period. Finally, the collapse of Classic Maya civilization and its transformation and
endurance during the Postclassic period and under early Spanish rule (A.D. 10001600) will be critically evaluated through a detailed review of the archaeologi-
cal and iconographic evidence.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: midterm and final exams, hieroglyphic project, research paper.
No prerequisites, but an introductory Art History or Anthropology course recommended. No enrollment limit (expected: 16). Preference: given to Anso and Art
History majors.
Hour: 2:353:50 TF FOIAS
ANTH 222(S) Charisma and Celebrity (Same as Religion 273) (W)
This course examines the ways in which cultures select, ritually celebrate, institutionally harness, and ultimately devour people designated as 'extraordinary'. We
will begin by considering cultural archetypes and theories of the hero and how heroism has been understood in different eras and cultural contexts. Using Weber's
theory of charisma as a foundation, we will look at a number of specific case studies to evaluate the relationship between individual creativity and action and the
demands of social conformity and control. Finally, we will examine how charisma is commoditized in the form of the celebrity in contemporary American
culture.
Format: seminar. Requirements: class participation, two short response papers, research paper, final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to Anthropology/Sociology majors.
Hour: 2:25-3:50 MR D. EDWARDS
ANTH 223(S) Ethnic Minorities in China: Past and Present (Same as Chinese 223) (D)
(See under CHIN 223 for full description.) YU
ANTH 225 Visible Culture: Documentary and Nonfiction (Same as English 236) (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course examines the potential of moving images to reveal aspects of culture normally obscured by the written word. We will consider both the theory and
practice of documentary film from its inception around 1900 to the present, paying particular attention to the way documentary filmmakers have approached
the representation of social reality in Western and non-Western cultural settings. Questions that we will consider include: What is the relationship between
written text and image, or between image and story? What is the role of film in anthropology? What counts as a document?
Team-taught, through a mixture of lectures and discussions. Course requirement: Regular attendance at film screenings and active class participation. Students
will write a 5-page paper on an assigned topic and a 12- to 15-page final paper. There will be a self-scheduled take-home final.
Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 30). Preference given to Anthropology/Sociology majors, then to sophomores, and finally to first-year students.
D. EDWARDS
49
ANTH 233 Spiritual Crossroads: Religious Life in Southeast Asia (Same as Asian Studies 233 and Religion 249) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
No region of the world presents a richer tapestry of religious beliefs, practices, and institutions than Southeast Asia. Buddhism, Hinduism, Christianity and
Islam are all to be found and all of them interpenetrate and contend with each other and with a deep undergirding of animism, shamanism, and mystical folk
belief systems. This course will survey these religious traditions through time and space, looking in particular at the growing tension between religion and the
state as fundamentalism and religious militancy have spread into the region in recent times. All of Southeast Asia will be covered, but particular attention will be
devoted to Indonesia, where religious blending and the growth of new fundamentalism are both especially marked.
Format: seminar. Requirements: mid-term, short essays, term paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15). Open to non-majors.
JUST
ANTH 234(S) Masculinities (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 234)
What does it mean to be a man? This course approaches masculinity in its various forms as a culturally constructed category and as an achieved aspect of social
identity. We will look at characteristics of manhood as they are imagined cross-culturally: man as warrior, lover, husband, father, protector, provider, disciplinari-
an, abuser; we will look at how manhood is variously achieved and how it can be lost; and we will look at forms of masculinity as they articulate with modes of
sexuality and gender. The course will make extensive use of cinema in exploring these themes.
Format: seminar. Requirements: attendance at film screenings, active leading and participation in class discussions, two 7-page papers, final 12-page paper.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to Anthropology and Sociology majors and to achieve gender balance.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR JUST
ANTH 235(S) Roman Archaeology and Material Culture (Same as ArtH 235, Classics 224 and History 224)
(See under CLAS 224 for full description.) RUBIN
ANTH 240 Roman Cities in the Near East (Same as Classics 340 and History 340) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under CLAS 340 for full description.) RUBIN
ANTH 243 Dilemmas of Humanitarian Intervention (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
This course will explore the promises, realities, and implications of humanitarian interventions, including relief operations, national reconstruction projects, and
peacekeeping missions. People in the affluent nations of Western Europe and North America contribute billions of dollars each year in response to solicitations
promising to relieve the suffering of victims of natural disaster, political strife, ethnic cleansing, and refugee crises. Western governments send thousands of
troops to war-torn nations in order to "keep the peace." However, all too often these efforts go awry and contribute in direct and indirect ways to the natural,
economic, and political destruction already visited upon these countries. This course will consider the reasons and ways in which often well-intentioned actions
to relieve the suffering of others go wrong, and ways in which current efforts might be improved. The course will begin with a consideration of the philosophi-
cal, ethical, and social underpinnings of humanitarianism, and then examine several classic anthropological studies, including Marcel Mauss's The Gift, which
provide the ground for considering humanitarianism in a more socially nuanced manner. The majority of the course will focus on specific case studies or relief,
reconstruction, and peacekeeping operations, including famine relief in sub-Saharan Africa, peacekeeping in the Balkans, and reconstruction programs in Af-
ghanistan. In addition, we will look in depth at the work of one or more aid organizations.
Format: seminar. Requirements: two short papers (2-3 pages), a longer research paper (7 pages), and a take-home final.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). The class is open to sophomores, juniors, and seniors. Preference given to Anthropology and Sociology
majors.
D. EDWARDS
ANTH 246 India's Identities: Religion, Caste, and Gender (Same as Religion 246 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 246) (Not
offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under REL 246 for full description.) GUTSCHOW
ANTH 248(F) Body Politics, Gender and Religion in South Asia (Same as Asian Studies 248, Religion 248 and Women's, Gender and
Sexuality Studies 249) (D)
(See under REL 248 for full description.) GUTSCHOW
ANTH 256 Engendering Buddhism: How Women and Men Shape and Are Shaped by Buddhism (Same as Asian Studies 256, Religion
256 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 256) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
(See under REL 256 for full description.) GUTSCHOW
ANTH 257 Gender Remade: Muslim Women and Narratives of Subjection (Same as Religion 238 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality
Studies 257) (Not offered 2011-2012)
The question of women's status in Muslim societies has been posed as a moral problem since the colonial era providing much of the impetus for political and
social reform as a corrective to the perceived conditions of women's subjugation. This course will consider the ways in which this problem has been defined at
the intersections of competing discourses (liberal humanist, nationalist, and religious) to understand how these have shaped gender in Muslim societies in the
colonial and post-colonial periods. We will critically engage with a range of textual genres--including histories, ethnographies, biographies, memoirs--relating
to gender in Muslim societies in order to explore the contours of these debates in the colonial and postcolonial periods. By considering the theoretical and
methodological issues posed by feminist, post-structuralist and post-colonial theorists in the study of gender and 'women in the third world', we will examine
the ways in which categories such as religious, secular, human, political and social are variously deployed to represent beliefs, practices, conditions and lives of
Muslim women. While the course is not geographically specific, it will primarily draw upon historical and anthropological literatures of the Middle East and
South Asia. A familiarity with gender and Islam is recommended though not considered necessary to take this course.
Format: seminar (with occasional mini-lectures). Requirements: full class participation and attendance, class presentations, quiz, two 5-page papers and a take-
home final.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15). Open to all students, but preference given to Anthropology and Sociology majors.
ANTH 258 Divine Kingship in the Ancient Mediterranean (Same as Classics 394, History 394 and Religion 213) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under CLAS 394 for full description.) RUBIN
ANTH 262T Applying the Scientific Method to Archaeology and Paleoanthropology (Same as Chemistry 262T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under CHEM 262 for full description.)
ANTH 272(F) (formerly 392) Sex in Society: Cultural Constructions of Reproduction (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 272)
Why is reproduction such a controversial subject in medicine as well as religious and cultural discourses more broadly? And why is the reproductive body subject
to such highly ideological and yet contradictory types of practices across the globe? This course seeks to examine the myriad ways that societies police the range
of practices surrounding reproduction--including fertility, conception, pregnancy, birth, abortion, and motherhood. The class will pursue a comparative analysis
of reproduction across major cultures and religions, as well as a deeper understanding of specialized topics such as the new reproductive technologies, the medi-
calization and ritualization of obstetrics in America, the continuing controversies over abortion across the globe, and the fracas over motherhood in the US popu-
larly dubbed the `Mommy Wars'. Throughout the course, we remain focused on the cultural, social, and medical construction of birth and reproduction more
generally. To this end, we explore the varying ritual and medical practices that surround birth in different cultural contexts, from high tech to low tech settings and
societies. We will deconstruct the process of human reproduction through readings culled from a variety of cultures and disciplines including anthropology,
medicine, religious studies, sociology, and women's studies. By the end of the course, we will appreciate how and why reproduction in such a contentious issue
today.
Format: seminar. Requirements: participation in a weekly class blog, course presentations, final papers.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected 25). Preference given to seniors and majors in Anthropology, Sociology, Religion, and Women's, Gender and
Sexuality Studies.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W GUTSCHOW
50
ANTH 299(F) Ritual, Power and Transgression (Same as Religion 274) (W)
Anthropology began, in part, as an effort to study "savage" cultures before they disappeared under the onslaught of modern civilization, and indeed most of the
societies investigated by early anthropologists no longer exist or survive in completely altered form. As they lost their original object of study, however, an-
thropologists also discovered that the tools and concepts developed in the study of "primitive" cultures could be applied to the contemporary world. Exploring this
possibility, this course examines the relevance of fundamental anthropological concepts that have developed through the structural and symbolic study of myth
and ritual to the contemporary world in which we live.
The course is divided into four sections. In the first unit, we read and discuss the work of Mary Douglas, Victor Turner, and Marshall Sahlins on myth and ritual,
focusing in particular on the ways in which different cultures construct categories of inclusion and exclusion, safe and dangerous, pure and impure, while also
creating the "in between" spaces within which both creativity and transgression emerge. On this foundation, we move to the second unit in which we discuss the
structural relationship between ritual, power, and transgression in western contexts, taking the majority of our examples from early modern European and Ameri-
can history. In the third section of the course, we consider what an anthropological perspective can reveal about some seminal events in 20th century history, and
we end the course by considering how anthropological theory informs two critical areas of current concern: immigration and national security.
Format: seminar. Requirements: class participation, two short response papers, 10-page research paper, final exam.
Prerequisites: ANTH 101, SOC 101, REL 101, or any other ANTH or SOC course. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to Anthropology,
Sociology or Religion majors.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR D. EDWARDS
ANTH 324(S) Empires of Antiquity (W)
Cycles of rise and collapse of civilizations are common in our human past. Among the most fascinating cases are those of empires, conquest civilizations, or states
that encompass a number of different ethnicities, polities and peoples. However, their rise and often rapid collapse begs an important question: how stable have
empires been in human prehistory? Are they intrinsically unstable political forms? The course will address these questions by examining the major empires of the
Old and New World in pre-modern history: Persian; Assyrian; Mongol; Roman; Chinese; Ottoman; Aztec; and Inca empires. Using readings by political scien-
tists, historians, epigraphers, archaeologists and political anthropologists, we will consider the causes of the expansion and collapse of these empires. We will also
explore their sociopolitical and economic structures as mechanisms for their maintenance in order to provide a cross-cultural comparison of the differential suc-
cess and final decline of all these empires.
Format: seminar. Requirements: weekly short response papers and a research paper, class presentation and participation.
No prerequisites. No enrollment limit (expected: 15). Open to first-year students.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF FOIAS
ANTH 328T Emotions and the Self (Not offered 2011-2012) (D) (W)
Everyone everywhere experiences emotions, and everyone everywhere is faced with the task of conceptualizing a self-hood and its place in the social world.
This course analyzes a variety of recent attempts in the social sciences to come to grips with topics that have long been avoided: the nature of the interior
experience and an epistemological framework for its cross-cultural comparison. Exploring the borderlands between anthropology, sociology, and psychology,
we will bring the tools of ethnographic analysis to bear on central pan-human concepts: emotions and the self. By examining these phenomena as they occur in
other cultures, we will be better placed to apprehend and challenge the implicit (and often unconsciously held) assumptions about emotions and the self in our
own culture, both in daily life and in academic psychological theory. What are emotions? Are they things--neuro-physiological states--or ideas--sociocultural
constructions? How are they to be described; compared? What is the self? How are selves constructed and constituted? How do various cultures respond to
categories of emotion and self, and how can we develop a sense of the relationship between self and emotion?
Format: tutorial.
Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Open to first-year students.
JUST
ANTH 331 Witchcraft, Sorcery, and Magic (Not offered 2011-2012)
Beliefs in magic, malign and otherwise, have been nearly universal in human experience. This course examines these beliefs in an attempt to understand their
cognitive basis, symbolic effectiveness, and social consequences. In particular we will approach the question of "magical thinking:" is magical thought "mis-
taken science" or a universal non-rational way of seeing the world? What does the fact of presumably rational people holding apparently irrational beliefs say
about the whole idea of rationality? Are witches self-aware agents who believe in the malign magic they practice, or are they innocent, marginalized victims of
hegemonic powers? To answer these and other questions we will draw on case studies from a broad range of ethnographic and historic sources, including
Aguaruna love magic, Azande oracles, Voodoo in Brooklyn, and witches in Renaissance Italy and twentieth-century England.
Format: seminar. Requirements: a midterm, class presentation, and a term paper.
Prerequisites: Anthropology 101 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15). Preference given to Anthropology and Sociology majors and
upperclassmen.
JUST
ANTH 335 In Between: The Ritual Construction of Identity and Difference (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course examines the categories of inclusion and exclusion, safe and dangerous, pure and impure, right and wrong that constitute cultural worlds, while also
creating the middle zones that make cultural creativity possible. Beginning with an examination of "liminality" and rites of passage in the work of Arnold Van
Gennep and Victor Turner, we will go on to look at Mary Douglas's seminal work on the construction of categories of inclusion and exclusion and other
theoretical works on ritual and the sacred. In the course of the semester, we will consider a variety of cultural contexts in which liminality is of central impor-
tance, including transvestitism in traditional Native American and contemporary US cultures, various avant garde artistic movements, and the ritual construc-
tion of the suicide bomber/martyr in Islamist practice.
Format: seminar. Requirements: class participation, two short response papers, research paper, final exam
Prerequisites: ANTH 101, SOC 101 or another ANTH/SOC course. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 18-20). Preference given to Anthropology and Sociology
majors.
EDWARDS
ANTH 347(F) Tribe and State on the Afghan-Pakistan Border (Same as Asian Studies 347)
One of the major challenges President Obama will face in his first term in office involves the perilous situation on the border between Afghanistan and Pakistan.
While the problems in the region are generally framed in relation to Islamic extremism, the more fundamental issue is the failure of the Afghan and Pakistani
governments to exercise control over the tribes that occupy the mountainous frontier. This course will look first at the history of the Afghan and Pakistani states
and of the Pushtun and Baluchi tribes that are part of, yet independent from the states that surround them. We will go on to consider the role of Islam as a political
force in the region, with particular emphasis on the ways in which outside religious groups, most recently al-Qaeda, have managed to gain a foothold in the
borderlands, despite the historic resistance of the tribes to outsiders of any kind. The course will also examine the efforts of, first, the Soviet Union in the 1980s
and, more recently, the United States and its allies to control the borderlands, and we will conclude with a consideration of the geopolitical implications if Afghan-
istan and Pakistan prove in the end to be "failed states." Readings will include theoretical discussions of tribe/state relations, British and Soviet era accounts of the
frontier (non-fiction and fiction), ethnographies of tribal societies, and contemporary studies.
Format: seminar. Requirements: class participation, short response papers, research paper, and final exam.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected 20-25). Preference given to Anthropology and Sociology majors.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR EDWARDS
ANTH 391(F) Insurgencies: Revolts, Revolutions, Wars of National Liberation, and Jihads (Same as History 391 and INTR 391)
We often tend to think of warfare in the classic terms described by Clausewitz: states waging armed conflict against other states using uniformed armed forces that
are distinct from non-combatant civilian populations. Throughout history, however, we may also encounter many instances of asymmetric conflict within states,
colonies, and other political entities, involving combatants who are often indistinguishable from the general population and whose objectives are often unlike
those of states: Peasant revolts, revolutions, wars of independence or national liberation, and other forms of resistance and civil insurgency pit the relatively weak
against the power of the state and may succeed because, to use Mao's metaphor, the insurgents move among the people like fish in water. The close relationship
between insurgent fighters and the supporting population makes the social structure, social values, social institutions--in short, the culture--of the society partic-
ularly relevant to understanding the nature of a given asymmetric conflict. In this course we will use theoretical and analytical concepts from anthropology,
sociology, history, and political philosophy to examine asymmetric conflicts of the twentieth century and the present day. The course will be divided into three
parts: in the first we will explore some of the theoretical literature on violence and warfare as well as some of the basic literature on tribal and peasant society,
peasant revolts, wars of national liberation, guerilla warfare, and insurgencies. The second part of the course will be devoted to presentations prepared by small
groups of students on case studies, e.g., the Hukbalahap insurgency in the Philippines, the communist revolutions of China, Cuba, and Malaysia, wars of national
51
liberation such as those in Algeria and Vietnam, and other ongoing civil conflicts such as the Palestinian intifadah and "ethnic cleansing" in the Balkans. The final
portion of the course is devoted to an in-depth study of Iraq following the American invasion and to a consideration of the evolving nature of asymmetric conflict
in a globalizing world.
Format: seminar. Requirements: class participation, two exams, research paper.
No prerequisites. Open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected 20). Preference will be given to Anthropology and Sociology majors.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR JUST
ANTH 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
ANSO 402(S) Senior Seminar
(See under ANSO 402 for full description.) JUST
ANTH 493(F)-W31-494(S) Senior Thesis
SOCIOLOGY COURSES
Reminder: check the Anthropology/Sociology (ANSO) listings for additional courses.
SOC 101(F,S) Invitation to Sociology
An introduction to sociological analysis. The course focuses on the relationship of individual men and women to the social world and introduces students to
systematic institutional analysis. Students will explore the intersection of biography, history, culture, and social structure as seen in the work of classical and
contemporary social thinkers, including Marx, Durkheim, Weber, Veblen, Simmel, and Goffman. Special consideration will be given to the social and cultural
problems of capitalism, rationality and irrationality in modern institutions and organizations, the psychological dilemmas facing the individual in modern society,
and the problem of social order and conflict.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: a take-home midterm exam, a class presentation and a final.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 35 (expected: 35). Preference given to first-year students and sophomores.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR First Semester: NOLAN
8:30-9:45 MWF Second Semester: RULIKOVA
SOC 202(S) Terrorism and National Security
An analysis of the roots, goals, and social organization of contemporary radical Islamist terrorism and of the state efforts to defeat it. A focus on: the recruitment,
training, and indoctrination of Islamist terrorists; their ideologies and self-images; and case studies of specific terrorist attacks and the vulnerabilities of modern
societies that such attacks reveal. The course analyzes the exigencies and dilemmas of ensuring public safety in a democratic society. Special attention to: the
structure and ethos of intelligence work; the investigation of terrorist networks and their financing; the relationship between organized and semi-organized crime
and terrorism; the legal dilemmas of surveillance, preemptive custody, and "extraordinary rendition" in democratic societies; and the technology and organization
of ascertaining identities in modern society. The course also addresses the crisis facing European societies--particularly the United Kingdom, France, Belgium,
the Netherlands, and Germany--with growing populations of radical Islamist minorities who reject cultural assimilation into Western social or legal frameworks,
a crisis paralleled in the United States, with important differences, by widespread illegal immigration. An assessment of the ideology of multiculturalism and its
intended and unintended consequences in the fight against terror. The course also examines the threat of terrorists' use of biological, chemical, and nuclear weap-
ons of mass destruction and the defenses against such threats. Finally, it appraises the structure and content of mass media coverage of terrorism, as well as official
and nonofficial propaganda on all sides of these issues. A Gaudino Fund Course.
Format: seminar. Requirements: full participation in the seminar, class presentations, and a major paper.
Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Preference to Anthropology and Sociology majors.
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR JACKALL
SOC 204(S) Health, Illness, and Biomedicine
A sociological examination of the social, cultural, and institutional contexts of health, illness, and biomedical science in a globalized world. How do structural
inequalities shape access to health care and affect morbidity and mortality? What are the social consequences of the commodification of health care by for-profit
bioscience, niche medical markets, and pharmaceutical companies? How are information technologies re-shaping patient-physician relationships? How does
illness vary in different social strata? The course will also examine the controversies surrounding stem cell science, fertility medicine, end-of-life decision-making
and euthanasia, abortion, organ transplants, and the 2010 American health care legislation.
Required readings for the course will likely include: Meika Loe, The Rise of Viagra: How the Little Blue Pill Changed Sex in America (New York: New York
University Press, 2004); Carl Elliott, White Coat, Black Hat: Adventures on the Dark Side of Medicine (Boston: Beacon Press, 2010).
Format: seminar. Requirements: full participation and attendance, lead/co-lead one class discussion, one 5- to 7-page book review, one term paper, one final
presentation on term paper topic. No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25. Preference given to Anthropology, Sociology or Religion majors.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR OSBAKKEN
SOC 211(F) Race and the Environment (Same as Africana Studies 211 and Environmental Studies 211) (D)
(See under AFR 211 for full description.) J. MANIGAULT-BRYANT
SOC 215(F) Crime
An examination of crime, criminals, and crime-fighters. Topics include: violent urban youth gangs in America; the recruitment, socialization, argot, culture,
worldviews, and ethics of professional criminals, both in America and in the international arena; the stages of criminal careers; the violence inherent in the drug
trade; human trafficking of women and girls; white-collar scams and financial depredations; identity theft; the work worlds and habits of mind of crime-fighters,
with a special focus on the work of uniformed police officers, detectives, federal agents, and state and federal prosecutors; the symbolic representations of crimi-
nals and crime-fighters in American and international popular culture; and the crisis of public social order. Special attention to the nature of criminal investigation.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: mandatory attendance, randomly-called class presentations, short papers, final exam, and a term paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected 40). Preference given to first-year students, sophomores, and majors in anthropology & sociology.
An examination of crime, criminals, and crimefighters. Topics include: violent urban youth gangs in America; the recruitment, socialization, argot, culture,
worldviews, and ethics of professional criminals, both in America and in the international arena; the stages of criminal careers; the violence inherent in the drug
trade; the trafficking of girls and women; the illegal immigration industry; whitecollar scams, fraud, and financial depredations; identity theft; the work worlds
and habits of mind of crimefighters, with a special focus on the work of uniformed police officers, detectives, federal agents, and state and federal prosecutors;
the symbolic representations of criminals and crimefighters in American and international popular culture; and the crisis of public social order. Special attention
to the nature of criminal investigation.
Format: seminar. Requirements: full participation in the seminar, class presentations, short mid-term paper, and a term paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected 25). Preference given to first-year students, sophomores, and majors in anthropology & sociology.
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR JACKALL
SOC 218 Law and Modern Society (Not offered 2011-2012)
This class is designed to introduce students to the field of law and society. The course begins with an overview of the various theoretical perspectives on the
subject, including Durkheimian, Marxist, Foucauldian, and Weberian analyses of law and society; as well as the work of those following in the different theoret-
ical schools established by these scholars. Informed by the theoretical overview, the next part of the course considers empirical research in selected areas of law,
including tort law, criminal trial procedures, abortion and divorce law, "community justice," and the adjudication of drug offenses. Recognizing that under-
standings of our own legal practices are enlightened through comparisons to other legal systems, the second half of the course is primarily historical/compara-
tive in focus. In this section, through an exploration of several case studies, American legal processes and habits are compared with related legal practices in
such places as England, Scotland, Ireland, Australia, Germany, Norway, and Canada.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: a short paper and midterm and final exams.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 35 (expected: 35).
NOLAN
52
SOC 219 Images and Society (Not offered 2011-2012)
"This is obvious!" is what we say when we feel that our point is irrefutable. But images are far less obvious than we may like to think. This course will create a
forum for discussing the role of images in our lives, as well as the role played by visual representations in sociological inquiry. It will explore the variety of ways
in which images can be used as diagnostics of society, develop skills for critical analysis of existing representations, and address the limitations, as well as
specific strengths that come with the study of signs and images. Topics for discussion include truth in photography, the problem of interpretation, different visual
languages, the contributions of photography, cinema, TV and digital technologies to changes in social relations, power in visual imagery, the appropriation and
redefinition of visual symbols in different contexts, the "visualization" of ethnic and national stereotypes, and the dilemmas of representation. Primary sources
for the discussions will be drawn from a variety of spheres, from Soviet propaganda posters to Nike commercials, and will include the images we encounter in
everyday life, media, politics, academia, `high' art and pop culture.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: active class participation, two response papers, oral presentation and a final paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Open to all students.
SHEVCHENKO
SOC 242(F) Food and Society
The French critic Roland Barthes famously said that food is a system of communication. This multidisciplinary course is designed to introduce students to differ-
ent ways of thinking about food through an exploration of the complex social and cultural rules that underlie food's consumption. Because our food choices
communicate who we are--or what we aspire to be--the study of food reveals how societies throughout the world construct difference, whether religious, ethnic,
national, or racial. The class will also examine nutrition, hunger, ideals of desirability in body image, and visual representations of food in advertising and art.
Probable readings include: primatologist Richard Wrangham on how cooking made us human; nutritionist Marion Nestle on food politics; R. Marie Griffith on
the Christian diet movement; policy analyst Raj Patel on the global food system; Psyche A. WilliamsForson on black women, food, and power; journalist
Michael Pollan on ethical food choices; philosopher Carolyn Korsmeyer on taste; archaeologist Martin Jones on why humans share food; and sociologist Gary
Alan Fine on the culture of restaurant work.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active class participation, weekly response papers, two 6- to 8-page papers, final exam.
No prerequisites; not open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to students with a demonstrated interest in the study of
food. Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR D. GOLDSTEIN
SOC 244(S) What They Saw in America
This course traces the travels and writings of four important observers of the United States: Alexis de Tocqueville, Max Weber, G.K. Chesterton, and Sayyid
Qutb. The course will consider their respective journeys: Where did they go? Who did they talk to? What did they see? The historical scope and varying national
origins of the observers provide a unique and useful outsider's view of America-one that sheds light on persisting qualities of American national character and
gives insight into the nature and substance of international attitudes toward the United States over time. The course will analyze the common themes found in the
visitors' respective writings about America and will pay particular attention to their insights on religion, democracy, agrarianism, capitalism, and race.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active class participation, two or three short papers, and a class presentation/final paper.
No prerequisites; Sociology 101 recommended. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). Preference given to Sociology and Anthropology majors.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR NOLAN
SOC 267(S) Race in the America's (Same as Africana Studies 267) (D)
(See under AFR 267 for full description.) J. MANIGAULT-BRYANT
SOC 269 Imagining Spaces of the British Empire in the Twentieth Century (Same as Asian Studies 269) (Not offered 2011-2012)
With British India representing one of the grandest projects of European colonization, this course will begin exploring such a complex undertaking by examin-
ing accounts of architectural innovation, the politics of antiquities, town and urban planning, the urban spaces of commodity production, map-making and
cartography, controversies on `filth' and public hygiene, the emergence of religious processions, and representations of the city in advertising, in twentieth
century South Asia. We will study and debate these accounts to understand how spaces for the exercise of imperial forms of power emerged-and continue to do
so. Because colonialism hoped to spread its reach to other parts of the British empire from its seat of power in India, this course will also engage with debates on
world exhibitions and spectacles of `tradition' in Egypt, Indian Ocean communities, the metropolis of vice and scandal, and linkages with contemporary cos-
mopolitanisms.
Format: seminar. Requirements include full participation and attendance, two class presentations, and a final paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected 25). Open to non-majors. Preference will be given to Anthropology and Sociology majors.
VALIANI
SOC 270(F) Cities and Citizenship (Same as Arabic 270 and Asian Studies 270)
What kinds of individuals can live in modern cities? How are modern cities spatially organized and does this affect the social practices that citizens 'ought' to
observe when inhabiting urban centers? Modern cities are distinct in terms of their common experience with state-led urban planning which strives to bring social
and physical order to street life. Participants in this course will explore if and how such institutional desires to control urban space shape the cultural identity of
urban citizens. We will also study how notions of citizenship that diverge from classical European and North American views of political identity, have emerged
as a result of colonization and decolonization, nationalism and transnationalism, economic liberalization, and globalization in the non-western world (ex. urban
planning in South Asia; housing in Mumbai; hyper commercialization in South Africa, and squatter movements in Brasilia). Of course the production of mean-
ings of cities and citizens does not rest solely within the ambit of powerful institutions, elites, and national movements. Therefore we will also examine how art
and aesthetics, public ceremonials, social movements, and street commerce create `insurgent' conceptions of citizenship and urban space.
Format: seminar. Requirements: include full participation and attendance, two class presentations, and two papers.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students and non-majors. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected 25). Preference given to Sociology and Anthropology majors, Asian
Studies, Arabic Studies and History majors, International Studies concentrators.
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF VALIANI
SOC 303(S) Cultures of Climate Change (Same as Environmental Studies 303) (W)
(See under ENVI 303 for full description.) HOWE
SOC 305(S) The Sociology of Black Religious Experience (Same as Africana Studies 305 and Religion 315)
(See under AFR 305 for full description.) J. MANIGAULT-BRYANT
SOC 315 Culture, Consumption, and Modernity (Not offered 2011-2012)
How do lifestyles, fashions and trends appear and evolve? Are we authors of our own taste? What structures our choices of goods and activities? What is it that
gives meaning to objects and makes them desirable? Are there non-consumer societies in the modern world? How has globalization changed the ways people
consume in different parts of the globe? This course will explore the consumption and consumer practices as products of modernity and will analyze the
political, cultural and social agendas that have transformed consumption over time. Politics of consumption (the way in which seemingly free and independent
consumption choices aggregate into the existing system of global capitalism) will be treated alongside its symbolic element: the role of consumer practices in
creating and articulating identities, building relationships and creating solidarities. It will look at fashion, advertising, arts, tourism, and shopping in places as
varied as nineteenth-century France, socialist Russia, and in contemporary United States, tracing both the mechanisms that structure patterns of consumption,
and the implications that these patterns have for the larger social order.
Format: seminar. Requirements: full participation, ten journal entries, annotated bibliography and a major term paper.
Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to Anthropology and Sociology majors.
SHEVCHENKO
SOC 317T The Public and the Private (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
The sharp distinction between the private and the public spheres is often taken as one of the defining features of the Western modernity itself. Furthermore, the
existence and vibrancy of the public sphere is a crucial precondition for participatory democracy, whereas respect for privacy and provisions and guarantees that
ensure personal autonomy remain fundamental for the daily operations of society. This tutorial course will address the public and the private as concepts that are
always in a state of tension, and will explore these tensions from a sociological and historical vantage point. Topics include: democracy and the public sphere,
53
publicity and its institutions, from the coffee house to the mass media, individual and collective identities, the "religion of individualism" and its rites and priests,
public and private uses of space, the shifting lines of differentiation between the private and the public and the contestations of this distinction, as well as the
impact of new technologies on the relationship between the public and the private. The tutorial will mainly address the Western cultural tradition, although it
will involve intercultural comparisons, drawing on a wide range of literature, from Jurgen Habermas to Svetlana Boym, Nancy Fraser and Richard Sennett.
Format: tutorial; students will meet in pairs with the instructor for one hour each week. Requirements: students will write a 5- to 7- page paper based on the
readings every other week (totaling 5 each); in the alternate weeks they will write and present a 2-page response to their peer's paper. The evaluation will be
based on the analytical qualities of the students' written and oral work and on their weekly participation in discussion.
No prerequisites; open to all students. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to Anthropology and Sociology majors.
SHEVCHENKO
SOC 319(S) Ethnographic Approaches to Africana Studies (Same as Africana Studies 319 and American Studies 319)
(See under AFR 319 for full description.) R. MANIGAULT-BRYANT
SOC 320(S) Urban Spaces of Modern South Asia (Same as Arabic 320, Asian Studies 320, History 317 and International Studies 320)
This course examines various conceptions, practices and histories of urban life in modern South Asia. Participants will explore the effects of urban planning on
the spatial organization of colonial and precolonial cities in the sub-continent. We will investigate how discourses of social order and the fields of urban planning
and architecture converged and evolved through the 19th and the early 20th centuries when much of the region was part of the British Empire. We will pay equal
attention to developments in urban design in the post-colonial period in order to illuminate urban processes that unfolded after decolonization. Course participants
will trace how ideas of `freedom', 'sovereignty' and 'justice' influenced urban life as articulated by anti-colonial and social movements that have been organized
in terms of religious, ethnic, gender and class affiliations (among other categories of social identity). Participants will explore how cultural understandings of cities
in the region have been shaped by debates about visual art, "beauty" and practices of "public culture." Finally, this course will also explore how current forces of
globalization and economic neo-liberalism make their mark on cities, towns and rural centers in Sri Lanka, India, Pakistan, Burma, Afghanistan, and Bangladesh.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active participation, regular attendance, a weekly writing assignment throughout the semester, 2 class presentations, final exam.
No prerequisites; a course in Sociology, Anthropology, Asian Studies or Arabic Studies, or History suggested but not required. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected:
15). Preference given to Sociology and Anthropology majors, Asian Studies, Arabic Studies and History majors, International Studies concentrators.
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR VALIANI
SOC 324 Memory and Identity (Not offered 2011-2012)
Our sense of self is inextricably tied to our understanding of our past, both as individuals and as members of society. This sense of origins, however, is far from
natural; it itself has its origins in the debates and politics of the time, and evolves under an array of influences. This course analyzes discourses of collective and
individual identity and the mechanism involved in the formulation of the individual's sense of his or her place in the world. Topics include: nations and national-
ism, representations of individual and collective pasts, collective memory and practices of remembrance, nostalgia and selective forgetting, narratives of child-
hood and a "golden age," the invention of tradition, museums and memorials, biography and memoirs, narratives of progression, and the making of national
and family histories.
Format: seminar. Requirements: extensive class participation, class presentation, several short papers and a research project.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15).
SHEVCHENKO
SOC 327(S) Violence, Terrorism, and Collective Healing (Same as Arabic 327 and Asian Studies 327)
What do terrorism and violence mean and how do we think of its perpetrators? This course will investigate the concepts of terror and violence, and how they can
be made into collectively recognized and remembered events. Participants will engage with relevant works in order to question and debate what terrorism and
violence mean and how these concepts are addressed by various disciplines in the social sciences and humanities. Further, this course will investigate how repre-
sentations of terrorism and violence are connected to the themes of: securing political power, collective resistance, community, and international power relations.
Crucially, the course seeks to enable participants to critically reflect upon the publicly available perspectives on terrorism and violence. The course will encourage
the interpretation, discussion, and writing on the following themes: `tradition' and religion; militancy and nationalism; public spaces and resistance; the role of
emotions in violent movements; community, gender and collective recovery; and memory, orchestrating public panic, and war. Our materials combine analytical,
historical, theoretical and literary texts, and films; all of these speak to the themes of this course and its participants will be encouraged to interpret, critique, and
connect the existing arguments made in the course materials.
Format: seminar. Requirements: full participation and attendance in class; two oral presentations; one 4-page response paper; one paper topic proposal; and a term
paper.
No prerequisites; not open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15). Open to non-majors. Preference given to Sociology and Anthropology
majors, Asian Studies, Arabic Studies and History majors, International Studies concentrators.
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR VALIANI
SOC 336(F) Global Migration (Same as American Studies 336)
It is essential to analyze the historical, economic, demographic, legal, and sociological aspects of migration in order to understand the circumstances and conse-
quences of global movements of people. Therefore this course approaches migration from an interdisciplinary perspective, by discussing the major theories of
migration and their limitations. While most theories of migration typically focus on one or another cause of migration, we will try to understand the variability of
motives in order to explain different strategies adopted by immigrants to settle down in the host country. The most widespread causes--economic necessity and
political sanctuary--will be discussed at length. The issue of human rights in the context of asylum seekers and war refugees will also be of special interest. We
will look at immigration policies and laws in the United States, and the European Union, with a focus on the individual and social consequences of illegal im-
migration. In this context we will look at methodologies of monitoring illegal immigration and controversies about the legalization or amnesty for these individu-
als. This course is aimed to provide students with the solid general overview of trends and issues related to people's mobility across national borders. It should also
enhance students' interest in themes like minority rights, multiculturalism, or globalization.
Format: seminar. Requirements: term paper, response papers, presentation, active participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 15). Preference given to juniors and seniors.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR RULIKOVA
SOC 337(F) Cultures of Protest in Modern South Asia (Same as Arabic 337, Asian Studies 337 and History 320)
This course will focus on various sites of political mobilization in modern South Asia. Participants will explore the culturally and historically specific manners in
which popular mobilization has been conceptualized and practiced. While situating political mobilization within the context of various moments of South Asian
nationalism and specific social movements, we will examine how cultural visions of activism and social transformation in South Asia have privileged certain
kinds of political subjects, mobilizational tactics, and performative rituals. The sites of political mobilization that we will survey include: bodily training as a
culturally privileged form of social transformation; techniques and meanings of "organized agitation;" civic action and religious virtue; protest in the city; transna-
tional movements; and the formation of idiosyncratic techniques of protest that emerged as a consequence of British colonialism, various phases of "globaliza-
tion," postcolonial states, and the growth of institutions of "security." We will connect such cultural representations and embodied practices of "political action"
with notions of community, caste and alterity, religion, class, sexuality and gender, and resistance or "emancipation." Crucially, the course seeks to enable partici-
pants to reflect critically upon categories such as "the crowd," "tradition," "mass movement," "militancy," "the activist," and "political violence."
Format: seminar. Requirements: full participation and attendance, two class presentations, and two papers.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15). Preference given to Sociology and Anthropology majors, Asian Studies, Arabic Studies and History majors,
International Studies concentrators.
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 9:5511:10 TR VALIANI
SOC 368 Technology and Modern Society (Not offered 2011-2012)
With expanding access to and use of the Internet, controversial developments in such bio-technical practices as the cloning of mammals, rapid advances in
various forms of telecommunication, and the increasing sophistication of technological weaponry in the military, the triumph of technology remains a defining
feature of modern life. For the most part, modern humans remain unflinchingly confident in the possibilities technology holds for continuing to improve the
human condition. Indisputably, technology has benefited human life in innumerable ways. However, as with other features of modernity, technology has also
had significant, albeit largely unanticipated, social consequences. Working within a sociological paradigm, this course will focus on the less often examined
54
latent functions of technology in modern society. It will consider, for example, the social effects of technology on community life, on privacy, and on how
people learn, think, understand the world, communicate, and organize themselves. The course will also examine the effects of technology on medicine, educa-
tion, criminal law, and agriculture and will consider such counter-cultural reactions to technology as the Luddite movement in early nineteenth century England,
Amish agrarian practices, and the CSA (community supported agriculture) movement in the contemporary United States.
Format: seminar. Requirements: two short papers, a midterm, and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). Preference: Sociology and Anthropology majors.
NOLAN
SOC 385(S) (formerly ANSO 402) The Foundations of American Society
An examination of the social, cultural, epistemological, and moral foundations of contemporary American society. This seminar will pay special attention to the:
economic and social consequences of the deindustrialization and concomitant globalization of the American economy and America's new debtornation status;
social and cultural effects of ongoing massive immigration, legal and illegal; increasing bureaucratization of every sphere of life, especially the growth of the
leviathan state apparatus; proliferation of claims on public and private bureaucracies fueled by adroit and competing advocacy; clashes between the manifold
cultural frameworks that give meaning to personal experiences; institutionalization of adversary political cultures, on both the left and right; entrenchment of
centrifugal ideologies of multiculturalism and diversity; polarization of our elites and stalemating of America's political system; and the remarkable multiplicity
of moral codes that often conflict with presumably common laws. In all, the course addresses a crucial question: who are we now as a nation? It proceeds entirely
through discussion and student presentations of lively contemporary materials. Students are expected to have read certain classical sociological and political texts
before the class begins.
Format: seminar. Requirements: several class presentations, major term paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Preference: Sociology and Anthropology majors. Not available for Gaudino option.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR JACKALL
SOC 387 Propaganda (Not offered 2011-2012)
A sociological analysis of the phenomenon of mass persuasion in modern society. The course will examine the institutional and technical apparatus of modern
propaganda and the role of intellectuals and technicians in shaping and disseminating propaganda. The symbolic content of specific kinds of propaganda--
political, commercial, social, and organizational--will be considered with attention to propaganda that seeks to overthrow social structures as well as maintain
them. The course will proceed through a series of intensive case studies with a particular focus on propagandists themselves, considered as experts with sym-
bols, and on the institutional milieux in which they work. Among other examples, we will examine the U.S. Committee on Public Information during the First
World War; the Nazi Ministry of Propaganda; the propaganda machinery in contemporary states and non-state actors of both the left and right; conservative and
liberal "public interest" groups; propaganda in contemporary social movements and national political campaigns; the workings of corporate and university
personnel offices; and advertising and public relations agencies in the United States. Throughout the course, we will analyze how the language, ideologies, and
visual symbols of particular varieties of propaganda seem to affect mass audiences.
Format: seminar. Requirements: full participation in seminar, class presentations, and a major paper.
Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Preference to anthropology and sociology majors.
Not available for the Gaudino option.
JACKALL
SOC 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
ANSO 402(S) Senior Seminar
(See under ANSO 402 for full description.) JUST
SOC 493(F)-W31-494(S) Senior Thesis
ARABIC STUDIES (Div. I)
Coordinator, Professor GAIL NEWMAN
Assistant Professors NAAMAN*, VARGAS. Affiliated Faculty: Professors: DARROW, D. EDWARDS, ROUHI. Associate Professors:
BERNHARDSSON, PIEPRZAK**. Assistant Professor: VALIANI. Visiting Assistant Professor KHATTAB. Senior Lecturer: H. ED-
WARDS.
Middle Eastern Studies is a vibrant and growing discipline in the United States and around the world. Students wishing to enter this rich and varied discipline
can begin with a major in Arabic Studies at Williams. The major is designed to give students a foundation in the Arabic language and to provide the opportunity
for the interdisciplinary and multi-disciplinary study of the Arab, Islamic, and Middle Eastern arenas.
The Major in Arabic Studies
Students wishing to major in Arabic Studies must complete nine courses, including the following four courses:
ARAB 101-102 Elementary Arabic
ARAB 201 Intermediate Arabic I
ARAB 202 Intermediate Arabic II
Students must also take five courses in Arabic and Middle Eastern Studies in affiliated departments. At least two of these courses should be from the arenas of
language and the arts (DIV I) and at least two from politics, religion, economics, and history (DIV II). At least two of these courses must be at an advanced level
(300 or 400 level). These might include:
ANTH 224 Morality and Modernity in the Muslim Middle East
ANTH 347 Tribe and State on the Afghan Pakistan Border
ARAB 216 Protest Literature: Arab Writing Across Three Continents
ARAB 228 Introduction to Modern Arabic Literature in Translation
ARAB 233 Introduction to Classical Arabic Literature in Translation
ARAB 257 Baghdad
ARAB 262 Outlaws and Underworlds: Arabic Literature of the Margins
ARAB 301 Advanced Arabic
ARAB 302 Advanced Arabic II
ARAB 303 Medieval Encounters East and West
ARAB 353 Writing the City: Beirut and Cairo in Contemporary Arabic Literature
ARAB 402 Topics in Advanced Arabic
ARTH 212 Distant Encounters: East Meets West in the Art of the European Middle Ages
ARTH 220 The Mosque
ARTH 278 The Golden Road to Samarqand
ARTH 472 Forbidden Images
COMP 223 Migrants at the Borders: Comparative Middle Eastern and Latin American Cultural Studies
HIST 111 Movers and Shakers in the Middle East
HIST 207 The Modern Middle East
HIST 305 Nation Building: The Making of the Modern Middle East
HIST 307 Islam and Modernity
HIST 310 Iraq and Iran in the Twentieth Century
HIST 311 The United States and the Middle East
HIST 396 Muslims and Europe: From the Conquest of Algeria to the Present
HIST 408 Archaeology, Politics, and Heritage in the Middle East
55
HIST 480T Historical Narratives of the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict
HIST 491T Political Islam
JWST 201 The Hebrew Bible
PSCI 258 Geopolitics, Religion and Oil: The Case of Iraq and Iran
PSCI 440 The War in Iraq
REL 230 Reading Reading: An Introduction to the Qur'an and Islam
REL 231 God, Empire and Apocalypse: The Origins of Islam
REL 232 Women and Islam
REL 233 Islamic Mysticism: The Sufis
REL 234 Shi'ism Ascendant?
REL 289T Exile, Homecoming and the Promised Land
RLFR 309 Contemporary Short Stories from North Africa
RLSP 271 The Interaction of Three Religions and Cultures in Early Modern Spain
Students who place into more advanced language courses may substitute additional courses for 101-102, but they must still take a total of nine courses.
Up to four courses from approved study abroad programs may be counted toward the major.
The Certificate in Arabic
The Certificate in Arabic demonstrates that a student has acquired a working foundation in the language. The sequence of eight language and
culture courses is designed to supplement a student's major at Williams by enabling the student to expand his or her knowledge in a related field.
Required Courses
ARAB 101
ARAB 102
ARAB 201
ARAB 202
ARAB 301
ARAB 302
Electives
-at least one course in Arabic literature, arts, or culture
-at least one course in Arabic history, religion, politics, or economics
Students must earn a cumulative grade average of B or higher in the sequence of eight courses. In addition, they must receive a score of at least 85% on a
language proficiency test administered by the Arabic faculty. The test is administered once a year during the month of April to all students who wish to obtain the
Certificate. Those interested should express their intent to the Arabic faculty by March 1st or earlier.
Students who enter Williams with previous training in Arabic may be exempted from up to three of the required eight courses. Thus, in order to earn a certifi-
cate, a student must take no fewer than five courses (including three language courses) after enrolling at Williams.
The Degree with Honors in Arabic Studies
Prerequisites
Honors candidates in Arabic are required to have maintained a GPA of 3.5 in the major to qualify for submitting a thesis proposal. In addition, candidates must
demonstrate a strong interest in a specific topic for which an appropriate faculty advisor will be available in the senior year.
Timing
Students wishing to pursue a thesis in Arabic are strongly urged to secure an advisor by the end of the week after Spring Break in their junior year. By May 15th of
their junior year, candidates must submit to the Program Advisory Committee a one- to two-page proposal and a preliminary bibliography. The Advisory Com-
mittee will inform candidates by June 1 whether they may proceed with the thesis and advise them about any changes that should be made in the focus or scope of
the project. The summer before the senior year will be spent compiling a more detailed bibliography and preparing for the process of writing the thesis.
In their senior year, candidates will devote two semesters and the winter study period to their theses (ARAB 493-W31-ARAB 494). By the end of the Fall
semester, students will normally have undertaken substantial research and produced the draft of at least the first half of the project. At this point students should
also have a clear sense of the work remaining for completion of the thesis. In the course of the Fall semester, students will also have chosen and met with a second
reader for the project, who will provide additional guidance and read the final thesis. By the end of Winter Study, students should have completed a draft of the
entire project. At that time, the Comparative Literature Advisory Committee, together with the advisor, will determine whether the project may continue as an
Honors Thesis, or whether its first portions (ARAB 493-W) will be graded as Independent Studies.
The second semester of independent thesis work will be spent revising as necessary. The completed thesis in its final form will be due one week before the last day
of classes. At the end of the Spring term, the student will make a public presentation of the final project, to which members of the Advisory Committee will be
specially invited.
Characteristics of the Thesis, Evaluation, and Major Credit
The topic of the thesis must have to do with some aspect of Arabic language, culture, history, politics, etc. and will be worked out between the thesis writer and
her/his advisor. It is also possible to write a thesis that consists of an original translation of a significant text or texts; in this case, a theoretical apparatus must
accompany the translation. The complete thesis must be at least 50 and at most 75 pages in length, excluding the bibliography.
The advisor will assign the grades for the thesis courses (ARAB 493-W-494); the Advisory Committee will determine whether a candidate will receive Honors,
Highest Honors, or no honors.
For students who pursue an honors thesis, the total number of courses required for the major-including the thesis course (ARAB 493-W-494)-is 10, i.e., one of the
thesis courses may substitute for one elective.
ARAB 101(F)-W-102(S) Elementary Arabic
This is a year-long course in which students will learn to read, write and converse in Arabic while becoming familiar with the basic grammar of Modern Standard
Arabic. Students will also be exposed to the Egyptian variety of colloquial Arabic. This is a communicative-oriented course which revolves around the daily
practice of vocabulary, conversation and different grammatical structures in class. You will be expected to speak Modern Standard Arabic in class from an early
stage. Students will also be expected to take advantage of the technological resources available for the study of Arabic on the internet, as well as the technological
aids available as part of our textbooks for this course, Alif Baa and Al-Kitaab fii Ta'allum al-'Arabiyya from Georgetown University Press.
Format: lectures, five hours a week. Evaluation is based on tests, daily homework, and active class participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit 20 (expected: 15).
Students registered for Arabic 101 and 102 are required to attend and pass the sustaining program during the winter study period.
Credit is granted only if both semesters of this course are taken.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MTWRF First Semester: VARGAS
10:00-10:50 MTWRF Second Semester: KHATTAB
56
ARAB 201(F) Intermediate Arabic I
In this course we will continue to study the essential grammar of Modern Standard Arabic while working to improve the linguistic skills obtained in Elementary
Arabic. Upon successful completion of this course, students will be able to hold conversations in Arabic with some fluency on a variety of topics while develop-
ing an increased vocabulary and cultural appreciation of Arabic-speaking countries.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based on daily performance, homework, quizzes, a midterm and a final exam.
Prerequisites: ARAB 101-102 or permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 10).
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF KHATTAB
ARAB 202(S) Intermediate Arabic II
As a continuation of ARAB 201, this course will expose students to more of the essential grammar of Modern Standard Arabic while increasing their cultural
literacy in Arab civilization. Our main textbook will be Al-Kitaab fii Ta'allum al-'Arabiyya Part II but outside materials from diverse media such as television and
newspapers will also be included. Class will be conducted in Arabic.
Format: lecture. Evaluation is based on quizzes, tests, homework and active class participation.
Prerequisites: ARAB 201 or permission from instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 10).
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF VARGAS
ARAB 206 Muhammad and the Rise of Islam (History 206 and Religion 235) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under HIST 206 for full description.) BERNHARDSSON
ARAB 216 Protest Literature: Arab Writing Across Three Continents (Same as Comparative Literature 216) (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course will begin with an analysis of the idea of protest literature as it emerged in an American cultural context in the early twentieth century through the
civil rights movement of the 1960s. We will then seek to revisit the meaning of this term today, particularly as it resonates in the cultural production of Arabs and
Arab youth across three very different locations: the Middle East (specifically Egypt and Palestine), France, and the United States. How are these Arab youth
subcultures constituted? In what ways has the globalization of hip-hop influenced the literary, musical, and cinematic production of Arab artists? In what way
do rap and the spoken word in these specific social contexts provide a vocabulary for expressing the violence, lack, and frustration pervasive in these 4th World
locations? In short, how has the contemporary American construction of "blackness" been exported and appropriated by young Arabs today? From Paris to
Cairo, from the West Bank to Detroit, we will examine the varied strands of this new movement for social justice, observing how different forms of literature
and music have been used as a vehicle for resisting war-torn circumstances, poverty, racism and social disenfranchisement across diverse national spaces. Texts
for this course will include novels and poems, as well as a number of films and selections of music. All of these works will be available in translation, although
advanced students may read the originals in French and/or Arabic. Possible novels include those of Charef, Sebbar, Smail, Begag, Chraibi, Ayaidi, Golayyel,
Latif, Kanafani, Darwish, Youssef, Hammad, and Kahf.
Format: discussion/seminar. Requirements: active participation, two shorter papers, a presentation, and final paper or project.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 15-20). Preference given to Comparative Literature and Literary Studies majors.
NAAMAN
ARAB 219 Arabs in America: A Survey (Same as American Studies 219 and Comparative Literature 219) (Not offered 2011-2012)
Arabs have been a part of the tapestry of the United States since the early 19th century. As immigrants to the new world, the identity of this community has
largely been defined by changing American understandings of race, ethnicity, and religion. The in-betweenness of this minority group--not exactly white or
black, claiming Christian, Jewish and Muslim faiths--and the often contradictory nature of U.S. involvement in the region, has only further confounded Amer-
icans in their understanding of this diverse community. This course will use an interdisciplinary approach to explore the rich histories, representations, and
cultural production of this American minority group. For the purposes of this survey, we will also consider the narratives of other Muslim minority groups (i.e.,
Iranians, Pakistanis, Indians, and African American Muslims) within the scope of the Arab American experience. We will look at poems and stories from Arab
immigrants in the early to mid 20th century (e.g., the Mahjar poets) and consider, in the context of these writings, issues of xenophobia, assimilation, linguistic,
and cultural difference, and Arab American identity in the context of other ethnic groups. Throughout this course we will continue to think about how changing
U.S. geo-political interests in the region alter perceptions of Arabs and Muslims in our midst (considering, for example, the 1979 Revolution in Iran and the
subsequent hostage crisis, the two Gulf Wars, the Israeli/Palestinian conflict, 9/11, Afghanistan, the War on Terror, and Guantanamo). In addition, we will
examine representations of this minority and Islam more generally in the media and popular culture (print and broadcast journalism, films, cartoons, popular
songs, and videos), as well as Arab cultural forms that seek to self-narrate the Arab experience for an American viewer. At the heart of this course is a desire to
not only shed light on what it means to be an Arab or a Muslim or an immigrant, but also to understand the multiple ways in which we conceptualize and seek to
define what it means to be American.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active participation, two shorter papers, occasional responses, a presentation, and a final paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 15-20). Preference given to Arabic Studies Majors, Comparative Literature and Literary Studies Majors, and
American Studies Majors.
NAAMAN
ARAB 222(F) Photography in/of the Middle East (Same as ArtH 222) (D)
(See under ARTH 222 for full description.) H. EDWARDS
ARAB 223(S) Migrants at the Borders: Comparative Middle Eastern and Latin American Cultural Studies (Same as Comparative Literature
223)
Why do the peoples and cultures of Latin America and the Middle East often elicit such passionate responses in the United States and Europe? Some feel threat-
ened, while others are intrigued, but responses to these world regions are seldom neutral. Often seen as exotic and erotic, or as a danger to the way of life of
Americans and Europeans, Islam, Arabs and Latin Americans are at the forefront of sociopolitical debates in the United States and Europe. The origins of this
worldview are historical, but are also heavily influenced by contemporary immigration and international affairs. After characterizing Islam as the greatest con-
temporary threat to "Western" civilization in his infamous essay titled "The Clash of Civilizations," Samuel Huntington subsequently found it necessary to focus
on Latinos as the most significant threat to American civilization. By examining literature and film from the Middle East and Latin America, and from these
immigrant communities in the United States and Europe, we will go beyond superficial images and inflammatory rhetoric to explore the cultures behind the
passions. Among other things, the texts of this course examine the ties between the Arab world and Latin America, and between these two regions and their
neighbors to the north. At the heart of this course are the ideas of borders and margins. What does it mean to cross borders or to live on the margins of society? The
borders we will discuss will be geographic borders, but also cultural borders that will permit the exploration of the territories between life and death, civilization
and barbarism, wealth and poverty, war and peace and other dichotomies that some employ to classify the world but that rarely allow for human sensibilities and
the subtle experiences of being. Our texts may include works by writers such as Alurista, Victor Hernandez Cruz, Gloria Anzaldua, Juan Rulfo, Clarice Lispector,
Milton Hatoum, Taher Ben Jelloun, Mohamad Choukri, Mahmoud Darwish, Laila Lalami and Tayyib Saleh that treat the human condition at the borders/margins
of society. Films may include El Norte, La Mision, Pixote, Midaq Alley, City of God, Battle of Algiers, My Beautiful Launderette, Crash, Hate and Head On.
There will also be a course reader that includes theoretical material on orientalism, tropicalism, nationalism and transnationalism. All readings are in English
translation and films have English subtitles.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: active class participation, two 3 to 5page papers and a final research paper (710 pages) or half hour oral exam.
No prerequisites: Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 15-20).
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR VARGAS
ARAB 228 Modern Arabic Literature in Translation (Same as Comparative Literature 228) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
In this course we will study prominent texts and authors of the modern Arab world. The range of genres and themes of this literature is vast. In particular, we
will analyze the debates around modernity and the importance given to social engagement in these texts. Our readings include works by authors that have
received some notoriety outside of the Arab world such as Naguib Mahfouz, winner of the Nobel Prize for literature in 1988. We will also read the Iraqi poets
Nazik al-Malaika and Badr Shakir al-Sayyab, the Palestinians Ghassan Kanafani and Mahmoud Darwish, and Tayyib Salih from the Sudan. Included in our
readings are the famous autobiography by the Moroccan Muhammad Shukri as well as women's literature by Hanan al-Sheikh, Huda Barakat and Nawal
Sadawi. This literature course fulfils the requirements of the Exploring Diversity Initiative (EDI), as it engages the Arab world from a humanistic perspective
that aims to promote cultural awareness. A fundamental goal of the course is to engage the diversity of approaches to sexuality, religion, gender and politics that
are so prominent in contemporary literature from the Arab world. All readings are in English.
Format: lecture/discussion.
Requirements: active and consistent class participation, two short paper (3-5 pages) and a final paper (5-7 pages).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 students (19 expected).
VARGAS or NAAMAN
57
ARAB 231(S) The Origins of Islam: God, Empire and Apocalypse (Same as History 209 and Religion 231)
(See under REL 231 for full description.) DARROW
ARAB 233 Introduction to Classical Arabic Literature (Same as Comparative Literature 233) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
In this course we will examine the rich, complex and diverse texts of Classical Arabic Literature. The readings include works that have achieved notoriety
outside of the Arab world (such as the Quran and One T housand and One Nights) as well as works by authors largely unknown outside of the Arab world but
canonical in Arabic-language culture such as Imru al-Qays, al-Jahiz, al-Ma'arri, Abu Nuwas, al-Hallaj, al-Ghazali and al-Mutannabi. Women's literature in this
course includes works by al-Khansa', known for her elegies, and by Wallada bint al-Mustakfi of Cordoba, who contributed to the courtly love poetry of both
Europe and the Arab world. Topics for discussion include theological and philosophical queries, erotica, wine, bibliomania and avarice. Our primary texts
represent such varied regions as the Arabian Peninsula, Egypt, Abbasid Baghdad, North Africa and Islamic Spain. Chronologically, the texts range from the
sixth century CE to the fourteenth century. All readings are in English.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: consistent and pro-active class participation, two 3- to 5-page papers, a final 8- to 10-page paper, one short presenta-
tion and weekly 1- to 2-page reaction papers.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to Comp Lit or Lit Studies majors and students with a background in Middle Eastern
Studies.
VARGAS
ARAB 234(F) Shi'ism Ascendant? (Same as Religion 234)
(See under REL 234 for full description.) DARROW
ARAB 257 Baghdad (Same as Comparative Literature 257) (Not offered 2011-2012)
Some consider Baghdad to be a specter of civilwar Beirut, but behind the deluge of grim news is a rich, complex heritage. Baghdad has a long history as an
intellectual milieu, literary setting and muse. This city became a major cultural center when the Islamic Caliphate was moved there in the eighth century CE. The
multiplicity of intellectual and artistic currents that flourished in Baghdad under the Abbasids would produce one of the earliest modernizing movements in
poetry, a challenge to the early Islamic tradition, a wealth of translation activity and a general cultural vibrancy in a multicultural, multilingual context. The texts of
the Golden Age of Baghdad would become fundamental to the Arab and Islamic cultural heritage while the city itself would continue to exert a strong creative
influence in both the Middle Eastern and European artistic traditions. This influence continues to this day as Arabs and Muslims look to Baghdad as a fundamen-
tal part of their cultural heritage while Westerners continue to be intrigued and haunted by this city. In this course we will read early texts written in or about
Baghdad including examples from 1,001 Nights and from works written by alMa'arri, alMutanabbi, Abu Nuwas, alGhazali and alHallaj. We will also read
more recent texts that engage this city including works by Jabra Ibrahim Jabra and Buthaina Al Nasiri. In addition to these texts, we will also view films including
Sindbad movies, The Thief of Baghdad and Aladdin. The texts for this course include examples from both "high" and popular culture. These works are by both
natives of Baghdad and by outsiders including the producers of Hollywood orientalist fantasies.
Requirements: active class participation, two shortanswer quizzes, two 4 to 6page papers and a final 6 to 8page paper.
No prerequisites. No enrollment limit (expected: 20).
VARGAS
ARAB 262 Outlaws and Underworlds: Arabic Literature of the Margins (Same as Comparative Literature 262) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(W)
The idea of the rogue or the outlaw is a theme that may be traced in Arabic literature from the classical poetry of the pre-Islamic period through to the present. In
considering a range of works from the 6th century onward, this course will explore the way in which the outlaw has historically been used as a literary motif in
Arabic literature to reflect and critique, not just society, but the official literary establishment as well. How does a writer's language--the decision to write in the
vernacular, for example--serve as a way of flouting the cultural establishment in an effort to speak to a more popular audience? In examining characters who
live by thievery or begging--who embrace the ethos of outsiderness--we will return repeatedly to consider the concept of freedom as a driving question in
these works. Between conformity and deviance, decadence and lack, how do we define what makes a person truly free? The rich underworlds that these
outlaws inhabit are sketched for readers as counter-cultures whose alternative way of life and set of values continually challenges the conventions and mores of
the mainstream. Readings will include selections from early Arabic (Suluk) poems, Abu Nuwas' wine poetry, the maqamat tradition of rhymed prose, as well as
a number of contemporary Arabic novels.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active participation, multiple reading responses, two short papers (5-7 pages) including revisions, and one longer paper (8-10
pages).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to first-years and sophomores.
NAAMAN
ARAB 270(F) Cities and Citizenship (Same as Asian Studies 270 and Sociology 270)
(See under SOC 270 for full description.) VALIANI
ARAB 301(F) Advanced Arabic
This course is a continuation of Intermediate Arabic. It focuses on expanding the students' knowledge of vocabulary and grammar while stressing the develop-
ment of reading, spoken, and written skills in Modern Standard Arabic. The material covered in class will include lessons from the Al-Kitaab series, as well as
literary and multi-media works. Emphasis will be placed on increasing cultural literacy. Class is conducted in Arabic.
Format: The class meets four hours a week with the fourth hour a conversation section, time to be arranged. Requirements: active class participation, completion
of all written assignments, quizzes, a midterm, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: two semesters of Intermediate Arabic or permission of the instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 8).
Hour: 12:00-12:50 MWF VARGAS
ARAB 302(S) Advanced Arabic II
This course is a continuation of Intermediate Arabic. It focuses on expanding the students' knowledge of vocabulary and grammar while stressing the develop-
ment of reading, spoken, and written skills in Modern Standard Arabic. The material covered in class will include lessons from the AlKitaab series, as well as
literary and multimedia works. Emphasis will be placed on increasing cultural literacy. Class is conducted in Arabic.
Format: The class meets four hours a week with the fourth hour a conversation section, time to be arranged. Requirements: active class participation, completion
of all written assignments, quizzes, a midterm, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: two semesters of Intermediate Arabic or permission of the instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 8).
Hour: TBA KHATTAB
ARAB 303(F) Medieval East and West: Travel, Holy War, Storytelling (Same as Comparative Literature 315 and English 303) (D)
(See under ENGL 303 for full description.) KNOPP
ARAB 309(F) An introduction to Egyptian Colloquial Arabic
This course will serve as an introduction to Egyptian colloquial Arabic, one of the most widely spoken and understood dialects across the Arab world. We will
focus primarily on enhancing students' speaking and listening skills in the dialect, as well as on major grammatical structures and essential vocabulary. Learning
activities include taskbased conversations, listening comprehension drills, as well as oral presentations. In addition to the textbook, supplementary materials will
also be used, drawn primarily from Arab print and nonprint media.
Format: lecture. Requirements: active participation in class, regular class and homework assignments, written and oral quizzes, presentations, midterm and final.
Prerequisites: two years of Modern Standard Arabic or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 10). If overenrolled, preference will be given to
Arabic and Middle Eastern Studies majors.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF KHATTAB
ARAB 320(S) Urban Spaces of Modern South Asia (Same as Asian Studies 320, History 317, International Studies 320 and Sociology)
(See under SOC 320 for full description.) VALIANI
ARAB 327(S) Violence, Terrorism, and Collective Healing (Same as Asian Studies 327 and Sociology 327)
(See under SOC 327 for full description.) VALIANI
58
ARAB 337(F) Cultures of Protest in Modern South Asia (Same as Asian Studies 337, History 320 and Sociology 337)
(See under SOC 337 for full description.) VALIANI
ARAB 353 Writing the City: Beirut and Cairo in Contemporary Arabic Literature (Same as Comparative Literature 353) (Not offered
2011-2012)
The Lebanese novelist Elias Khoury has written that understanding contemporary Lebanese literature requires us to understand "how literature both creates
myth and then seeks to destroy it." This class will consider this statement in relation to the development of the Arabic novel emerging out of Beirut and Cairo in
the latter part of the twentieth century. We will consider the ways in which Lebanese and Egyptian novelists use the motif of the city as a way to take up the
prevailing social and political issues of the day. In so doing we will discuss how some works actively mythologize and celebrate the city as an extension of
national identity, while others portray it as the root cause of the country's social ills. We will also consider how the history of each of these cities was intertwined
with the rise and fall of certain ideological movements in the Arab world whereby the novel, as a relatively new form in the region, served as an alternative
medium for theorizing and considering the efficacy of such movements. In taking up these questions, we will discuss the extent to which the trajectory of the
Arabic novel may be understood as a reflection of the changes affecting these urban milieus and reciprocally the way these two cities are, and continue to be,
produced by these fictions. Throughout the semester we will read a range of works by Lebanese and Egyptian novelists as well as a selection of critical material
that theorizes the city in relation to literature.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: active participation, presentation, two short papers (5-6 pages), and one longer paper (8-10 pages).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 15-20). Preference given to Comparative Literature majors and seniors.
NAAMAN
ARAB 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
ARAB 402(S) Topics in Translation (W)
This is an Arabic language course focusing on translation as a means to help students achieve a more advanced level of proficiency in the language. We will be
engaged in translating texts from Arabic into English, and vice versa, addressing translation challenges between the two languages as well as translation strategies
that can be used to overcome such challenges. Texts are primarily drawn from modern Arabic literature in the form of short stories by Naguib Mahfouz, Youssif
Idris, Hanan AlSheikh, among others, and equal attention is given to the translation task, linguistic and literary characteristics of Arabic texts, as well as aspects
of Arab culture as revealed in these works. The language of instruction in this class is Arabic.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active participation in class, presentations, short essays and/or translation projects (weekly), one midterm writing project and one
final writing project.
Prerequisites: ARAB 302 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 10). If overenrolled, preference will be given to Arabic and Middle Eastern
Studies majors.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR KHATTAB
ARAB 410(F) Kings, Heroes, Gods, and Monsters: Historical Texts and Modern Identities in the Middle East (Same as History 410, Jewish
Studies 410 and Religion 405) (D) (W)
(See under HIST 410 for full description.) BERNHARDSSON
ARAB 493(F)-W31-494(S) Senior Thesis
ART (Div. I)
Chair, Associate Professor PETER LOW
Professors: ALI, EPPING*, FILIPCZAK, GLIER*, GOTLIEB, HAXTHAUSEN***, HEDREEN, JANG, E. J. JOHNSON, L. JOHNSON, LA-
LEIAN, LEVIN, M. LEWIS, MCGOWAN, OCKMAN*, PODMORE, TAKENAGA. Associate Professors: CHAVOYA, LOW, SOLUM. Visit-
ing Clark Professor: ELKINS. Senior Lecturers: H. EDWARDS, E. GRUDIN. Lecturers: B. BENEDICTЁ, D. JOHNSON, MCCALLUM, SAT-
TERTHWAITE. Lecturers in the Graduate Program in the History of Art: CLARKE, CONFORTI, CORRIN, HOLLY, MacNAMIDHE, P. PARK,
SIMPSON. Visiting Lecturers: ERICKSON, CORRIN, FERANDO, JACKSON, MacNAMIDHE, SOUTH.
MAJOR
Three routes are offered: the emphasis of the first is on the history of art, and that of the second is on creative work in studio. The third route through the major
allows students to take courses in both halves of the department in more or less equal numbers.
Note: The Art History and Art Studio routes are strongly recommended for any prospective Art major who is contemplating graduate study in Art History or
Art Studio.
Requirements beginning with the class of 2013:
Art History Route
Sequence courses
Any two of the following three foundational courses, ArtH 101, 102, or 103
Any 100-level studio class without prerequisites; preferably taken by the end of the junior year
ArtH 301 Methods of Art History
One 400-level Seminar or Graduate Course (cannot be used to satisfy any other requirement for the art-history major)
Parallel courses
Any five additional semester courses of art history including three concerned with the following:
1) a period of art prior to 1800
2) a period of art prior to 1400
3) art of the Middle East, Asia, and Africa
Of the five parallel courses, at least one must be a 300-level tutorial or 400-level seminar or graduate course.
Although the structure of the art history route allows for flexible scheduling, the faculty strongly recommends that students proceed through the major in the
recommended sequence. Introductory 100- and 200-level courses should be taken in the first or second year. So that they are prepared for the research require-
ments of the seminar classes that cap the sequence, majors are required to take the required Junior major class, ArtH 301 during their junior year. If the student is
studying abroad for the entire junior year, this requirement may be filled in the senior year (see STUDY ABROAD policy of the Art Department for more informa-
tion.)
Art Studio Route
Sequence courses
ArtS 100 Drawing I
ArtS 230 Drawing II
ArtH 101-102 or any two art history classes for which students are eligible; preferably taken by the end of the junior year
Any three of the 200-level ArtS courses in three different media or
any one 100-level course (except Arts 100, Drawing) and any two 200-level courses in three different media
ArtS 319 Junior Seminar
Any two of the 300-level ArtS courses
or
One of the 300-level ArtS course and ArtS 418T Senior Tutorial
History and Practice Route
Sequence courses
ArtH 101-102 Aspects of Western Art
ArtS 100 Drawing I
One 200-level ArtS course
ArtH 301 Methods of Art History or ArtS 319 Junior Seminar
One ArtH seminar (400-level) or one 500-level graduate course except 508
One 300-level ArtS course or (with permission) ArtS 418T Senior Tutorial
59
Parallel courses
Any four additional Art Studio or Art History courses. At least one elective must be taken in each wing of the department. At least one of the electives
must be an Art History course concerned with a period of art prior to 1800 (either of Europe, North America, and South America OR art of the Middle
East, Asia, and Africa).
Art History Route: The history of art is different from other historical disciplines in that it is founded on direct visual confrontation with objects that are
both concretely present and yet documents of the past. We emphasize analysis of images, objects, and built environments as the basis for critical
thought and visual literacy. In addition to formal and iconographic analysis, we use the work of other disciplines to understand visual images, such as
social history, perceptual psychology, engineering, psychoanalysis, cultural studies, and archaeology. Because of its concentration on visual experi-
ence, the Art History major increases one's ability to observe and to use those observations as analytical tools for understanding history and culture.
ArtH 101-102 and ArtH 103 introduce students to a series of critical studies of important works selected from the history of European, North American, and
Asian art from antiquity to the present. The critical approach of the introductory courses is maintained in all further courses, often by assigned study of original
works in the Williams College Museum of Art, Chapin Library, the Clark Art Institute, and Mass MoCA.
An introductory studio course, at the 100 level, in which no artistic talent or prior experience are assumed, provides vital training in what is
a visual as well as a verbal discipline. The requirement of a course in the art of the Middle East, Asia, and Africa (a second course if students
have chosen ArtH 103 as one of their foundational courses) expands majors' geographic as well as cultural horizons, and the requirement of
two courses in art from periods prior to 1800 provides a necessary concentration on earlier moments in culture. (As the late contemporary
architect, Philip Johnson, said, "You cannot not know history.") The junior course (ArtH 301) develops awareness of the theoretical implica-
tions, as well as the possibilities and limitations of different art-historical methods. The requirement of two additional upper level courses
(one 300-level tutorial or 400-level parallel course, the other a 400-level seminar or 500-level graduate course as the final sequence course)
enables students to apply that knowledge of methodology to their most specialized work in the Art History route.
Art Studio Route: The studio division of the Art major has been structured to foster the development of a critical understanding of making art; to
support creative interests and to develop students' perceptions and imaginations as they investigate a variety of visual media. Drawing I,
ArtS 100 serves as an introduction to the basic drawing and design principles which establish the foundation for the development of visual
expression. ArtH 101-102, Aspects of Western Art or two other art history classes, provide part of the necessary background in the critical
analysis of art. The 200-level ArtS courses provide opportunities to learn the elements of some of the principal visual arts media: architec-
ture, painting, photography, printmaking, sculpture, and video. These courses combine technical foundations in the medium with analysis of
the interrelation of visual form and content. The 300- and 400-level courses place a greater emphasis on the application of appropriate visual
skills and strategies to particular thematic concerns, and to the development of the student's individual vision. All students taking ArtS418
are required to exhibit in the spring of their senior year at the Williams College Museum of Art or other appropriate venues. Students who
choose to take two 300-level classes do not exhibit at WCMA in the spring of the senior year.
History and Practice Route: This route allows students to study in depth both the history of art and the making of it. It offers considerable flexibility: students may
propose courses of study that emphasize particular media, themes or methodological issues. To mention just three examples, students may design sequences of
courses that focus on architecture, gender or narration in both the history of art and contemporary practice. Students may take more courses in one wing of the
department than the other, as long as the minimum requirements in each wing are satisfied. The History and Practice route is especially well-suited to students
interested in arts-related careers outside of higher education, including work in art galleries, art museums, and primary or secondary school education.
Unlike the history or studio routes, acceptance into the History and Practice route is not automatic. The student must first submit a written application in two
copies, one for each advisor from the two wings of the department, as well as a list of proposed courses; this application and list of proposed courses must be given
to the department secretary before registering for the major.
The application must provide a narrative statement of the theme of the major, and why it cannot be accommodated in either history or studio. It is not enough to
submit a list of courses; the student needs to show the coherence and integrity of the plan of study, and how it develops the theme of the proposed major.
Some students will be attracted to both wings of the department but will not have a field of study that falls between the two. In these cases, it is better for the
student to choose between history and studio--taking additional courses from the other wing as desired. In short, the History and Practice route is reserved for
students with a strong record of achievement who cannot be accommodated in the two wings of the department.
History and Practice majors do not participate in the senior studio exhibition at the end of the year.
History and Practice Faculty Advisors: Michael Glier, Ann McCallum, and Ben Benedict in studio; E. J. Johnson, Peter Low and Michael Lewis in history.
COURSE NUMBERS
First Digit
The 100-level courses in both Art History and Studio are introductions to the field and emphasize visual and critical analysis. These courses do not require
previous experience in the subject and they are often prerequisites for other courses in the department; 200-level courses are introductions to specific fields;
300-level courses prepare students for independent research; 400-level courses emphasize independent research, oral presentation, and active participation
and are intended for advanced students, usually senior majors.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN ART
Students who wish to become candidates for the degree with honors must show prior evidence of superior performance in the major as well as research
capabilities to carry out the proposed project.
Art History
To graduate with honors in art history, students are to enroll in the Senior Honors Seminar during the Spring semester of their senior year, where they will
develop an original research paper based on prior research. To be admitted to the seminar, students must have completed ArtH 301 in their Junior year. To enter
the class, students must either be nominated by a faculty member, or apply independently to the Department Honors Committee for admission. Students who
have been nominated, as well as students who wish to apply for admission to the Honors Seminar, must submit an original research paper that was completed in a
prior art history class. The paper must be properly formatted and include illustrations, a bibliography, and an abstract of not more than 250 words. These docu-
ments are to be turned in to the Department Secretary no later than the end of the exam period of the Fall semester. The department Honors Committee will invite
students (no more than 10) to enroll in the Honors Seminar based on the quality of the original research, the student's GPA within the major, and the willingness
and availability of appropriate faculty advisors. Notification of admission to the seminar will be sent to students by early January. Since enrollment is by invitation
only, students should pre-register for four classes and, if invited, drop one of them and add the Honors Seminar during drop-add period. The Honors Seminar is to
be taken in addition to the required courses for the major. Once in the seminar, students will revise, refine and expand on previous research and produce a paper of
approximately 25 pages and present a shortened version of the paper to the faculty and public at the Williams College Museum of Art.
Art Studio:
Studio art concentrators who wish to be candidates for honors are required to add a 200-level course, and to take the 400-level senior tutorial. An additional
300-level tutorial or 200-level course must be added for a total of twelve courses.
Honors candidates enrolled in the senior tutorial must "evidence" prior experience in the media chosen for the honors work. This "evidence" may consist of
one or more 200-level courses in the medium, course work at the 300 level and/or a slide portfolio demonstrating the student's proficiency in the media chosen for
the honors project. This work is presented to the senior tutorial instructor at the start of the spring semester.
At the end of the spring semester of the senior year, the honors candidate will orally defend his/her work in the senior exhibition at WCMA. The entire studio
faculty will attend the defense. Based on the work and the oral defense, the studio faculty (as a whole) will designate honors, high honors or no honors.
History and Practice:
The route to honors is a combination of the Art Studio and Art History honors routes. At the beginning of senior year, a candidate for honors in History and
Practice makes a proposal to two faculty members, one faculty advisor from each wing of the department. If both advisors agree to supervise the project, the
candidate enrolls in independent study and works through the fall semester and winter study. The progress of the project is assessed by both advisors at the end of
winter study; if the project is not well enough developed, the advisors may end it at that time. If the project is allowed to move forward, the student enrolls either in
ArtS 418T Senior Tutorial, if the project is primarily a matter of making art, or in an Honors Independent Study, if it is primarily a writing project. The final project
is submitted to the two advisors, who will determine whether or not it will receive honors.
STUDY ABROAD
Although the Art Department encourages students to travel and study abroad, we feel that it is very important for students to begin their major with a required
seminar in their Junior year. The Junior seminars, ArtH 301 and ArtS 319, prepare students for independent research and/or independent artistic production which
is the focus of the senior year.
a. Studio Art Majors must take the required Junior Seminar (ArtS 319) in their junior year unless they are planning to study abroad for a full year; in that
case they may take the required class in their senior year.
60
b. History and Practice students must include their Study Abroad plans in their application to the major and discuss them with their advisor.
c. Art History students must take the required Junior Seminar (ArtH 301) in their junior year unless they are planning to study abroad for a full year; in that
case they may take the required class in their senior year.
ART HISTORY COURSES
ARTH 101(F)-102(S) Aspects of Western Art
A yearlong introduction to a history of some European and North American art, this course concentrates on threedimensional media in the fall (ArtH 101
architecture and sculpture) and twodimensional media in the spring (ArtH 102 painting, drawing, prints and photography). Even though the course focuses on
Western art, it also explores interchanges among other cultures and the west, particularly in more recent times. Both semesters cover the same chronological span,
from Ancient Greeks to computer geeks. We organize the course in this unusual way not only to give students the grasp of history, but also to heighten their ability
to understand visual objects by coming to grips with only one artistic medium at a time. To train students to look carefully at art, we use the wealth of art resources
in Williamstown: the Clark Art Institute, the Williams College Museum of Art and the Chapin Rare Book Library.
Students spend time with original works of art. For the study of architecture we have a unique set of "Virtual Buildings" made expressly for this course, that
approximate the experience of being in structures thousands of miles away.
Format: lecture and weekly discussion section. Requirements: quizzes, midterm, two papers and a final exam.
ArtH 101-102 may not be taken on a pass/fail basis; however, the course may be audited. Students who have audited ArtH 101-102 lectures on a registered basis
may enroll in any Art History course at the 200 or 300 level. Although students may begin the course in either the fall or spring semester, both semesters of ARTH
101-102, a hyphenated course, must be taken to receive course credit for either semester. The only exception is for art history majors who may take ArtH 103 in
place of either 101 or 102. Students should petition the chair of the Department for this exception to be made.
Enrollment limit: 180 (expected: 180). Open to first-year students.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF, 12:00-12:50 MWF Conferences: See online directory First Semester: E. J. JOHNSON
9:00-9:50 MWF, 11:00-11:50 MWF Conferences: See online directory Second Semester: E. GRUDIN
ARTH 103(F) Asian Art Survey: From the Land of the Buddha to the World of the Geisha (Same as Asian Studies 103)
This course introduces to students some of the major monuments of Asian art with an emphasis on the art of India, China, and Japan. Its contextual approach helps
students gain insight into the aesthetic, religious, and political ideas and cultural meanings conveyed by the works of art. Visual analyses and thematic discussions
will bear upon the interconnectedness among these three cultures, and their respective interactions with the West. This course also provides students with the
vocabulary, techniques, and patterns of thinking needed for advanced art history courses.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based on three 30- to 40-minute quizzes, two short papers, film screening and class attendance.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 35. Highly recommended for first-year students. May not be taken on a pass/fail basis
Satisfies the pre-1400, pre-1800 or Art of Middle East, Asia and Africa requirement OR can be taken with either ArtH 101 or ArtH 102 as the foundational
requirement for the art history route to the major. Students should petition the Chair of the Art Department for this exception to be made.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR JANG
ARTH 108 Creating Bodies (Same as ArtS 108) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under ARTS 108 for full description.) GLIER and OCKMAN
ARTH 201(F) American Landscape History (Same as Environmental Studies 201) (W)
A survey course stressing the visual attributes and historical geography of regional, vernacular (that is, ordinary or pervasive) American settings, with the goal of
discerning a national style of spatial or landscape organization. Among the human-altered environments to be studied, from an evolutionary or diachronic per-
spective, are: forestlands, rangelands, croplands, outdoor recreational sites, mines and quarries; power and utilities; small towns, mill towns, central business
districts, and suburbs; housing, industry, commerce, and institutional uses such as the American college campus; water, road, and rail corridors as examples of
circulation nets. Given the course's breadth of topics and, by contrast, other courses (see ArtH 304 and 308 during this academic year) concentrating on specific
land uses. An aim of this survey course will lie in discerning generic stylistic continuities and discontinuities, or changes, which the landscape activities or sites
express. One outdoor, afternoon meeting each week provides discussion opportunities in situ, and enables class members to obtain a deeper or first-hand familiar-
ity with a rural-urban gradient of representative land uses and occupants of the Hoosic-Hudson watershed and Taconic upland region surrounding Williamstown,
as well as practicums in interviewing and field study methodologies.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: weekly essays advancing the documentation of an individually-chosen landscape site or behavior, simultaneously with
the wider textual and field context which the course itself provides. The first Friday in November there will be an obligatory all-day field session, pondering an
urban-rural gradient from Troy, New York to Salem, New York.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Open to first-year students. Preference to American Studies, Art, and Environmental Studies majors or
intended majors.
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Field Session: 1:10-3:50 M,W SATTERTHWAITE
ARTH 203(F) Chicana/o Film and Video (Same as Latina/o Studies 203 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 203)
(See under LATS 203 for full description.) CHAVOYA
ARTH 205(S) Picturing Race: From Early Modern Europe to Now (Same as Africana Studies 207) (D)
This historically wide-ranging course surveys visual representations of race in order to ask questions about how art establishes conventions for racial iconography,
as well as about how art may challenge and revise these conventions. The comprehensive scope is deliberately cross-historical to create a longer timeline that
expands the range for comparative perspectives in the study of race. Throughout, analysis of race includes whiteness as a racial category. The course begins with
the black servant motif in Renaissance portraits of white patrons by, for example, Anthony van Dyck, both to identify standard visual elements in the repertoire of
poses for black attendants and, equally, to note departures from the norm. Against this background, the course ultimately turns to Glenn Ligon, Fred Wilson, Kara
Walker, and other contemporary artists who engage in re-visionary explorations of identity.
This is an Exploring Diversity (EDI) course because, in the context of racial difference, we will confront forthrightly the negative realities and assess critically the
possibilities for productive change and hope in the depiction of cross-racial power relations.
Format: seminar. Evaluation based on active participation in class discussion, short papers, final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15). Preference given to Art majors and Africana Studies concentrators.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR ERICKSON
ARTH 209(F) The Art and Archaeology of Maya Civilization: A Marriage Made in Xibalba (Same as Anthropology 219)
(See under ANTH 219 for full description.) FOIAS
ARTH 210(F) The Works of Modernist and Contemporary Landscape Architects (W)
Successive ways nature and the city are understood have affected the field of landscape architecture, first distinguished as a profession, differing from landscape
gardening, by Frederick Law Olmsted in the last quarter of the nineteenth century. The field's purview has considerably broadened, beyond attendant grounds or
parks, to larger entities such as watersheds or regions or campuses, with their land use and circulation patterns and their "growth nodes." Today the remediation of
"brownfields" and other urban detritus is an increasing source of commissions. Possibly no discipline has recently influenced landscape architecture as much as
plant ecology, with the landscape profession's becoming a manifestation of "applied ecology." This tutorial course will ponder the work of such deliberate out-
door shapers as Swedish park and playground designers, a Brazilian's "painting" grounds with flowers, and a Canadian's recreating indigenous vegetation (as in
a permanent "work of art" outside the National Gallery of Art in Ottawa). Formalist, naturalistic, and other styles, or works, likely receiving our attention in the
United States will include: a schema for shaping urban sprawl; AfroAmerican community planning in Oakland (as an example of "process"); the grassingover
of roofs at Ford's River Rouge plant; and the rehabilitation of abandoned sites like a former elevated rail spur in New York Cityall these landscape compositions,
or proposals, being the works of acclaimed "masters" or "rising" practitioners.
Format: seminar. Requirements: weekly papers. Emphasis will be placed on developing skills in viewing in our mind's eye, and articulating verbally, the com-
plexities of sometimes extensive outdoor spaces and in interpreting these designs, as well as constructing arguments and responding to them, in both written and
oral critiques. There will be an obligatory allday field session to Boston (in the company of a current practitioner, Nancy Shapero '81).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19.
Hour: TBA SATTERTHWAITE
ARTH 212 Distant Encounters: East Meets West in the Art of the European Middle Ages (Not offered 2011-2012)
This lecture course investigates the rich artistic consequences--in architecture, manuscript illumination, mosaic, sculpture, panel painting, fresco, metalwork,
and other minor arts--of European contact with the Eastern Mediterranean between approximately 300 and 1450 AD. From the beginnings of Christianity,
pilgrims from Europe made the long journey to sacred sites in the Holy Land (extending across parts of present-day Egypt, Israel, Syria, and Turkey). When
61
these sites became less accessible with the spread of Islam in the seventh century, Europeans sought to recreate the sites at home. Later, from 1095 onward,
Christian Europeans attempted to reclaim and hold the Holy Land from non-Christians by force, through an ill-fated series of five major and several lesser
"crusades." Over the centuries, before, during, and after the Crusades, exposure to the peoples, ideas, and cultures of the Eastern Mediterranean also came
through trade and through the travel and settlement of non-Europeans in Europe itself, particularly in Spain, Sicily, and Venice. The course aims to survey
artistic production within each of these different contexts of East-West encounter.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: two to three short papers, midterm, and final exam.
No prerequisite, but previous coursework in medieval art helpful (ArtH 101-102, 223, or 224). Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25).
Satisfies the pre-1400 or pre-1800 requirement.
LOW
ARTH 213 Greek Art and Myth (Same as Classics 213) (Not offered 2011-2012)
Classical myth provides rich subject matter for painters and sculptors throughout the history of western art. This course investigates the earliest representation of
myth in Greek art of the seventh through the first centuries B.C.E. Sophisticated narratives involving gods and heroes first appear in a variety forms and con-
texts. Myth informs the visual culture of the Greeks on many levels, from paintings on vases used in domestic contexts to the marble sculpture that decorated the
monumental temples of great sanctuaries throughout the Greek world. The purpose of the course is two-fold: to familiarize students with the subjects and
narratives of Greek myths and the underlying belief system that, in part, produced them, and also provide a comprehensive outline of developments in Greek art
in the first millenium B.C.E. Of special interest will be the techniques developed by artists for representing narratives visually, as well as the conceptual issues
that underlie certain myths, such as sacrifice, war, marriage, coming of age, specific festivals, and the relationships between men and women, and those be-
tween mortals and immortals. Reading will include ancient literature in translation (Hesiod, Homer, Sappho, Aischylos, Sophokles, Euripides and Apollodorus)
as well as secondary literature by contemporary authors that provides insights into the religious, social and historical developments that influenced artists in their
choices of subject matter and style.
Format: lecture. Requirements: two short papers, quiz, hour test, final exam. Required fieldtrip to The Metropolitan Museum in New York.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 45 (expected: 45). The course satisfies the pre-1400 or pre-1800 requirement.
MCGOWAN
ARTH 216(S) Body of Evidence: Greek Sculpture and the Human Figure (Same as Classics 216)
From the beginnings of Greek sculpture in the eighth century B.C.E. until the end of the Hellenistic period in the first century B.C.E., the human figure remained
the most prominent choice of subject for Greek artists. Introductory classes will cover sculpture in the Neolithic and Bronze Ages but the goal of this course is to
study Greek sculpture in the first millennium B.C.E. with emphasis on ancient Greek attitudes toward the body. We will consider the function, surroundings and
reception of male and female figures, both human and divine, from athletic, religious and funerary contexts, and look at dedications of individual figures as well as
the complex mythological narratives found on Greek temples. Reading material includes ancient literature in translation as well as contemporary critical essays.
Format: lecture. Requirements: two short papers, midterm, final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected 25.) The course satisfies the pre-1400 or pre-1800 requirement.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR MCGOWAN
ARTH 220 The Mosque (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
A clean place oriented towards Mecca is enough for daily prayer, but the communal practices of Islam entail more than basic rituals and these activities often
transpire in formal architectural settings. These structures range from traditional columned halls of brick and timber to modernist ensembles of reinforced
concrete and plate glass; prayer halls may be open to the elements, flat-roofed or domed; surfaces may be enhanced with carved marble, inlaid wood or glazed
tile. Elaborate inscriptions often play an important role in these buildings. By exploring the commonalities and variations of mosque architecture from Delhi to
New York, this course fulfills the terms of the Exploring Diversity Initiative by offering students an opportunity to see how Islam shapes the built environment
in diverse cultural settings and then apply that knowledge with empathy, close to home. Ultimately, our test case will be the sacred spaces of Williams' campus,
as we seek to understand how architectural form can foster community, manifest belief, activate conviction and sometimes exacerbate religious differences.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: midterm, final, term project.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15.
H. EDWARDS
ARTH 222(F) Photography in/of the Middle East (Same as Arabic Studies 222) (D)
Since its inception, photography has been globally disseminated but locally inflected, serving disparate documentary needs and expressive purposes in different
cultural contexts. In the Middle East, the powers and pleasures of the medium have been valued by colonial forces, indigenous populations, photojournalists and
artists; the resulting images merit aesthetic appreciation even as they grant visual access to the past and present in complicated places. The course will explore
photographic practices in different zones of the Middle East--e.g., the Holy Land, Egypt or the Persian sphere--by attending to individual photographers and
case studies. This tightly focused approach will support, in turn, a consideration of the burdens and risks of representation in particular circumstances--what work
do photographs do? Who resists and who benefits? The general goal will be to appreciate the diversity of perspectives that underlie renderings of the Middle East.
Format: lecture. Requirements: class participation, short papers, term project.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Permission of instructor required.
This course satisfies the Art of Middle East, Asian and Africa requirement.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF H. EDWARDS
ARTH 224(S) Romanesque and Gothic Art and Architecture: The Medieval Church in Context
The goal of this course is to survey the major works of ecclesiastical architecture, sculpture and stained glass produced in France between approximately 1050 and
1400. These works were not created in isolation from their surroundings; thus we will attempt to understand them not only stylistically, but also in their original
functional, social, and sometimes even political settings. The course will emphasize the abbey church and the cathedral, the two major ecclesiastical buildings of
this period, as heterogeneous entities that used architecture, sculpture, stained glass and other media, in conjunction with church ritual, to render their sacred
spaces distinct from, and elevated above, the world outside. We will furthermore try to appreciate the special centrality of the abbey church and the cathedral in
high medieval society. Sites for contact with God and for the development of advanced learning, they could also serve as critical determinants of local economic
and political life, and as focuses of pilgrimage, trade, and international cultural exchange.
Format: lecture. Requirements: midterm, final, quiz, paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25.
Satisfies the pre-1400 or pre-1800 requirement.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF LOW
ARTH 232(F) The Visual Culture of Renaissance Rome
During the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, the city of Rome saw itself transformed from a shrinking and neglected medieval town into a thriving center of artistic
achievement. This lecture course focuses on the historical, geographic, and ideological forces behind this period of renovation and restoration forces that re-
worked the urban fabric of the city while shaping the character of the visual arts from Filarete and Fra Angelico to Bramante, Michelangelo, and Raphael. We will
examine monuments such as Michelangelo's Sistine Chapel, then, not only as touchstones for the history of western art, but also as images capable of reflecting,
and even constructing, a uniquely Roman sense of power, time, and historical destiny.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: midterm, final, and two papers.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 40. Open to Art majors as well as non-majors.
Satisfies the pre-1800 requirement.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MF SOLUM
ARTH 235(S) Roman Archaeology and Material Culture (Same as Anthropology 235, Classics 224 and History 224)
(See under CLAS 224 for full description.) RUBIN
ARTH 238 The Image of God in Greek Art (Same as Classics 248) (Not offered 2011-2012)
The representation of the divine poses special problems for artists and art historians in any cultural context in which the divine is believed to be not visible in the
ordinary sense yet powerfully present. Visual representations of gods and goddesses in ancient Greek art pose especially interesting interpretive questions
because of the importance of naturalism in Greek theories and practices of visual representation. This course will cover the basic stylistic, iconographical,
mythological, and ritual features of the individual gods and goddesses as they are depicted in Greek sculpture and painting. The course will also examine
62
influential ancient monuments, literary forms, and social phenomena, such as the sculptures of Delphi, Olympia, and the Parthenon; divine corporeality in
poetry; the theology of mortal-immortal relations; the practice of statue-ritual, and the functions of visual representations of gods. The overall aim of the course
is to acquire an understanding of the interrelations of art, mythology, and religion in ancient Greece.
Format: lecture and discussion. Requirements: short papers, final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 20-30). Preference will be given to Art-History majors needing to fulfill the pre-1400 requirement; otherwise,
the course is open;students who have taken ARTH 216 may take this course only with permission of instructor.
Satisfies the pre-1400 or pre-1800 requirement.
HEDREEN
ARTH 239 Envisioning Empire: Geography in the Graeco-Roman World (Same as Classics 341 and History 341) (Not offered
2011-2012) (D)
(See under CLAS 341 for full description.) RUBIN
ARTH 240(S) Romanticism in North America and Europe
We examine a particularly wide variety of pictures from different places (ranging from post-Revolutionary Paris and Jacksonian New York to Royalist Spain). All
of the artists discussed were born between 1746 and 1801; all of them have been called Romantic. But their approaches to painting seem to share few common
features: while lonely Gothic ruins attracted the German painter Caspar David Friedrich, the English-born, Catskill-settled Thomas Cole elevated the "impetuous
rivers" and "tangled woods" of the United States over Europe's "palaces of princes" and "venerated ruins." Contrasts such as these enable us to ask if "Romanti-
cism" is an old-fashioned label incapable of summarizing myriad cultural expressions, or should we describe it as a valuable term drawing together essential
aspects of otherwise diverse styles? To be kept in mind throughout are the remarkable and often tragic developments (imperial expansion; the slave trade; ecologi-
cal destruction) through which life on both sides of the Atlantic was transformed in the nineteenth century's first four decades.
Format: lecture. Requirements: three short book reviews or analyses of individual paintings (2 to 3 pages in length). Final research paper (12 to 15 pages). Visits to
the Clark Art Institute are part of this course. A field trip to the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston may also be required
Prerequisites: Arth 101-102 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 25). Preference given to sophomores and juniors.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR MacNAMIDHE
ARTH 241(S) Dutch Art of the 1600s: Hals to Vermeer
Rembrandt van Rijn, Frans Hals, Jan Vermeer are only the best-known of the many artists who were active in the northern Netherlands during the seventeenth
century. The variety of their subjects was unprecedented, but the degree of symbolic content in their work is disputed: to what extent was Dutch painting an art of
description or of hidden allegory? We will consider this problem and also give special attention to the ongoing reinterpretations of Rembrandt's oeuvre and life.
Format: lecture. Requirements: a midterm, short paper, and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25.
Satisfies the pre-1800 requirement.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR FILIPCZAK
ARTH 247 Flemish Art: Bruegel to Rubens (Not offered 2011-2012)
The most admired art in northern Europe during the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries was produced in Antwerp (in present day Belgium). This city
served as home to the best-known Flemish artists, such as Pieter Bruegel and his sons, Rubens, and Van Dyck. In this lecture course, we will examine studio
practices, especially the collaboration of artists on a single work, different narrative approaches, and the religious, political, and social messages conveyed by the
works. We will also discuss official and popular religious practices and the images produced for different locations, including pilgrimage sites associated with
miracle-working images.
Evaluation based on midterm, 3-page paper, and final (with a prepared essay).
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102. Enrollment limit: 25.
Satisfies the pre-1800 requirement.
FILIPCZAK
ARTH 253 Art in the Age of the Revolution, 1760-1860 (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 253) (Not offered 2011-2012)
A social history beginning with art of the pre-Revolutionary period and ending with realism. Major topics include changing definitions of neoclassicism and
romanticism, the impact of the revolutions of 1789, 1830, and 1848, the Napoleonic Empire, the shift from history painting to scenes of everyday life, landscape
painting as an autonomous art form and attitudes toward race and sexuality. The course stresses French artists such as Greuze, Vige-Lebrun, David, Ingres,
Delacroix, Gricault, Corot, and Courbet, but also includes Goya, Constable, Turner, and Friedrich.
Format: lecture. Requirements: two quizzes, hour test, and final exam or research paper; a conference at the Clark Art Institute and a field trip to New York may
also be required.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 30.
OCKMAN
ARTH 254(F) Manet to Matisse (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 254)
A social history of French painting from 1860 to 1900, beginning with the origins of modernism in the work of Courbet and Manet. Among the topics to be
discussed are the rebuilding of Paris under Napoleon III; changing attitudes toward city and country in Impressionist and Symbolist art; the impact of imperialism
and international trade; the gendering of public spaces, and the prominent place of women in representations of modern life. The course addresses vanguard
movements such as Impressionism and Post-Impressionism and the styles of individual artists associated with them, as well as the work of academic painters.
Format: lecture. Requirements: hour test and final exam or research paper; a conference at the Clark Art Institute and field trip to The Metropolitan Museum and
MOMA and/or The MFA in Boston may also be required.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102. Enrollment limit: 30.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR FERANDO
ARTH 257(S) Architecture 1700-1900
In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries a new conception of architecture arose, based on archaeological discoveries, the development of new building materi-
als, and convulsive social changes. This course looks at the major architectural movements of this period, and the theoretical ideas that shaped them. Topics
include Neoclassicism, new building types, Victorian Architecture, the development of the architectural profession, and Art Nouveau. Major architects to be
discussed include Piranesi, John Soane, Schinkel, Pugin, and H.H. Richardson. When possible, primary sources will be used. Students will be given experience in
reading plans and writing about buildings.
Format: lecture. Requirements: one short paper and design project, midterm, final, and a field trip.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 60.
This course does not satisfy the pre-1800 requirement.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR M. LEWIS
ARTH 258(S) Latina/o Installation and Site-Specific Art (Same as Latina/o Studies 258)
(See under LATS 258 for full description.) CHAVOYA
ARTH 262(S) Architecture Since 1900
An exploration of major developments in Western architecture from 1900 to the present, including the relationship of architecture of this period to developments
in other artistic fields. Concentration on major figures: Wright, Gropius, Mies van der Rohe, Le Corbusier, Aalto, Kahn, Venturi, Gehry, Koolhaas, Hadid.
Format: lecture. Requirements: bi-weekly quizzes and an architectural design project for which no previous training is expected.
Prerequisites: ARTH 101-102, or ARTH 101 if 102 taken at the same time. Enrollment limit: 50 (expected: 50). Preference given to juniors and sophomores.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF E. J. JOHNSON
ARTH 263(F) European Painting and Sculpture, 1900-1945
A survey of the major artists and tendencies, including Fauvism, Expressionism, Cubism, Futurism, Dada, Surrealism, the Bauhaus, and the Russian avant-garde.
Lectures will focus on selected artists, with others to be covered through readings. Issues will include theoretical rationales for abstraction, varieties of avant-gard-
ism, and relations between art, criticism and the art market.
Format: lecture. Requirements: one quiz, a midterm, a short paper, a field trip to New York, and a final.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102. Enrollment limit: 30.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR FERANDO
63
ARTH 264(F) American Art and Architecture, 1600 to Present (Same as American Studies 264)
American art is often looked at as a provincial version of the real thing--i.e., European art--and found wanting. This course examines American architecture,
painting, and sculpture on its own terms, in the light of the social, ideological and economic forces that shaped it. Special attention will be paid to such themes as
the Puritan legacy and attitudes toward art; the making of art in a commercial society; and the tension between the ideal and the real in American works of art.
Format: lecture. Requirements: three 5-page papers, midterm, final, and a field trip.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 60.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR M. LEWIS
ARTH 265(S) Pop Art (W)
The use of commercial and mass media imagery in art became recognized as an international phenomenon in the early 1960s. Items such as comic strips, adver-
tising, movie stills, television programs, soup cans, "superstars" and a variety of other accessible and commonplace objects inspired the subject matter, form and
technique. This course will critically examine the history and legacy of Pop Art by focusing on its social and aesthetic contexts. An important component of the
course involves developing skills in analyzing visual images, comparing them with other forms, and relating them to their historical context.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: two short response papers, oral presentation, and one final research paper.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102. Enrollment limit: 16.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF CHAVOYA
ARTH 266(S) Twentieth-Century Russian Art and the Birth of Abstraction (Same as Russian 208)
(See under RUSS 208 for full description.) GOLDSTEIN
ARTH 270(S) Japanese Art and Culture (Same as Japanese 270)
This course is a survey of traditional Japanese painting, sculpture, architecture, woodblock prints, and decorative arts. Special attention will be paid to the devel-
opments in artistic style and subject matter in the contexts of contemporary cultural phenomena. Through visual analysis students learn the aesthetic, religious,
and political ideals and cultural meanings conveyed in the works of art. This course offers students a solid grasp of the social, cultural, and art histories of Japan.
Format: lecture. Requirements: three 30- to 40-minute exams, two short papers, film screening, class attendance.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 35. This course satisfies the pre-1400, pre-1800 or Art of Middle East, Asia and Africa requirement.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF JANG
ARTH 274(F) Chinese Calligraphy: Theory and Practice (Same as Chinese 274)
This course has two components: art history and studio practice. The first offers students an opportunity to acquire an understanding of theoretical and aesthetic
principles of Chinese calligraphy, one of the highest art forms in China practiced by the literati. It also investigates the social and political functions of Chinese
calligraphy in ancient and contemporary China. Studio practice allows students to apply theories to creating artworks. The semester is evenly divided between
technical instruction and the art history part of the course.
Format: lecture, class discussions and studio practice. Requirements: weekly assignments, a midterm, one short paper, oral presentations, a final project (artistic or
scholarly), class attendance, film screening.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 12. This course satisfies the pre-1400, pre-1800 or Art of Middle East, Asia and Africa requirement.
Hour: 10:00 a.m-1:00 p.m. F JANG
ARTH 276 Chinese Art and Culture (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course surveys the arts of China, including painting, sculpture, ceramics, gardens, and other decorative arts. Topics covered will include the rise and
development of Buddhist art; meanings and functions of landscape painting; gender construction in Chinese art; Western influence in Chinese art; and more. Its
contextual approach helps students gain insight into the aesthetic, religious, and political ideas and cultural meanings conveyed by the works of art. Visual
analyses and thematic discussions will bear upon the interactions and interconnectedness between China and the West. This course also provides students with
the vocabulary, techniques, and patterns of thinking needed for advanced art history courses.
Format: lecture. Requirements: 3 exams; 2 short papers; film screening; class attendance.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). This course satisfies the pre-1400, pre-1800 or Art of Middle East, Asia and Africa requirement.
JANG
ARTH 278 The Golden Road to Samarqand (Not offered 2011-2012)
The region comprising present day Iran, Afghanistan, Central Asia, Pakistan and India has a rich and complex history. Home to Genghis Khan and Tamerlane,
Akbar the Great and Shah Jahan, it has generated some of the most spectacular monuments (e.g. the Taj Mahal and the blue tiled mosques of Isfahan) and
refined manuscript painting ever known. We will look at these art forms from the tenth to the twentieth centuries, highlighting the patronage of key dynasties,
including the Timurids of Samarqand and the Mughals of India. An important issue throughout the course will be the impact that Islam has had on the artistic
traditions of this region.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, a short paper, a midterm and a final.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20.
Satisfies the Art of Middle East, Asia and Africa requirement.
H. EDWARDS
ARTH 300T Rembrandt Tutorial: Case Studies of Individual Works and Controversial Issues (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Currently Rembrandt ranks as the best known but also the most controversial Dutch artist of the 17th century. Dispute surrounds his character as well as the
quantity, quality, and significance of his art. At each meeting we will focus on a specific painting, print, or drawing by Rembrandt or on an issue concerning him
and his work in order to compare the strengths and weaknesses of the various approaches. The semester will begin and end with a group meeting of everyone
taking the tutorial.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: each week write a short paper or respond to the tutorial partner's paper.
Preference to non-majors.
Satisfies the pre-1800 requirement.
FILIPCZAK
ARTH 301(F,S) Methods of Art History
This course on the methods and historiography of art history is designed to offer art history majors an opportunity to examine art-historical problems and method-
ological issues that have shaped the discipline. Works of art will inevitably enter into our discussions, but the main objects of study will be texts about art as well as
texts about methods for an historical study of art. Topics include (depending on individual instructor): aesthetics, style and periodization; iconography, narratolo-
gy, spectatorship; art and psychoanalysis, the social functions of images and the social history of art; art history and difference; and art-historical narrative as
representation.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: five bi-weekly short papers, one final paper, one oral presentation, and class participation.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102. Limited to Art History majors and required of them.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR First Semester: HEDREEN
1:10-2:25 TF Second Semester: SOLUM
ARTH 302(F) When Art Needs Room to Breathe: Public Art Beyond the White Cube
This course will consider the history, controversies, emerging issues, and evolving aesthetic approaches to publicly sited art from Richard Serra's Tilted Arc,
removed from its downtown NYC site by court order, to Christo and Jeanne-Claude's Gates for Central Park, to Mark Dion's Seattle Vivarium, a 60-foot nurse
log housed in a monumental urban greenhouse created in collaboration with, amongst others, scientists, ecologists, and botanical illustrators, and Rick Lowe's
community-based Project Rowhouse in Houston. Through lectures and guided readings, it will provide an overview of landmark projects including "plonk" art in
corporate plazas, site-specific commissions, and new-genre public works. The course will consider questions including: What is the public? What is the differ-
ence between space and place? How do different kinds of art define place? What is the responsibility of the artist to his/her public(s)? The course will provide
opportunities for students to consider these issues from the points of view of artists, curators, and representatives from architecture, government, and non-profit
public art commissioning organizations. An important component of the learning experience is a practicum in which students work together in teams to research,
create/curate, and problem-solve actual public art projects for the Williams campus and beyond.
Field trips will include study of publicly sited works on campus including the new Jenny Holzer installation in the Science Quad and at MASS MoCA, and a trip
64
to Storm King, a sculpture park located in upstate New York. Final grades will be determined by mid-term paper, presentation of the group project and completion
of associated essays synthesizing this collaborative work, and critical participation in discussions. The instructor is the Director of the Williams College Museum
of Art and has served as project manager for two public art works on campus. She was also the artistic lead for the new Olympic Sculpture Park on the Seattle
waterfront.
Format: seminar. Requirements: mid-term critical thinking paper, group project with presentation and individual paper, participation in class discussion.
Prerequisites: any 100-ARTS or ARTH, and any 200-level course in ARTS, ARTH, Theatre, Sociology, Environmental Studies, History, Psychology, Philoso-
phy, or permission of the instructor; this course is open to graduate art history students. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 14). Preference given to undergraduate art
history and studio art majors/graduate art history students.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 T CORRIN
ARTH 306T Inventing Christian Art (W) (Not offered 2011-2012)
Soon after the year 200 CE, the first Christian pictures appeared--in the form of quick, enigmatic sketches--scribbled on the walls of a few underground burial
chambers. By 450 CE,dazzlingly large Christian works of art--complex in content, sophisticated in craftsmanship, and made of the most sumptuous materials -
had begun to cover the vast interior surfaces of gigantic churches. By 600 CE, not only had this tradition of monumental public religious art spread around the
Mediterranean, but a new tradition of Christian devotional art had emerged, centered on the sacred portrait, known as the icon, an object often deemed capable
of performing miracles. Why did Christians begin to make art? Why did it take them nearly two centuries to do so? After its initial appearance, why did
Christian art evolve in the particular ways that it did, in terms of both its forms and functions? By addressing such questions, this tutorial aims to investigate not
only the origins of Christian art--an issue essential to understanding the entire history of Western European art--but also the new worlds (religious, political,
cultural) that this art helped to invent. At the same time, the course will trace another story of invention: the shifting interpretations of this art by art historians.
What sense have modern scholars made of Early Christian (often also termed "Late Antique") art? How have the questions asked of this art by scholars
changed over time? What can these changes tell us about the evolution of the discipline of art history itself?
Format: tutorial. Requirements: several papers of 5-7 pages, several written responses to the work of the tutorial partner, and one final paper evaluation will be
based on written work and critical conversation.
Prerequisites: at least one course in art history preferred. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to sophomores and then art majors.
Satisfies the pre-1400 or pre-1800 requirement.
LOW
ARTH 309 Art about Art: 1400-2000 (Not offered 2011-2012)
This thematic lecture course will focus on depictions through which artists referred to their own profession and its products. Images to be discussed include
legends of the origin of art, self-portraits and other portraits of artists, scenes of contemporary and historical artists in their studios, finished art on display, and
appropriation art. We will analyze specific images, comparing their implications with the social conditions as well as the theoretical positions then current in
order to track major changes from the end of the Middle Ages through the twentieth century.
The course will also acquaint students with the diversity of art-historical approaches that can be used to study these works.
Format: lecture. Requirements: Two 10 page papers. Those majors taking the course for Art H 301 credit would have to write methodologically explicit papers.
Prerequisite: ArtH 101-102. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). Preference: Art majors.
FILIPCZAK
ARTH 311(S) Infrastructure (Same as Environmental Studies 311) (W)
A seminar responding to the futurist Buckminster Fuller's often observing that when he flew into metropolitan airports at night, all the twinkling lights he saw
were but the aboveground protuberances, or expressions, of the underground systems sustaining urban life. And it was this larger design of interconnnectivity,
the buried and aboveground arteries, that he thought to be important. Hence a course in the history, and especially the visual expression, of public works: their
design and planning, from the college pump in Harvard Yard to New York City's Croton, Catskill, and Delaware systems for supplying potable water, including
the Third Tunnel now in construction. We will study pipelines, water (including irrigation) and sewer systems, dams, gas and electric transmission or distribution
lines (in their above and belowground guises), telegraph and telephone lines, radio, cell, and other communications towers, and maybe some transport linkages
as well--and their accompanying buildings or architecture. Could manhole covers and what they cover be one essence of our studies? And another, cartography?
And yet another, the depiction of these works by artists or documentarians? Some seminal figures and institutions in the history of public works will be given
prominence: like Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and the Tennessee Valley Authority, George Waring and Thomas Edison, Robert Moses and Fuller himself.
And we will be attentive as well to infrastructure monuments: the Schuykill water works, the Chicago pump house, Hoover dam, the early longdistance trans-
mission of electricity from a dam on the American River at Folsom, California into the city of Sacramento eighteen miles away.
Format: seminar. Requirements: weekly essays, field session, and obligatory late April overnight weekend field session in Montreal with the urban geographer
David Hanna of the Universite du Quebec a Montreal.
No prerequisites, but ArtH 201/ENVI 201 encouraged. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to Art majors, Environmental Policy majors, Envi-
ronmental Studies majors, Environmental Studies concentrators, upperclassmen, students with urban design or regional planning interests.
Hour: TBA SATTERTHWAITE
ARTH 317 Topics in Chinese Art (Not offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
This course is an in-depth thematic study of Chinese art in the context of its contemporary cultural phenomena. Topics of interest include "Picturing Power:
From Ritual Bronze Vessels to the Socialist Posters of the Mao Era; "Chinese Landscape Painting: Meanings and Functions;" "Gender Construction in Chinese
Art;" "Chinese Art in the Age of Exploration and Beyond: Western Influence in Chinese Art;" and "The Bold and Outrageous: Contemporary Chinese Art,"
among other things. Investigation of these topics offers students an understanding of the important development in style and subject matter in Chinese art, as
well as the aesthetic, theoretical, and cultural issues that underpinned this development. This course will also draw upon parallel topics that are discussed and
debated in other cultures so as to address the question of how the same human concerns expressed in art operate differently in different cultures. This class helps
students acquire critical reasoning and analytical skills in interpreting art and other cultural constructs.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: a series of short papers, including response papers, a final research paper, oral presentations, class attendance, class
discussions.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 16 (expected: 16). Satisfies the pre-1400 or pre-1800 or Art of Middle East, Asia and Africa requirement. Preference: none.
JANG
ARTH 329(F) Visual Politics (Same as Political Science 430)
(See under PSCI 430 for full description.) M. REINHARDT
ARTH 330T(F) Michelangelo: Biography, Mythology, and the History of Art (W)
One might argue that Michelangelo's enduring fame, and his preeminence in the western art historical canon, is as much a product of his artistic persona as his
artistic achievement. Indeed, the modern notion of the visual artist as a brooding, even tortured genius of unstoppable creative force finds its roots in the Italian
Renaissance. This is largely due to the singular figure of Michelangelo, whose life and career are more fully documented than those of any western artist to
precede him. And Michelangelo's mythic individuality, alongside his artistic innovations and contributions, have made him a fundamental force in the shape of
the history of art as we understand and study it today. Students of this tutorial will become well-acquainted with the life and work of Michelangelo through the
examination of a wide variety of primary and secondary sources: contemporary Renaissance documents, letters, poetry, and biographies; art historical surveys,
monographs, and studies; and documentary and popular film. They will give their critical attention, however, to the intersection between this artist's biography
and his artistic production. We will focus on a number of important questions arising from this connection. What, for example, is the nature and reliability of the
evidence used to reconstruct Michelangelo's life and personality? What are the grounds for interpreting his work according to his philosophical outlook, religious
beliefs, and even sexuality? To what extent was Michelangelo responsible for shaping his own persona for posterity? Is the myth of this artist distinguishable from
his "reality?" And to what extent have all these issues shaped our own thinking about artists and the history of art?
Format: tutorial. Requirements: evaluation will be based on the quality and improvement of written work (5 weekly papers and 5 response papers, and a final
written exercise addressing major themes of the tutorial), and oral dialogue.
Prerequisite: one Art History course of any level. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Open to sophomores, juniors, and seniors.
Satisfies the pre-1800 requirement.
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. SOLUM
ARTH 365(S) Non-Fiction and Experimental Film
This course examines the evolution--from the Lumiere brothers in 1895--of nonfiction filmmaking by historical period and national school, with emphasis on
the work of such masters as Flaherty, Ivens, Grierson, and Wiseman, and on such "schools" as the National Film Board of Canada. Special attention to the
documentary mode, its relationship to still photography, the analysis of cinematic form, and the influence of anthropology, war, propaganda, and television upon
65
the medium of film as an art form. Secondary consideration of experimental, avantgarde, or independent film, especially the work of Canadian animators like
Norman McLaren.
Format: screenings in addition to class meetings. Requirements: lectures, discussions, obligatory overnight field trip to Film Board in Montreal, oral reports,
occasional formal exercises and essays.
No prerequisites, though ArtH 201 recommended. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). Preference to senior American Studies or Art majors.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR SATTERTHWAITE
ARTH 376(S) The Path to Enlightenment: Zen and Zen Art In China and Japan (Same as Asian Studies 376 and Religion 252) (W)
This undergraduate seminar emphasizes writing, critical reasoning, and analytical skills. It explores a variety of Zen art forms {painting, sculpture, architecture,
ceramics, tea ceremony, and gardens} as expressions or visualizations of the ideals and doctrines of Zen Buddhism in the context of Chinese and Japanese
cultures. Attention will be paid to the study of Zen as a philosophy as well as a religion, Zen's aesthetic principles and iconographic development in Zen paintings,
and the political functions of Zen gardens and the tea ceremony in Japan's samurai culture.
Format: seminar. Requirements: one quiz; oral presentations; 4-5 short essays 2-3 pages, including position papers and oral presentation write-ups; a final paper
10-12 pages; contribution to discussion; class attendance.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 12).No preference. Students who do not show up in the first class will not be admitted.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W JANG
SEMINARS
ARTH 400(F) Clark Visiting Professor Seminar: Rewriting Visual Studies (Same as ArtH 500)
(See under ARTH 500 for full description.) ELKINS
ARTH 400(S) Clark Visiting Professor Seminar: Issues Raised by Art Since 1900 (Same as ArtH 500)
(See under ARTH 500 for full description.) ELKINS
ARTH 402 Monuments and The Art of Memorial (Not offered 2011-2012)
The urge to commemorate individuals, heroic acts or historic events whether unspeakable or splendid is both human and timeless. This seminar will document
and explore the concepts behind and the nature of monuments, both commemorative ones, and those that admonish or inform without commemorating a
specific event or individual. Students will study and analyze monuments and memorials from the ancient Mediterranean (Egypt; Mycenae; Greece of the
Archaic, Classical and Hellenistic periods; Imperial Rome) and chart their their influence on monuments in later history, especially those of the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries. The current trend towards countermonuments, or anti-monuments, such as Maya Lin's Vietnam Veterans Memorial or the Gerzes' vanish-
ing "Monument Against Fascism, War and Violence and For Peace and Human Rights" in Hamburg/Harburg will be discussed in light of the monumental
tradition of combining word, image, and architecture to create memorials that will endure in both spatial and temporal terms. Ongoing discussions of Holocaust
memorials and the problems inherent in the design of the monument for the WTC will also be addressed. More humble memorials, such as ephemeral installa-
tions, roadside shrines, and photographic assemblages will be included in the discourse concerning the concept of "monument" alongside topics such as historic
buildings and National parks.
Format: seminar. Requirements: participation in discussions, short response papers, two in-class presentations that provide material for a major term paper of
20-25 pages due at the end of the semester.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102 or permission of the instructor; students of History and Anthropology are also encouraged to enroll. Enrollment limit: 14.
Satisfies the pre-1400 requirement.
MCGOWAN
ARTH 405(S) Seminar in Architectural Criticism (W)
How does one judge a building? According to its structural efficiency or its aesthetic qualities? Its social responsibility--or just its pizzazz? Depending on the
building, and the critic, any of these questions might be pertinent, or impertinent. This seminar explores architectural criticism, that curious genre between litera-
ture and architecture, and looks at its history, nature and function. We will read and discuss classic reviews by historical and contemporary critics as John Ruskin,
Mariana van Rensselaer, Lewis Mumford, Ada Louise Huxtable and Herbert Muschamp. Insights gained from these discussions will be applied by students to
writing their own reviews, which will likewise be discussed in class. Early assignments will concentrate on mechanics: how to describe a building vividly and
accurately, how to balance description and interpretation judiciously, how to compare. Subsequent ones will be more synthetic, encouraging students to write
bold, lively and critical essays. The ultimate goal is to develop a distinctive and effective voice, and to gain a better understanding of the nature of criticism in
general.
Format: seminar. Requirements: Students will write and revise six papers (5-7 pages) during the semester.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102 and consent of instructor. Enrollment limit: 11. Preference given to junior Art History majors.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W M. LEWIS
ARTH 411 The Artist's Studio in the 19th Century, Real and Imagined (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
This course explores depictions of the artist in his or her studio in European art of the nineteenth century, including paintings, illustration, and fiction. Works by
Courbet, Manet, and Seurat, but also lesser known artists, across the century, who treated the studio as a site for self-fashioning and artistic self-invention.
Attention will also fall on the "erotics" of the studio, namely the presumed relationships between artists and models. Readings by 19th-century authors such as
Zola and Balzac, as well as modern art historical texts.
Format: seminar. Requirements: weekly readings, annotated bibliography, oral presentation, and research paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 12). Preference given to juniors and seniors.
GOTLIEB
ARTH 417 Gender Construction in Chinese Art (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)(D)
"One is not born, but rather becomes a woman--Simone de Beauvior"
This course will investigate how gender as a cultural and social construction is visualized in Chinese art. Issues of interest include how gendered space is
constructed in Chinese painting; how landscape paintings can be decoded as masculine or feminine; and ways in which images of women help construct ideas
of both femininity and masculinity. This course will also discuss Confucian literati's [ideals] [of] reclusion and homsociality; didactic art for women; images of
concubines, courtesans; and lonely women's isolation and abandonment. For example, while nature is often seen as feminine, Chinese landscape painting may
be coded as masculine due to its association with the Confucian scholar's ideals of eremitism, a means for the cultivation of the mind, and homosociality. On the
other hand, the placement of a masculine landscape in feminine space may be seen as rhetorical strategy, accentuating the lonely woman's isolation and aban-
donment, which are important tropes in Chinese erotic poetry as well.
This course fulfills the EDI requirement in that it is designed to enable students to study the logic of gender and sexuality in a context different from their own; to
see how both genders are constructed in relation to each other, and how they interact in the context of class, ideology, politics, and ideals, as well as how we may
compare their representation in China with those of other cultures, notably Japan and the West. Using both visual art and literature, this course also challenges
the gender stereotyping that still exists in current scholarship.
Students will submit five to six 1- to 2-page position papers about readings for the class; one 3- to 4-page midterm paper (draft and revision); two 2- to 3-page
respondent's written critiques; one 3- to 4-page pre-focus/focus paper (for final research paper proposal), and one 12- to 15-page final research paper (draft and
revision).
Format: seminar/discussion.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10).
Satisfies Art of Middle East and African requirement.
JANG
ARTH 421 Contemporary Art, Contemporary Methods (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
This course focuses on major developments in contemporary art practice over the last two decades and key methods that have developed to elucidate these
practices. The seminar is designed for both art history and studio art majors. As we explore various critical frameworks used to interpret and analyze contempo-
rary art, both studio and history majors will focus on expanding critical vocabularies and developing analytical skills in a manner that takes into account both
theory and practice. Throughout this process we will also critically examine the changing definitions and roles of artist, critic, curator, and audience. Topics will
include: installation, appropriation and the remix, globalization and hybridity, archival practices, and forms of participation and collaboration that generate new
66
audiences and/or sites of encounter.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class presentations, two short papers, one research paper, and presentations. Approximately 30 pages of writing.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 14 (expected:12). Preference: junior and senior Art majors
CHAVOYA
ARTH 422(F) Making the Stones Speak: The Emergence and Development Of the Romanesque Sculpted Portal
Beginning around the year 1000, European Christendom experienced a great ecclesiastical building boom. According to a contemporary chronicler, "it was as if
the whole earth, having cast off the old by shaking itself, were clothing itself everywhere in the white robe of the church." During the course of the eleventh
century, the designers of these structures fashioned a new architectural language that we now label "Romanesque." One of the most innovative and dramatic
aspects of this new language was its assimilation of monumental sculpture, absent in Europe since the fifth century. The focus of attention in this regard was the
portal, which marked the threshold between the profane realm of the outside world and the sacred space of the church. This seminar will investigate the anteced-
ents and origins of the Romanesque sculpted portal and examine in detail its greatest manifestations. Emphasis will be placed on understanding these often
complex sculptural schemes within their original functional and physical contexts. What role did this imagery play in structuring the medieval visitor's overall
experience of the church? And what did it mean to have this imagery carved into the very fabric of "God's temple"?
Format: seminar. Requirements: class discussion, class presentation, 15- to 20-page research paper.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 14. Preference given to Art majors.
Satisfies the pre-1400 or pre-1800 requirement.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 F LOW
ARTH 426 Pictures That Rocked the Nation: Courbet and Manet in Second Empire France (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality
Studies 426) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
How do we recognize or see diversity in the works of canonical artists? If modernist painting has often been understood to put pressure on existing power
relations, the stylistic innovation that defines it has just as often been used to veil its controversial subject matter. The aim of this course is two-fold: 1) to call
attention to difference through comparative analysis and to consider how and why identifying it is meaningful; 2) to detail the changes in historiography since
the 1970s that have enabled discussions of difference (sex, class, race, ethnicity, sexuality) and the challenges they present. The course demonstrates that the
Second Empire (1851-1870) in France was an especially fertile period for innovations in style and subject matter that generated both outrage and incomprehen-
sion. In the wake of the revolution of 1848, realism and its rallying cry ("il faut tre de son temps") brought home subjects that heretofore had been safely
displaced to the classical or exotic worlds as they were imagined by the West. The Second Empire coincided with the birth of mass culture so that artists had
access to new types of imagery and increasing contact with racy and controversial subjects.
This course will investigate polemical works by Gustave Courbet (i.e. Burial at Ornans, Origin of the World) and Edouard Manet (i.e. Olympia, The Execution
of Emperor Maximilian) through the lens of critical writings of the 1850s and 1860s (i.e. Baudelaire, Proudhon, Zola) as well as revisionist writings from the
1970s to the present (Carol Armstrong, Homi Bhahba, T.J. Clark, Lee Edelman, Diana Fuss, Sander Gilman, Zine Magubane, Linda Nochlin, and Gayatri
Spivak). We will consider the relationship of Manet's and Courbet's works to academic ones, including orientalist paintings by Ingres and Grme, and to
vanguard pictures of the next generation (i.e. the homoerotic work of Caillebotte and Bazille, the "sex workers" of Degas's toilette scenes). Finally, we will
examine the legacy of Courbet and Manet during the period when difference began to be represented in the work of artists such as Judy Chicago, Yasumasa
Morimura, Cindy Sherman, Samuel Fosso, and Carrie Mae Weems.
Format: seminar. Requirements: weekly 1- to 2-page position papers; oral presentation and final research paper, 10-15 pages.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected:12). Preference may be given to students with course work in French
history or literature and/or Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies.
OCKMAN
ARTH 432 Domestic Visual Culture in Renaissance Florence (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 432) (Not offered 2011-2012)
Fifteenth-century Florence nurtured a burgeoning culture of image production. This remarkable proliferation of images, and the rapid development of visual
idioms, has given the Tuscan city a privileged art historical position as the birthplace of the Renaissance and, traditionally, the basis of the first chapter in the
story of artistic development and progress in the west. The domestic palace, as it emerged during this period, was a crucial site for the production and reception
of new kinds of objects; indeed, many Renaissance touchstones--Botticelli's Birth of Venus, Leonardo's Mona Lisa, and Michelangelo's Doni Tondo, to name
just a few examples-were originally commissioned for (and viewed within) a domestic setting. In this course we will examine the Renaissance palace itself, as
well as a constellation of diverse images once housed within it including traditional panel paintings, painted furniture and wall-hangings, ceramics, and ritual
objects. We will pose questions about the relationship between these images and the people who commissioned them and lived with them, focusing especially
on issues of gender and power. Our investigation of domestic art will be grounded in the larger historiographic problem of Renaissance individualism; in other
words, we will use this material in order to consider, critique, and refine traditional conceptions of the Renaissance as a historical period.
Format: seminar. Requirements: evaluation will be based on oral participation and short response papers, one oral presentation, and a 15- to 20-page research
paper.
Enrollment limit: 12. Preference given to seniors.
Satisfies the pre-1800 requirement.
SOLUM
ARTH 451 Ideal Bodies: The Modern Nude and Its Dilemmas (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 451) (Not offered
2011-2012)
The nineteenth century is so dominated by the female nude that the very term "nude" has come to stand for the female body. And yet, the history of the nude
during this period is not devoid of male bodies. This course looks at both male and female nudes in order to understand how the nude became gendered female.
Required readings include Kenneth Clark's classic study The Nude: A Study in Ideal Form (1956) and Lynda Nead's The Female Nude: Art, Obscenity and
Sexuality (1992), with special attention to texts which show how the nude and the discourse of the ideal function to obscure social issues. We will explore the
ways in which certain types of bodies have been defined in opposition to the white western ideal, and thereby exoticized or marginalized. Our prime focus is the
work of David, Ingres, Gricault, Courbet, Manet, and Renoir but more popular nineteenth-century images as well as selected works by artists working today
will be discussed.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on biweekly 1-page papers, short reports, an oral presentation and a 10- to 20-page paper.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102; permission of instructor required.Enrollment limited to 12. Preference given to junior Art majors, Women's, Gender and Sexuality
Studies majors and History majors with a concentration in European studies.
OCKMAN
ARTH 460(S) Klee/Picasso: Versions of Modernism
Since the 1920s Pablo Picasso (1881-1973) has been universally viewed as [the] dominant representative of European classic modernism--"all in all, the painter
of today," the German painter Paul Klee (1879-1940) called him. On the other hand, Klee himself, once seen as an idiosyncratic albeit absolutely central figure
within modern art, has become increasingly marginalized in historical accounts and scholarly debates about the movement, resulting, one could argue, in an
impoverished, distorted understanding of what was at stake in the art of this period. For together, arguably more than any other two artists of their era, they
exemplify the range and richness of what modernism was. In no two other artists of their generation does one find such a fecundity of formal invention, such a
range of technical experimentation. Each engaged in his distinct way in a radical rethinking of the enterprise of pictorial representation, and yet both were intent,
despite that radicalism, in a dialogue with history. Restoring Klee to his rightful place as a central, defining figure within the period, this seminar will comparative-
ly examine these two artists and their respective practices, with the goal of achieving a more nuanced understanding of the art-historical phenomenon known as
modernism.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on regular participation in class discussion, a thirty-minute oral presentation, and a revised, expanded written version of
that paper.
Prerequisites: ArtH 263 (European Painting and Sculpture, 1900-1945) or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 14 (expected: 14). Preference given to
senior art history majors who have taken ArtH 263.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 T HAXTHAUSEN
ARTH 461T Writing about Bodies (Same as INTR 461 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 461) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
The goal is to think about describing bodies from a variety of disciplinary approaches and genres of writing. Its focus is on living bodies, or bodies that were
once alive, with an emphasis on bodies that move i.e., performing bodies--actors, dancers, singers--and what makes them unique. We will also consider
objects associated with bodies, and the ways they are animated, including how they are animated when the person who had them dies. The course is meant for
67
juniors, seniors, and graduate students who wish to analyze bodies from different disciplinary formations-art, theatre, literature, anthropology, philosophy--and
who have a particular interest in writing. We will read scholarly writing, fiction, New Yorker profiles, as well as memoir/autobiography, and take each as a
model through which to write about a person or an object redolent of a person.
Possible readings: Roland Barthes on cultural theory and representation; Zine Magubane and Zadie Smith on othered bodies; Tamar Garb on portraiture; Elaine
Scary on the body in pain; Joan Acocella, Hilton Als, Judith Thurman and other writers on the arts; Judith Butler and Peggy Phelan on the performative body;
Joseph Roach, Diana Taylor, and Michael Taussig on the body, memory, and ritual; Marvin Carlson and Terry Castle on haunting; and Bill Brown on things.
These will be supplemented by selected tapes of live performances as well as films.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: alternating weekly essays (4-5 pages) and responses (2-4 pages) as well as discussion; a final paper that distills the writer's own
project from these cumulative exercises.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102, or permission of the instructor; a writing sample that conveys the kind of subject you might be interested in pursuing. Enrollment
limit: 10 (expected: 10).
OCKMAN
ARTH 462 Art of California: "Sunshine or Noir" (Same as American Studies 462 and Latina/o Studies 462) (Not offered 2011-2012)
California has long been considered a land of "sunshine and noir," unique in the national and international imagination as a land of physical recreation and
destruction, aland of opportunity and social unrest. In this course, we will study the visual arts and culture of California from the 1960s to the present. Although
we will focus on southern California, particularly Los Angeles, we will also consider movements in San Diego and the San Francisco-Oakland Bay Area. The
course will approach California pop, conceptual, funk, performance, installation, public, and media arts to pursue questions of influence and interpretation
concerning the relations between space, place, identity, and style in the visual arts and popular culture. Alongside analyzing California's visual culture, we will
examine the region's cultural geography through historical and theoretical readings. Particular attention will be given to the region's special relations to Holly-
wood, the automobile, beach-surf culture, and the great diversity that characterizes the state.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on two research papers and a presentation.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101-102. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15).
CHAVOYA
ARTH 463 The Holocaust Visualized (Same as Jewish Studies 463) (Not offered 2011-2012)
This seminar will examine how memories of the Holocaust have been conveyed through visual means and consider what historical, cultural and political
circumstances have caused various nations to remember the Holocaust differently. We will discuss the issues prompted by public memorials, exhibitions and, as
one writer puts it, the "museumification" of concentration camps. How should we define the Holocaust? Whose memory should take precedence? Should we
allow collapsing sites of memory to collapse. What is lost or gained by the inclusion of texts with images? How might memory be misrepresented by the
exhibition of visual materials such as video testimony, photographs and artifacts? In addition, we will study art about the Holocaust, including Art Spiegelman's
graphic novel, Maus, and films, such as Night and Fog, Shoah and Schindler's List, to ask whether constructed or simulated images can convey the experience
of the Holocaust as well as documentary ones. Additionally, we need to consider ways in which the images of the Holocaust, by now too well-known, have
been instrumentalized by groups wishing to minimize the Shoah (e.g., the recent Holocaust cartoon competition in Tehran, 2006.)
Format: seminar. Requirements: active participation in class discussion and regular participation in a class list server discussion group, one oral pre-
sentation, and one research paper; no exams.; fieldtrip to the Holocaust Museum in Washington, D.C. (estimated cost: $260).
No prerequisites; not open to auditors or first-year students. Enrollment limit:12.
This course is part of the Jewish Studies concentration.
E. GRUDIN
ARTH 464 Latina/o Visual Culture: Histories, Identities, and Representation (Same as Latina/o Studies 464) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(D)
This course examines the contemporary history of Latina/o visual culture and explores the various relations between cultural expression, identity formation, and
public representation. We will begin by considering the critical and aesthetic practices that emerged in the context of civil rights actions and nationalist move-
ments, which often focused on issues of visibility, self-representation, and autonomy. The topics of immigration, transnationalism, and the "Latinization" of the
United States will then be analyzed in depth as we examine representations of and representations by Latina/os in film and television, the visual arts, advertising,
and other forms of popular media. Throughout the course, we will investigate the role of visual culture in determining taste and trends as well as shaping notions
of belonging and cultural citizenship.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class participation, a research presentation, several short writing assignments (1-2 pages), and a final research
paper.
Prerequisites: LATS 105 or ArtH 101-102 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 12). Preference given to Latina/o Studies and Art History
seniors and juniors.
CHAVOYA
ARTH 465(S) Mining the Museum: Critical Revisions of Museum History and Practice (Same as ArtH 564)
(See under ARTH 564 for full description.) CORRIN
ARTH 470(S) Image-making, Orientalism and Visual Culture (D)
Images enjoy extraordinary power in the spaces between self and other, human and divine. They play myriad roles--witness, surrogate, instigator, supplicant--
and travel freely across political, religious and cultural boundaries. This course is about three regions--United States, France and the Persian sphere--and the
images that mediate and document their interactions. Along the way, we will address important issues like iconoclasm and aniconism, common types like veiled
women and pious men, and asymmetrical relationships like orientalism and Islamicism. The peculiar nature of portraiture will be a prominent theme. This course
fulfills the Exploring Diversity Initiative in its emphasis on comparative cultures and its effort to promote understanding of contextualized meanings in diverse
settings.
Format: seminar. Requirements: Oral presentation, term project; students will give oral presentations and complete a semester-long project.
Prerequisites: one Art History class. Enrollment limit: 12. Preference given to majors, permission of instructor.
Satisfies the Art of Middle East, Asia and Africa requirement.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 R H. EDWARDS
ARTH 472 Forbidden Images? (Not offered 2011-2012)
Islam forbids the depiction of the human figure, right? Wrong. There is actually a long and rich tradition of figural imagery, particularly in Iran, Afghanistan and
India. Many of those images occur in the context of Persian manuscripts, but the introduction of photography generated new possibilities and controversies.
This seminar will explore the history of Muslim image making and related questions about representation, iconoclasm, and power in the Islamic world.
Format: seminar. Requirements: students will have access to original materials and they will be expected to produce a major term project.
Enrollment limit: 12.
Satisfies the Art of Middle East, Asia and Africa requirement.
H. EDWARDS
ARTH 494(S) Honor's Thesis Seminar
To graduate with honors in art history, students are to enroll in the Senior Honors Seminar during the Spring semester of their senior year, where they will develop
an original research paper based on prior research. Under the guidance of the instructor, students will present and defend their own work in both written and oral
form, as well as respond to, and critique, the work of their peers. As students work toward transforming their existing paper into an honor's thesis, they will also be
trained in skills necessary to analyze an argument effectively, and strategies of constructive critique.
Format: seminar. Once in the seminar, students will revise, refine and expand on previous research and produce a paper of approximately 25 pages and present a
shortened version of the paper to the faculty and public at the Williams College Museum of Art.
Prerequisites: to be admitted to the seminar, students must have completed ArtH 301 in their Junior year. To enter the class, students must either be nominated by a
faculty member, or apply independently to the Department Honors Committee for admission. Students who have been nominated, as well as students who wish to
apply for admission to the Honors Seminar, must submit an original research paper that was completed in a prior art history class. The paper must be properly
formatted and include illustrations, a bibliography, and an abstract of not more than 250 words. These documents are to be turned in to the Department Secretary
no later than the end of the exam period of the Fall semester. The Department Honors Committee will invite students (no more than 10) to enroll in the Honors
Seminar Based on the quality of the original research, the student's GPA within the major, and the willingness and availability of appropriate faculty advisors.
68
Notification of admission to the seminar will be sent to students by early January. Since enrollment is by invitation only, students should pre-register for four
classes and, if invited, add the Honors Seminar during drop-add period. The Honors Seminar is to be taken in addition to the required courses for the major.
Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 6). Permission of instructor required.
Does not satisfy the seminar requirement.
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M SOLUM
ARTH 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
ART STUDIO COURSES
ARTS 100 Drawing I (Not offered 2011-2012)
Looking closely at the world is one of the great pleasures of living and drawing is a excellent way to find this happiness. In class and in weekly assignments, we
will use a variety of media to describe objects, landscape, architecture and the human figure. Divided into sections on line, composition, proportion, value and
space, the course is designed for those with no previous experience in drawing, but it is flexible enough to challenge experienced students.
Format: studio. Evaluation is based on the following: successful application of new skills, participation in class, effort, development of concept, timeliness and
attendance. Lab fee.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15. (expected 15). This course may not be taken on a pass/fail basis.
ARTS 100(F) Drawing I
The process of drawing develops a heightened awareness of the visual world. Your subjective experiences and your objective experiences combine to form a
larger perceptual understanding of the environment in which you live. Drawing allows you an alternative use of these processes and provides a format for stating
what you know about the world. Drawing is an excellent means for improving your skills in observing, seeing distinctions, and creating new meanings from your
perceptions. This is an introductory course which will investigate the properties of making an image on the twodimensional page. While drawing is an essential
basis for much of the artmaking process, its use is not limited to artists. Design, illustration, engineering, and science are among the many fields which incorporate
drawing. There are three to five sections of ArtS 100 offered each semester. Although individual faculty members teaching beginning drawing do not follow a
common syllabus, they share common goals. Syllabi for each section are available from the secretary's office in the W. L. S. Spencer Art Building.
Format: studio. Evaluation will be based primarily on the quality and quantity of work produced as well as some attention to the student's progress. Lab fee.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20. Preference given to Art majors and firstyear students. This course cannot be taken on a pass/fail basis.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 M First Semester: SOUTH
1:10-3:50 T Second Semester: JACKSON
ARTS 100(F,S) Drawing I
The purpose of this course in beginning drawing is to advance your understanding of fundamental aspects of the language of visual communication and expres-
sion. Through the development of greater visual acuity, an examination of the structure of the two dimensional image, and the study of appropriate working
methods, you will work to give coherent visual form to your own observations, and will develop an enhanced ability to understand the images created by others.
The development of appropriate technical skills, strengthening of observational skills, and a basic understanding of the interrelationship between form and con-
tent in drawing are the key aims of this course.
Format: studio. Evaluation will be based primarily on the quality of work produced as well as some attention to the student's progress.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 18 (expected: 18).
This course may be taken on a pass/fail basis.
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M First Semester: LEVIN
7:00-9:40 p.m. M Second Semester: LEVIN
ARTS 100(F,S) Drawing I
This course is designed to introduce the fundamentals of drawing. A significant portion of class time will be devoted to learning some of the basics of drawing,
such as line, gesture, composition, and value. Acquiring technical skill is an important goal of this class, and intensive weekly assignments are a significant part of
that process.
Format: studio. Evaluation will be based primarily on the quality of work produced, successful completion of all assignments, and attendance. Lab fee.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 18 (expected: 18).
This course may not be taken on a pass/fail basis.
Hour: 9:00-11:50 T ALI
1:10-3:50 M TAKENAGA
ARTS 101 Artists Respond to Contemporary Events (Same as American Studies 101) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
This introductory video production course focuses on how contemporary artists engage their historical moment. We will look ways in which the moving image
can be used to reckon with the force that historical events have on us, and the ways in which we might hope to have force on historical events. Examples will
include works made in Hollywood and for broadcast television, as well as work by artists and activists. Our focus will be on work related to U.S. events in the
present and the recent past.
Films and videos studied may include works by: S.R. Sidarth, Julia Meltzer and David Thorne, Oliver Stone, Omar Fest, Michael Winterbottom, Sharon
Hayes, Jayce Salloum and Elia Sulieman, Gus Van Sant, Marco Loera, Spike Lee, WITNESS, Common Ground Collective, TVTV, ACT UP, Paul Chan,
Kelly Anderson and Tami Gold, the Yes Men, and many others. Reading a newspaper or online news source will also be required.
Format: studio. Students will produce three short videos, and will learn substantial techniques related to shooting and editing in experimental, fictional, and
documentary forms.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 12). Preference given to first- and second-year students.
L. JOHNSON
ARTS 107(S) Creating Games (Same as Computer Science 107)
(See under CSCI 107 for full description.) MCGUIRE
Does not satisfy any requirement for the Art major.
ARTS 108 Creating Bodies (Same as ArtH 108) (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course looks at the human body, clothed and nude, from many perspectives, including that of the visual artist, the art historian, the performer and the
creative writer. It is intended to introduce both the experiential and conceptual dimensions of the body and to develop skills in critical thinking. Students will
meet for lecture and discussion once a week. Twice a week students will attend a figure drawing workshop to study basic drawing skills like line, proportion,
composition, light and space. Studio sessions will be coordinated with the lecture and the readings to explore topics such as naked vs. nude, movement, specta-
torship, the construction of identity, and portraiture. Possible texts for purchase: Roland Barthes' Camera Lucida, John Berger's Ways of Seeing, and Mark
Doty's Still Life with Oysters and Lemon. All of the drawing will be done in class. Drawing supplies will be provided and charged to the term bill. The studio
and scholarly components of the course will be weighed equally in the final evaluation of student achievement.
Additional Info: this course may be taken for Art History or Studio Art credit and students should choose the appropriate course number when enrolling; Art
History majors may take the class to fulfill the studio art requirement for the major; if they wish to do so, they should register for the course as ARTS 108
Format: lecture, discussion and studio workshop; two class meetings and viewing time in the Clark Art Institute and/or Williams College Museum of Art are
also required. Requirements: assignments are limited to weekly readings and one short paper; participation in class discussion is expected and will be evaluated.
No prerequisites; students who have no previous drawing experience are encouraged to enroll. Enrollment limit: 32 (drawing sections limited to 16);
expected enrollment: 32. Preference given to first-year students, art majors, sophomores.
Material and Lab Fees: $150.00-200.00.
GLIER and OCKMAN
ARTS 111T Photographic Montage and Collage (Not offered 2011-2012)
It is all about the edge. Montage is the seamless combination of photographs which begs the viewer to suspend disbelief and embrace the new composite reality.
Collage also yields an alternate reality by combining multiple photographs but here the process unabashedly reveals itself. In this course, students will learn
basic photographic techniques as well as use found photographs to make both collages and montages. These combinations will be made with razor blades and
69
glue as well as in Photoshop.
Format: course activities will include demonstrations, slide lectures and meetings with a tutorial partner to critique the assignments
Requirements: evaluation will be based on the level of formal and technical competence of the portfolio as well as the conceptual strength and sophistication of
the work completed.
Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 12). Preference given to first-year students and sophomores.
LALEIAN
ARTS 200(S) Costume Design (Same as Theatre 305)
(See under THEA 305 for full description.) BROTHERS
This course does not satisfy any requirements for the Art major.
ARTS 201(S) Theatrical Staging and Design: Process of Collaboration (Same as Theatre 201)
(See under THEA 201 for full description.) BAKER-WHITE
This course does not satisfy any requirements for the Art major.
ARTS 202 Movement and Art Making (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course will investigate the connections between dance and visual art. Students will learn and use techniques from dance that can apply to the representation
of action in drawing, painting, photography, video and other forms. Artists noted for the ability to express motion or collaborate with dancers that we will
examine include Edward Muybridge, Barbara Morgan, Picasso, Walkowitz and Jacob Lawrence. Dancers with a history of collaboration with visual artists we
will study include Martha Graham/ Isamu Noguchi, Martha Graham/ Barbara Morgan and Lucinda Childs/Sol Le Witt.
The class will visit designated exhibitions at WCMA, MASS MoCA and other museums or galleries throughout the semester and attend dance concerts at the
'62 Center and MASS MoCA. We will also view media, discuss selected readings and participate in special sessions with guest artists and curators. Require-
ments: ajournal documenting process with readings, discussions, field trips, media etc. (journals are submitted three times for instructor review and comments),
midterm project that is presented and discussed in class, final project that is a synthesis of their learning for presentation and discussion.
Format: studio/seminar. Evaluation based on class participation, quality of midterm and final projects, attendance and journal.
Prerequisites: experience in a visual art medium (painting, drawing, photography, film) or experience in dance (Modern, African, Ballet, Hip-Hop, etc) pre-
ferred.
Does not satisfy any requirements for the Art major.
BURTON
ARTS 204(S) Perceptual Intelligence (Same as Dance 204)
(See under DANC 204 for full description.) VAN DER KOLK
ARTS 205(F) "New" Choreography (Same as Dance 302)
(See under DANC 302 for full description.) VAN DER KOLK
ARTS 220(S) Architectural Design I
Instruction in design with an introduction to architectural theory. Five simple design problems will explore form and meaning in architecture. Each problem will
require drawings/model and will be critiqued in a class review with outside critics.
Evaluation will be based on quality of design, with improvement taken into account. Lab fee.
Prerequisites: ArtS 100; ArtH 101-102 strongly suggested. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15). Permission of instructor is required. Registration does not guar-
antee admission to the course.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 F BENEDICT
ARTS 221 Scenic Design (Same as Theatre 302) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under THEA 302 for full description.) MORRIS
ARTS 230(F) Drawing II
This advanced drawing course will continue to investigate the techniques, principles of organization, and ideas which were introduced in the Drawing I course.
Having become more familiar with the drawing process, students will be encouraged through intensive weekly assignments to expand and challenge the conven-
tions of markmaking. As with any discipline, familiarity with the rules allows the users to seek alternatives and develop definitions of how the drawing process
can best be suited to their own visual vocabulary. The range of exercises could include traditional materials on paper as well as non-traditional methods and
exercises.
Evaluation will be based on evidence of each student's progress, as shown by the weekly assignments and final portfolio. Attendance and participation in class
discussions are also considered part of the course evaluation. Lab fee.
Prerequisites: ArtS 100. Enrollment limit: 15. This course may not be taken on a pass/fail basis.
Hour: 9:55-12:35 T SOUTH
ARTS 241 Painting (Not offered 2011-2012)
In this course, we will begin to explore the options that painting with oils has to offer. The class will be focused on developing necessary technical skills, such as
the manipulation of color, value, surface, and texture. We will also begin to consider issues of content and representation by looking at a diverse range of
paintings, both in the museums that we have on campus as well as in regular slide presentations.
Evaluation will be based on fulfillment of assignment objectives, technical execution/craftsmanship, conceptual and physical investment of time, participation
in critiques, and attendance. Lab fee.
Prerequisites: ArtS 100. Enrollment limit: 15.
EPPING
ARTS 241 Painting (Not offered 2011-2012)
The variables of oil painting are so numerous that the permutations are endless. As an introduction to basic variables like color, brushwork, surface, form and
light, this course is the beginning of what may be a life long, creative adventure through the medium of paint. Most assignments are done from direct observa-
tion of the human figure, the landscape and objects. Museum visits and slide presentations are an important part of the class.
Format: workshop. Requirements: weekly assignments.
Prerequisites: Arts 100 and 108.; Arts 230 recommended. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15). Preference given to majors, sophomores, juniors, seniors.
Lab fee: $375.
GLIER
ARTS 241(S) Painting
In this course, we will begin to explore the intellectual possibilities and physical permutations associated with the act of painting. The class will be focused on
developing necessary technical skills, such as the manipulation of color, value, surface, and texture primarily through direct observation of objects, as well as, the
figure. We will begin to consider issues of content and representation, and support this, by studying a diverse range of artists in slide format, through local sources
such as WCMA, and in regular readings and homework assignments.
Evaluation will be based on fulfillment of assignment objectives, technical execution/craftsmanship, conceptual and physical investment of time, participation in
critiques, and attendance. Lab fee.
Prerequisites: ArtS 100. Enrollment limit: 15. Preference given to majors, sophomores, juniors, seniors.
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M and 2:35-3:50 R JACKSON
ARTS 243(F) Acrylic Painting
In this course, we will explore the options that painting with acrylic can offer. The class will focus on developing necessary technical skills, such as the manipula-
tion of color, value, surface, and texture. We will also consider issues of content in a diverse range of approaches, including painting from life (still life and
portraits), abstraction, and some mixed media. The particular characteristics of acrylic paint will be explored in a variety of processes. There will be visits to the
museum, critiques, and slide presentations.
Format: studio. Evaluation will be based on the quality of work, investment of time, participation in critiques, and attendance.
Prerequisites: ARTS 100. Enrollment limit: 14 (expected: 14). Preference given to art majors.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 M TAKENAGA
70
ARTS 252 The Human Image: Photographing People and Their Stories (Same as INTR 252) (Not offered 2010-2011)
(See under INTR 252 for full description.)
ARTS 253(F) Film Photography
An Introduction to black and white film photography. Students will shoot with cameras provided by the art department; both 35mm single lens reflex cameras and
4x5 inch monorail view cameras. Students will learn how to process film and make prints. The assignments will guide students through the ideas and aesthetics
related to these particular cameras, primarily in the 19th and 20th centuries. Some thought and discussion of what role, if any, film photography has in the 21st
century, after the advent of digital. Meant as a companion course to Arts 254, (Digital Photography) the assignments in this course will allow students to engage
with the aspects of photography which are best done with film and silver printing. Substantial amounts of work will be done outside of class, and in the Spencer
Art darkroom.
Format: studio. Evaluation is based primarily on the quality of the photographic portfolio produced; technical and conceptual sophistication, demonstrated com-
prehension of the ideas contained in the assignments, and individual progress will determine the final grade.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15). Preference given to Art majors.
Hour: 3:10-4 W Lab: 1:10-2:25 MR, 2:35-3:50 MR LALEIAN
ARTS 254(S) Digital Photography
Cell phones and scanners, along with Digital SLR cameras, will be used as image capture devices. Instruction in Photoshop software on the Macintosh platform
and printing on a variety of digital media will be taught. Assignments will investigate the influence of these digital technologies on art photography. Meant as a
companion course to Arts 253, (Film Photography) the assignments in this course will allow students to engage with the aspects of photography, which are best
achieved digitally. Substantial amounts of work will be done outside of class, in the Mac lab in Jesup and in the digital printing lab in Spencer Art. With the
exception of camera phones, the college will provide all other equipment necessary to complete coursework.
Format: studio. Evaluation is based primarily on the quality of the photographic portfolio produced; technical and conceptual sophistication, as well as individual
progress will determine the final grade.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 12). Preference given to Art majors.
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M and 2:10-3 W LALEIAN
ARTS 255 Photographic Time and Space (Not offered 2011-2012)
An introduction to the practice of photography with an emphasis on the vision that is unique to the camera: the particular manner in which three-dimensional
reality is rendered on the two dimensional, light-sensitive plane. The course will concentrate on the study and creation of imagery which is dependent on the
specificity of photographic vision. Students will receive instruction on the workings both film and digital cameras (provided by the department), development
of black and white film, digital color and basic printing techniques. Students will be asked to respond to a series of assignments. A substantial amount of lab
time, in addition to the class meetings, is necessary to complete these assignments. Students' works are evaluated individually and in class critiques throughout
the semester.
Evaluation will be based on the level of formal and technical competence of the portfolio as well as the conceptual strength and sophistication of the work
completed. Lab fee.
Prerequisites: ArtS 100. Enrollment limit: 12. Preference given to Art majors and to those non-majors who have been bumped from ArtS 255, 256 in the past.
LALEIAN
ARTS 256 Fabricated and Manipulated Photography (Not offered 2011-2012)
Fabricated and Manipulated Photography A directorial approach to photography in which events are staged for the camera and images are manipulated.
Photographs are preconceived yet simultaneously altered by the alchemy inherent to chemical photography.
Students will learn to use 4x5 film cameras and slr digital cameras (both provided by the department). A series of assignments will be completed using Photo-
shop software, basic color digital printing as well as the development b/w film and the basics of b/w printing technique. Lab time, in addition to the class
meetings, is necessary to complete these assignments. Students' works are evaluated individually and in class critiques throughout the semester.
Evaluation will be based on the level of formal and technical competence of the portfolio as well as the conceptual strength and sophistication of the work
completed. Lab fee.
Prerequisites: ArtS 100. Enrollment limit: 12. Preference given to Art majors.
LALEIAN
ARTS 263(S) Printmaking: Intaglio and Relief
An introduction to printmaking through the process of intaglio and relief. Techniques will include drypoint, etching, and aquatint. Monotypes, some color work,
collage, and hand tinting will also be covered. Both technical skill and a strong conceptual basis will be emphasized in order to create finished fine art prints.
Experimentation is encouraged. Class time will consist of studio work, demonstrations, lectures, critiques, and field trips.
Format: studio. Evaluation will be based on attendance, participation in class, and the quality of work produced. Lab fee.
Prerequisites: ArtS 100. Enrollment limit: 12.
Hour: 9:55-12:35 T TAKENAGA
ARTS 264 Printmaking: Lithography (Not offered 2011-2012)
An introduction to printmaking through the process of lithography. Students will work on both stones and aluminum plates. Techniques will include traditional
lithographic processes as well as monotyping, multiple plates, collage, and hand tinting. Both technical skill and a strong conceptual basis will be emphasized in
order to create good, finished, fine art prints.
Format: studio work, demonstrations, lectures, critiques, and field trips. Evaluation will be based on attendance, participation in class, and quality of work
produced. Lab fee.
Prerequisites: ArtS 100 or ArtS 103. Enrollment limit: 12.
ARTS 266(F) Low Tech Printmaking
This course will cover a variety of easy techniques to make multiple images, including xeroxing, linoleum plates, stencilling, cardboard plates, collagraphs, and
monotyping. Students will be encourage to handcolor or add to the prints, incorporating drawing, painting, photography, bookmaking and collage. With less
emphasis on complicated techniques, the focus of the course will be more upon form and content, investigating how the reproductive and serial nature of print-
making have an impact upon artmaking. There will be a minimum of five assignments during the semester and students are expected to work substantial hours
outside of class.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based on the quality of the finished work, attendance in class and participation in critiques. Lab fee.
Prerequisites: ArtS 100. Enrollment limit: 12
Hour: 9:55-12:35 T TAKENAGA
ARTS 275(F) Sculpture: Cardboard and Wood...Plus
This course is an introduction to the media and processes of sculpture. The focus will be on the interplay of form, concept, and material. Incorporating a variety of
materials is encouraged, yet there will be an emphasis on learning the techniques and processes of woodworking as they relate to sculpture. This course is based
on a series of sculpture projects which will have you investigating both the formal and the conceptual aspects involved in creating personal statements in a visual
format. A substantial amount of time outside of class is necessary to complete these projects.
Evaluation will be based on the quality of work produced, depth and quality of investigative process, participation in critiques, and attendance. Lab fee.
Prerequisites: ArtS 100 or ArtS 103. Enrollment limit: 12.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W PODMORE
ARTS 276(S) Sculpture: Metal and Plaster Plus
This course is an introduction to the media and processes of sculpture. The focus will be on the interplay of form, concept, and material. A variety of materials will
be explored; however, the emphasis will be on techniques and processes associated with metal and plaster and how they relate to sculpture. Metal techniques will
include gas welding, arc welding, and MIG welding. Plaster processes will include modeling and casting. This course is based on a series of sculpture projects
which will investigate both the formal and the conceptual aspects involved in creating personal statements in a visual format. A substantial amount of time outside
class is necessary to complete these projects.
Evaluation will be based on the quality of work produced, depth and quality of investigative process, participation in critiques, and attendance. Lab fee.
Prerequisites: ArtS 100. Enrollment limit: 12.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 T PODMORE
71
ARTS 284(F) Writing for Film, Video, and Performance (Same as Theatre 284) (W)
This is a writing workshop for the time-based arts. The course will focus more on the process of writing and artmaking than on the final product of a film or video.
We will study the use of language in a variety of kinds of film, video, and performance-based artworks. We will study examples in avant garde film, video art,
performance art, narrative cinema, and essay films. Students will generate monologues, voiceovers, screenplays and avant garde forms, and will also write several
response papers about the use of language in film, video, and performance.
Format: studio. Grades will be based on in-class writing, weekly assignments, and workshop discussion, and on several sketch-like video-based assignments.
Enrollment limit: 12 (expected 10).
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W L. JOHNSON
ARTS 288(F) Video
Video is an introduction to the moving image as a fine arts medium. The course will involve hands-on production as well as contemporary screenings and readings
that demonstrate elements of the medium. The course will look specifically at performance, sound, exhibition context, documentary, high and low production
values, appropriation, writing, and analysis. The course will introduce shooting and editing skills, including preproduction skills such as storyboarding and script-
ing, production skills such as directing, shot composition, lighting, and sound recording, and postproduction editing skills in a range of styles.
Evaluation will be based on the technical and conceptual strength of the tapes, with consideration given to individual development. Lab fee: $100-150.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 R L. JOHNSON
ARTS 310T Appearance/Disappearance (Not offered 2011-2012)
Appearance and disappearance are conditions that intuitively and intellectually link a subject to its surrounding environment. We are made aware of things
appearing (or disappearing) by the degrees and kinds of contrasts exhibited by the subject (ideas or objects) in relation to its ground (ephemeral or material). The
particular array of relationships between subject and ground constructs diverse kinds of evidence. From medical research in the imaging processes of the inter-
nal body to the forensic cues offered by the "black box" in-flight recording; from the military use of camouflage to the video taped "appearances" of Osama bin
Laden; from the inability of an eating disorder patient to recognize a self image to the masquerades we willingly wear-appearance and disappearance have
governed the evidences of our actions, beliefs and identities.
This image-based studio examination of the subject will look at material that has been shaped by its link with our central theme. Each of five studio projects will
successively build a cumulative view of how appearance and/or disappearance might shift a viewer's ability to render any point of view. While work in a variety
of media will be encouraged, most of the studio exercises will be two-dimensional or low-relief in their final presentation.
Format: tutorial. Evaluation will be on the basis of the technical and conceptual strengths of the portfolio, the weekly paired-student format and full class studio
discussions, and regular written analysis of work produced during this term. Lab fee.
Prerequisites: any one of the following: ArtS 230, 241, 242, 257, 263, or 264. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 12). Preference given to Art majors. (Note:
Students only need to be available one hour during the stated time. Students who have time-conflicts with another course should contact the instructor.)
EPPING
ARTS 315(S) Realisms: Courbet to Mumblecore
This 300-level video production seminar will look at traditions in realism and historical styles of representing everyday life. Students will consider pre-cinematic
realisms in painting and literature, classical formations of Hollywood realism, Italian Neorealism, critical and New Wave relationships to realist practice, recent
forms of neorealism from Iran, China, and the U.S., and the everyday aesthetics of mumblecore. Students will produce three short videos in relation to screenings
and readings in different realist traditions, and will develop skills and technique related to traditions of narrative realism. This thematic seminar will help students
develop basic skills in screenwriting, performance, and cinematography, at the same time as raising questions about realism's place in relation to the legacies of
formalist modernism in the visual arts, contemporary critical art practice, and the realist expectations of American "mainstream" cinema. While the focus of the
seminar will be on students' own production, coursework will be informed by engaging with work by John Ford, Mike Leigh, Roberto Rossellini, Jean-Luc
Godard, Chantal Ackerman, Andy Warhol, Abbas Kiaorastami, Jia Zhangke, Kelly Reichardt, and Aaron Katz, and will also involve critical studies that position
realism in relation to traditions in art history, cinema, and theater, including readings by Clement Greenberg, Bertolt Brecht, Andre Bazin, Augusto Boal, Rosalind
Krauss, Hal Foster, Moyra Davey, and many others.
This course is appropriate for art majors who may be beginning students in the medium of video, or for students who have taken a previous video production
course or Writing for Film Video and Performance.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on three short videos and occasional brief writing exercises.
Prerequisites: open to art majors and students who have taken another video course. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 12). Preference given to art majors.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 R L. JOHNSON
ARTS 317T The Miniature (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course will involve the critical analysis and production of works of art done on a small scale. If art on the largest scale is inherently public in nature, what is
the nature of the miniature? The miniature has fulfilled many functions: images of remembrance, the portrait of a beloved, devotional objects, art made as an
object of contemplation and wonder. The language of the miniature is intimate, private, and bears the authority of understatement. Our involvement with many
works of art is likely to be distanced, in time and in space. Our involvement with the miniature is close, highly personal, and frequent. Course assignments will
examine the inherent qualities of the work in miniature, and ask students to create work to fulfill historically defined and innovative functions. The assigned
work can be executed in any medium in which the student has completed an introductory course. Students will meet in pairs, together with the instructor, and
the students will present critical responses to the works in progress and upon completion. Readings will be assigned to focus this critical analysis. In addition to
the production of miniatures, each student will research and deliver critical presentations on related contemporary or historical works.
Format: tutorial. Evaluation will be based on the quality of the assigned work, the engagement in the critique process, and quality of presentations.
Prerequisites: any ArtS 200-level course. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to Art majors.
LEVIN
ARTS 319(F) Junior Seminar
The objectives of this intensive seminar for studio majors are to strengthen both creative and technical skills (through weekly studio projects) and analytical and
critical abilities. Students are also assigned readings and film/video viewings and required to visit local museum exhibits as part of the assignments. Lab fee.
Format: seminar and studio workshop. Evaluation will be based on the quality of work produced, participation in class discussions and critiques, successful
completion of all assignments and attendance.
Prerequisites: three studio courses required for the major, including at least two which are 200 level or higher; enrollment is limited to studio art majors (or
permission of instructor). Studio and History and Practice majors are required to take this course in the junior year unless studying abroad during the fall semester.
Preference to Studio Art and History and Practice majors, Art History majors. Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 M ALI
ARTS 322T(F) The Empowered Object
The development of "found objects" in the language of art have played a significant role in constructing meaning in the consciousness of the twentyfirst century.
This tutorial will have students explore that tradition further through their own creative endeavors. They will be asked to add to the lineage of art that uses "found
objects" in a creative and meaningful way. They will have the freedom to choose which medium will convey their ideas most effectively. They include, but are not
limited to: sculpture, painting, drawing, photography, printmaking and video. For example, within the investigation of the "found object," projects could include:
still life painting with a focus on the objects, 2dimensional work depicting or incorporating real objects, collage, assemblage, etc. The "found object in art" will
be examined through: art practice, readings and presentations. Three projects will be completed. As a tutorial, the course is designed to meet individual needs and
to stress student participation and responsibility for learning. Students will meet weekly with a peer and the professor to review work.
Format: tutorial. Evaluation is based on the conceptual and technical quality of the work as well as the level of participation in the tutorial meetings. Students are
required to purchase their own materials.
Prerequisite: any 200-level art course in the area that you are planning to work that is housed soley in the studio wing of the art department. Enrollment limit: 10
(expected: 10).
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M PODMORE
ARTS 324(F) The Documentary Photography Project (Same as INTR 324)
While every image documents something, the field of documentary photography traditionally uses still images to relate a story about the events and people that
shape our world. Students will learn skills required to produce an effective visual narrative. Technical aspects of image acquisition that are particularly useful in
conveying information will be reviewed, including manipulation of exposure controls, wide angle composition, and location lighting. Conceptual topics will
72
include myths about "truth" and "objectivity" in photography, and the responsibilities of the documentarian to his/her subjects. Students will practice different
types of documentation, from news photography to photoessays, and consider techniques for approaching, photographing and interviewing subjects. The practi-
cal aspects of developing a story, gaining access, working in unfamiliar environments and editing both individual images and series will be examined. Students
will work throughout the semester on planning and executing a documentary project, culminating in an exhibition of their work. Participants will use college
supplied digital cameras, and should expect to spend significant time working outside of class.
Format: studio. Requirements: class attendance is mandatory; 30% participation in class discussion and critiques, 30% aesthetic and technical strengths of shoot-
ing exercises, 40% aesthetic and technical strength of final project.
Prerequisites: any full semester photography course or any full semester video course, or portfolio review. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference based
on portfolio review.
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M GOLDSTEIN
ARTS 329(F) Architectural Design II
A continuation and expansion of ideas and skills learned in Architectural Design I. There will be four to six design projects requiring drawings and models, each
of which will emphasize particular aspects of architectural theory and design. Visiting critics will discuss student work. The course is useful for students thinking
of applying to graduate school in architecture.
Evaluation will be based on quality of designs during the term. Lab fee.
Prerequisites: ArtS 220 is highly recommended. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15).
Hour: 1:10-3:50 F MCCALLUM
ARTS 333T(F) Narrative Strategies (Same as Comparative Literature 333)
In this tutorial, we will examine the use of narrative in a range of fine art practices, which could include painting, drawing, video, sculpture, installation, public art,
and sound art. Students who are interested in telling or referencing stories in their work in some way will be given the opportunity to develop their ideas and skills
in a challenging studio class. In addition to intensive projects, we will look at and discuss the work of artists such as Huma Bhabha, Kara Walker, Joe Sacco, Lydia
Davis, Matthew Barney, Raymond Pettibon, Todd Solondz, Sophie Calle, Jenny Holzer, and Jessica Stockholder among others. One of the aims of this course is
to challenge traditional notions and expectations of narrative. For instance, what could minimally constitute a narrative piece? How do different mediums allow
for time to unfold in unexpected ways? How does omission play a powerful role in a narrative? How might the role of the narrator (often so powerful and present
in novels and short stories) change in a visual arts context? Preference given to studio majors
This is a studio tutorial with an emphasis on demanding, weekly projects. Students will work both in mediums of their choice and be asked to experiment with
new, unfamiliar formats. Readings and screenings will be required in addition to tutorial hours. Students are required to have taken two 200 level classes in any
medium (or by permission of the instructor).
Format: tutorial. Evaluation based on assignments, studio performance, class participation, and attendance.
Prerequisites: students are required to have taken at least two Studio Art 200 level classes in any medium (or by permission of the instructor). Enrollment limit: 10
(expected: 10).
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 T Lab: 7-9:40 p.m. M ALI
ARTS 344 Abstraction (Not offered 2011-2012)
Abstraction has been a persistent and defining visual idea of the twentieth and twenty-first century. This workshop for intermediate and advanced drawing,
painting and sculpture students will investigate the principles of abstract design as well as some of the artists that helped to develop the genre. Among the
concepts to be explored are cubism, field composition, and gestural painting. Students will work from a variety of sources, including the human body, still life,
and found photography. Although the majority of assignments are in drawing and painting, the final multi-week independent project may be realized in multi-
media.
Format: studio; the final four weeks will be dedicated to independent projects. Requirements: weekly studio assignments. Evaluation will be based on the
quality of visual projects, and class participation.
Prerequisites: ArtS 230 or a 200-level painting course or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 15. Preference: studio art majors, seniors, juniors,
sophomores.
GLIER
ARTS 350T The BIG Picture (Not offered 2011-2012)
Installation practices, scale changes and serial imagery are transforming our spatial experience and temporal understanding of the photographic image. The size
of photographic prints has grown enormously in the past thirty years. Photographs compete with paintings for white wall real estate. There are technological,
economic and aesthetic reasons for this dramatic change in scale. This course will address the conceptual and technical challenges of large format printing and
the making of large composites of photographs. Students will have an opportunity to work in a variety of media, both chemical and digital, dictated by the
nature of the ideas generated in tutorial sessions with colleagues. Lab fee.
Format: tutorial. Evaluation will be based on the portfolio produced and participation in the weekly tutorial meetings.
Prerequisites: ArtS 255, 256 or 252. Enrollment limit: 10.
LALEIAN
ARTS 364T Artists' Books (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course will investigate the processes and ideas associated with the making of artists' books, works that are fine art objects that generally use visual images
and/or text. For example, individual projects could include visual diaries, three-dimensional pop-up books, solely visual narratives, autobiography, literary
text/image collaborations, animated "\"flip" books, or sculptural books. Limited-editions as well as one-of-a-kind work will be encouraged. Media options
include painting, drawing, etching, lithography, relief printing, photography and bookbinding techniques (from sewn bindings to boxes). As a tutorial, this
course is designed to support individual directions, to stress student participation and responsibility for learning, and to examine different points of view. Stu-
dents will meet in groups of two for critique of individual projects in the tutorial format each week--students are expected to give 20- to 30-minute presenta-
tions about their work and to respond to questions and criticism. Students will also meet once a week as a group for demonstrations, lectures, and discussion of
readings.
Format: tutorial. Evaluation will be based on student participation and the conceptual and technical quality of the work. There will be required field trips during
the semester to the Chapin Library, the Clark Art Institute, and WCMA. Lab fee.
Prerequisites: any ONE of the following: ArtS 230, 241, 257, 263, 264, or 266. Enrollment limit: 9.
TAKENAGA
ARTS 418(S) Senior Seminar
The primary emphasis of the senior tutorial is on strengthening the individual student's ideas, formal skills, and critical analysis for the creation of visual objects
and/or events. At the beginning of the term, studio art majors, in consultation with the tutor, will determine the individual projects that will serve as the focus of
their work for the semester. During the course, students are expected to refine their creative directions in a coherent and structured body of work which will be
exhibited at the Williams College Museum of Art. Students are responsible for buying their own materials. Lab fee.
The primary emphasis of the senior tutorial is on strengthening each student's individual voice as an artist, with regards to their ideas, formal skills, and critical
analysis. At the beginning of the term, studio art majors, in consultation with the tutor, will determine the individual projects that will serve as the focus of their art
work for the semester. During the course, students are expected to refine their creative directions in a coherent and structured body of work which will be exhib-
ited at the Williams College Museum of Art. Senior Art majors who wish to pursue a more structured course are encouraged to take a second 300level tutorial
instead of 418. Students are responsible for buying their own materials.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on the quality of work produced, depth and quality of invesitgative process and participation in critiques and tutorials.
Prerequisites: completion of all other studio courses required for the art studio route. Permission of the instructor is required for the history and practice route to the
major. Enrollment limit: 18. No student will be accepted into an independent study project unless he/she has completed two 200level ArtS courses and one
300level ArtS tutorial. With current staffing limitations, it is difficult for studio faculty to supervise more than a very few independent studies projects. We feel our
curriculum includes rich and varied offerings and believe that the need for most independent work can be met through those regular offerings.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W PODMORE
ARTS 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
With current staffing limitations, it is difficult for studio faculty to supervise more than a very few independent studies projects. We feel our curriculum includes
rich and varied offerings and believe that the need for most independent work can be met through those regular offerings.
73
Prerequisites: no student will be accepted into an independent study project unless he/she has completed two 200-level ArtS courses and one 300-level ArtS
tutorial. Permission of instructor is required.
GRADUATE COURSES IN ART HISTORY
Requirements for the Degree of Master of Arts in Art History
To qualify for the Master of Arts degree in art history, candidates complete a minimum of eleven courses for graduate credit plus two winter study periods, the
latter comprising a Study Trip in the first year (ARTH 51) and preparation of a Draft Qualifying Paper in the second (ARTH 52). Students must also demonstrate
reading proficiency in two foreign languages, one of them German (for more specific information on the language requirements, see below, after the listing for
ARTH 597/598). At the end of the second year, all students present a shortened version of the Qualifying Paper in the annual Graduate Symposium.
At least seven of the eleven courses must be graduate seminars. Included among them are three required of all students: ARTH 504, "Methods of Art History
and Criticism," to be taken during the first semester; ARTH 506, "An Expository Writing Workshop," to be taken in the second; and ARTH 509, "Graduate
Student Symposium," to be taken in the fourth.
Students must also fulfill a distribution requirement by undertaking coursework in three of six areas:
(1) East Asian, Indian, Islamic art
(2) Ancient Near Eastern, Egyptian, Greek, and Roman art
(3) Early Christian, Byzantine, and Western Medieval art to 1400
(4) Western art, 1400 to 1780
(5) Western art, 1780 to present
(6) Arts of Africa, Oceania, and the Americas (Pre-Hispanic or Native American cultures)
Students may petition the Director to apply a thematic or non-period specific course toward the distribution requirement by demonstrating substantial work in
an appropriate area.
Undergraduate Courses and Private Tutorials
With permission from the Director and the individual instructors, students may take up to four undergraduate courses for graduate credit, with the understand-
ing that research papers submitted in such courses meet a standard commensurate with those prepared for graduate seminars. Students who wish to take under-
graduate courses for graduate credit must receive permission of the instructor.
In addition to regularly offered seminars and classes, students may arrange up to two private tutorials (ARTH 595/596) by submitting petitions to the Director
describing the substance of their projects, including bibliography, and the nature of the work they will submit for evaluation. The petitions must be co-signed in
advance by both the students and their faculty supervisors.
Of the minimum requirement of eleven courses, the combined number of private tutorials and undergraduate courses applied to the degree may not exceed
four.
The Qualifying Paper
The Qualifying Paper is normally a revision of a seminar or private tutorial paper produced in one of the previous three semesters, expanded and refined over
the second Winter Study term and a portion of the fourth semester. Students submit the topic of the Qualifying Paper in writing to the Director by the final day of
exams of their third semester. Before this, students must obtain their original faculty supervisor's agreement to be engaged in the Qualifying Paper process.
On the first Friday of their fourth semester, students submit drafts of their Qualifying Paper, including illustrations, to three faculty readers (generally the
original faculty supervisor. the Director, and the Associate Director). Although a draft, this version of the paper should be brought to a high level of completion.
Early in the fourth semester, students and their readers meet together to discuss the drafts. Within six weeks of these discussions (at a date determined by the
Director), students submit their Qualifying Papers. Qualifying Papers should not exceed 8,000 words, including footnotes and bibliography.
The Graduate Symposium
All second-year students speak in the Symposium, presenting 20-minute talks developed from their Qualifying Papers. Each has an ad hoc committee to
advise them in preparing these presentations (ad hoc committees comprise, but are not limited to, the Director, one additional faculty mentor, one first-year
graduate student, and one second-year graduate student). Preparations include at least three practice runs for each student. Speakers present the first and third of
these run-throughs to the ad hoc committee, the second to the other second-year students in a workshop scheduled by the Director.
Grades and Academic Standing
The Program uses the following grading system:
A+ = truly exceptional (4.33) B = satisfactory (3.00)
A = outstanding (4.00) B- = barely adequate (2.67)
A- = excellent (3.67) C = inadequate (0)
B+ = good (3.33) E = failing (0)
Courses in which students receive a grade below B- do not receive graduate credit.
Letter grades are used in all seminars except ARTH 509. It and the Winter Study courses (ARTH 51 and 52) are Pass/Fail. Grades in language courses are
converted to Pass/Fail on the Williams transcript and are not calculated in the GPA. The Director reviews students' records at the end of the first year; those with
GPAs of 3.00 or lower may be asked to resign from the Program.
Course instructors set the deadlines for coursework. If students seek and receive extensions that result in semester grades of Incomplete, they must hand in their
work by the instructor's revised deadline, which will be no later than the second Monday of the next semester's classes. Extensions beyond this date will be solely
at the discretion of the Director (in consultation with the instructor).
Students who resign from the Program may, after a period of at least one year, petition to the Director for re-admission. Such a petition must include evidence
that deficiencies have been remedied and that the student is capable of completing the course of study without further interruption.
The M.A. requirements are designed for completion in two consecutive academic years in residence. There is no credit for coursework done prior to matricula-
tion in the Program. The Program is full-time and does not normally admit students on a part-time basis.
ARTH 500(F) Clark Visiting Professor Seminar: Rewriting Visual Studies (Same as ARTH 400(F))
In 2008, graduate students at the School of the Art Institute in Chicago initiated an unusual project: a next-generation anthology of visual studies, to be written
entirely by graduate students. By 2010, the project had 80 chapters written by graduate students from several dozen countries. The book is now in its final stages;
it will be published in 2012 by Routledge. The book is intended to question the conceptual foundations of visual studies, and to enlarge the field's range of
theoretical and artistic references. There is room in the manuscript for 16 more essays, 1,500 words each. We will read several existing anthologies of visual
studies (Nicholas Mirzoeff, Lisa Cartwright and Marita Sturken), and several theoretical texts that bear on the field (Susan Buck-Morss, Whitney Davis, Sunil
Manghani, Gustav Frank), and consider the optimal form of the Reader. Students will then read and analyze the manuscript, and contribute, as credited authors, in
the editing and writing of the final essays.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class participation and written work.
Enrollment limit: 16, with places for 8 undergraduate [ARTH 400] and 8 graduate students [ARTH 500] assured. Preference given to senior Art History majors
and Graduate Program students.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 R ELKINS
ARTH 500(S) Clark Visiting Professor Seminar: Issues Raised by Art Since 1900 (Same as ARTH 400(S))
Art Since 1900 is rapidly becoming the de facto text for twentieth-century art in English- and Spanish-speaking countries. It presents a version of the increasingly
ubiquitous October model of art history: it privileges North America and western Europe; it draws on a distinct set of methodological concerns; it focuses on
surrealism, photography, and the modernist avant-garde; and it demonstrates (as Terry Smith has said) a series of modernist moments that can be considered as
contemporaneities. Given the worldwide diffusion of Euramerican models of art history, it is crucial to rethink Art Since 1900, and attempt to produce an alternate
history. This class will read the book itself, selected reviews, and a sampling of pertinent literature (Smith, Iftikhar Dadi, John Clark, Parul Mukherji, Elaine
O'Brien, Kobena Mercer, Matthew Rampley's survey of art history in Europe). Students will be expected to theorize the pedagogic issues created by Art Since
1900, and they will also contribute, as credited authors, in the editing and writing of a multiply authored work in progress on this subject.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class participation and written work.
Enrollment limit: 16, with places for 8 undergraduate [ARTH 400] and 8 graduate students [ARTH 500] assured. Preference given to senior Art History majors
and Graduate Program students.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 R ELKINS
74
ARTH 503(S) Studies in Decorative Arts, Material Culture, Design History, 1700-2000
The course will explore the methods, goals, and theoretical framework in which three-dimensional, functional objects have been and are interpreted. Class discus-
sion will include distinction between "fine arts," "decorative arts," and "design;" role and limitation of connoisseurship; the current relationship of object study to
aesthetics, social history, history of technology, anthropology, sociology, gender and ethnic studies; the effect of the market on history and scholarship; and current
theories on the role of objects in human life.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on leading class discussions of selected readings, one 20-page paper, two 3-page papers, and an oral presentation on the
main research topic.
Enrollment limit: 14. Preference given to Graduate Program students and then to senior Art History majors.
Hour: 2:10-4:50 T CONFORTI
ARTH 504(F) Methods of Art History and Criticism
This is a seminar in the intellectual history of the history of art, with some concentration on the ways in which this disciplinary tradition has been challenged by
recent critical theory. It will begin its study with the "founders" of the field and end with issues and problems that generated the "new art history" twenty years ago
and "visual studies" in the last decade. Topics to be covered include: style, iconography/iconology, semiotics, identity politics, formalism, deconstruction, pheno-
menology, psychoanalysis, feminism, Marxism, and gender studies. Resident Clark Fellows will occasionally talk to us on perspectives of their choice.
Format: seminar. Each student will write one short midterm paper and a longer concluding essay, as well as present a couple of the readings to the class.
Limited to and required of first-year students in the Graduate Program in the History of Art.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 T HOLLY
ARTH 506(S) An Expository Writing Workshop
A common and depressing consequence of too much education is how our writing tends to devolve, as the task of saying what we mean is complicated by new
anxieties: trying to impress our potential employers, intimidate our competition, and claim our place in an intellectual community. In many professions, bad prose
tends to proliferate as scholars, trying above all to avoid mistakes, become tentative, obscurantist, and addicted to jargon. In this course we will try to relearn the
basic skills of effective communication and adapt them to new and complicated purposes. In class we will go over weekly or bi-weekly writing assignments, but
we will also look at the essays you are writing for your other courses, to give them an outward form that will best display their inner braininess. Among other
things, I am a fiction writer, and part of my intention is to borrow the techniques of storytelling to dramatize your ideas successfully.
Limited to and required of first-year students in the Graduate Program in the History of Art.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 M PARK
ARTH 507(F) Universal Expositions and the Empire of Spectacle
This course will examine a number of universal expositions that took place in France, England, and America in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. These
exhibitions--part architectural display, part trade show, part art exhibition, part demonstration of national strength--drew crowds from all over the world to
participate in what was often a spectacular display of imperialist power. The course will treat the architectural, artistic, and engineering innovations produced in
and around the exhibitions, keeping in mind the theme of globalization (in its economic, cultural, and political aspects). We will treat topics such as: the Crystal
Palace, one of the first examples of a monumental iron and glass architecture, designed by Joseph Paxton at the 1851 expo in England; Courbet's and Manet's
independent exhibitions held in conjunction with the 1855 and 1867 Paris exhibitions, respectively; Mary Cassatt's murals for the Woman's Pavilion at the World
Columbian Exhibition in Chicago in 1893; the pavilions designed to show off European colonial holdings at the 1900 exhibition, such as those of India, Indochi-
na, Tahiti, etc. (and which often included human displays); the impact of such pavilions on Western European and American artists and architects such as Gau-
guin, Rodin, and Frank Lloyd Wright; the use of expositions as spaces for architectural experimentation, such as Melnikov's Soviet Pavilion and Le Corbusier's
Pavillon de l'Esprit Nouveau at the 1925 Exposition des arts dcoratifs.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class participation, presentation of research, and a term paper of 20-25 pages.
Enrollment limit: 14. Preference given to Graduate Program students and then to senior Art History majors.
Hour: 10:00-12:30 R D'SOUZA
ARTH 508(S) Art and Conservation: An Inquiry into History, Methods, and Materials
This course is designed to acquaint students with observation and examination techniques for works of art, artifacts, and decorative arts objects; give them an
understanding of the history of artist materials and methods; and familiarize them with the ethics and procedures of conservation. This is not a conservation-train-
ing course but is structured to provide a broader awareness for those who are planning careers involving work with cultural objects.
Classes are held at the WACC in the Stone Hill Center on the Clark campus. Field trips this semester will include the Governor A. Nelson Rockefeller Empire
State Plaza Art Collection in Albany, New York, and two others to be announced. Students receive a syllabus with session outlines and required reading lists.
Required reading is mainly from books on reserve at the Clark Library. No book purchases are required.
Format: slide presentations, lectures, gallery talks, hands-on opportunities, technical examinations, and group discussions.
Attendance is required at all sessions. The course grade is based on exams given throughout the semester; there is no final exam.
Enrollment limit: 14. Preference given to Graduate Program students and then to senior Art History majors.
Hour: 6:30-8:30 MR BRANCHICK and WACC staff
ARTH 509(S) Graduate Symposium
This course is designed to assist qualified fourth-semester graduate students in preparing a scholarly paper to be presented at the annual Graduate Symposium.
Working closely with a student and faculty ad hoc advisory committee, each student will prepare a twenty-minute presentation based on the Qualifying Paper.
Special emphasis is placed on the development of effective oral presentation skills.
Requirements: each student will present three dry runs and a final oral presentation at the symposium.
Prerequisites: successful completion and acceptance of the Qualifying Paper.
Limited to and required of second-year students in the Graduate Program in the History of Art.
Hour: bi-weekly meetings TBD, in addition to dry runs. GOTLIEB
ARTH 510(S) Approaches to Drawing from Connoisseurship to Conceptualism
This course will consider the art of drawing as a pedagogical tool and cultural practice from the 16th to the 20th century. Creative and commercial forces over four
centuries have fostered different types of and reasons for production: presentation drawings in 16th-century Italy, an increased market for drawings in 17th-centu-
ry Holland, a fashion for powdery pastels in 18th-century France, and the critical promotion of drawing as a form of autographic thinking in the 19th century.
Drawing has enjoyed a resurgence in the last fifty years as Minimalism and Conceptualism have the pushed the medium's boundaries. Equal consideration will be
given to the history of collecting and to materials from the invention of the Cont crayon to the deteriorating effects of acidic paper. The class will be held in the
Manton Study Center for Prints, Drawings, and Photographs with visits to the Williams College Museum of Art and other area museums.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on involved class participation, several short presentations, one short paper, and a term paper of 20 pages.
Enrollment limit: 14. Preference given to Graduate Program students and then to senior Art History majors.
Hour: 1:30-4:00 W CLARKE
ARTH 512(F) Hellenistic Sculpture and the Beginning of Art History
The Hellenistic period begins with Alexander the Great's extension of the borders of the Greek world from the central Mediterranean to the banks of the Indus
River. Kingdoms replaced city-states as important centers of power. Increased trade and movement of individuals between Greece, Egypt, and the Near and
Middle East encouraged a cross-cultural examination of religion, philosophy, literature, and art. The new cosmopolitan attitude brought about not only a revolu-
tion in sculptural ideals and forms but in the approach towards art in general. Museums and libraries are established for the first time, and the concept of collecting
art takes hold. We see a historical self-consciousness and self-referential quality in sculpture as well as a new interest in theatricality and the diversity of human
nature and experience. This course will explore Hellenistic sculpture through the close study of individual works of art of the fourth through first centuries B.C.E.,
as well as the broader philosophical, religious, literary and political forces that encouraged its innovations. Reading material includes J.J. Pollitt, Art in the Helle-
nistic Age, R.R.R. Smith, Hellenistic Sculpture, ancient literature in translation, and recent critical essays.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on participation in class discussion and two short reports that will form the basis for a term paper of 20 pages.
Enrollment limit: 14. Preference given to Graduate Program students and then to undergraduate Art History or Classics majors.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 M McGOWAN
ARTH 555(F) John Singer Sargent
In this seminar we will consider the life and art of John Singer Sargent (18561925). Paintings in the collection of the Sterling and Francine Clark Art Institute will
focus our discussions and provide the basis for exploring his artmaking and his place within the artculture of his day. Sargentborn in Italy, trained in France,
active in Englandepitomized the cosmopolitanism of American artists in the late 19th century. Consideration of his career will encourage us to think about
75
questions of nationality; the mechanisms of fame in the modern art world; the tension between the lures of artistic tradition and innovation; and the fluctuating
taste for his art among critics, collectors, and historians of the past century.
Format: seminar. Students' responsibilities will include class discussion, weekly summaries of readings, two short papers, an oral presentation (and response to
someone else's), and a final research paper (2025 pages). A field trip to Boston is likely.
Enrollment limit: 14. Preference given to Graduate Program students and then to senior Art History majors.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 F SIMPSON
ARTH 561(F) Why Divide Up Picasso?
Art historians have imposed order on the many changes in Picasso's seven-decade career by a variety of means. A sampling of styles includes the two main stages
of Cubism, at least two periods of Classicism, and the "starter" phases dubbed the "Blue" and "Rose" Periods. For a discipline historically groomed in all matters
of chronological development, the restlessness in Picasso's work raises thorny questions. This seminar takes up their challenge via a particular concern for the
pre-Cubist, early Picasso. Our readings will pay special attention to those scholars who have grappled with Picasso's divisions (including Lisa Florman, T.J.
Clark, and the literary critic Marjorie Perloff) without neglecting commentaries on Picasso's work now considered virtually as monumental as the artist himself
(Gertrude Stein's Picasso; Leo Steinberg on the Demoiselles).
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class participation, 3 book reports (distributed in advance and discussed in class) and one end-of-semester paper of
10-15 pages.
Enrollment limit: 14. Preference given to Graduate Program students and then to senior Art History majors.
Hour: 10:00-12:30 T MacNAMIDHE
ARTH 562(S) The Face: Image, Theory, Politics
This is a class about faces: how we think about them, how we represent them in images and words, and how we respond (and sometimes do not) to the meanings
they express. Psychologists have shown that we are born with an innate preference for face-like visual patterns, and as our minds develop, the cognitive impor-
tance of faces only grows with age and enculturation. Idiomatic phrases such as "face to face," "to lose face," "to show one's face," and "two-faced" suggest how
deeply intertwined is the human countenance with our everyday grasp of psychological concepts like mind, identity, and character. In this interdisciplinary semi-
nar, we will explore attempts by modern artists, scholars, and scientists to describe, comprehend, and sometimes even capture what makes the human face so
special. We will look at images of faces and masks in modern art and literature (including works by Francis Bacon, Nancy Burson, Chuck Close, Don DeLillo,
Orlan, Tony Oursler, Gerhard Richter, August Sanders, Cindy Sherman, Fiona Tan, and Andy Warhol); art historical writings about the face and portraiture (Bal,
Elkins, Fried, Gombrich, Koerner); close-ups of the face in films (Dreyer, Bergman, Balazs); historical accounts of physiognomy (Gray, Pearl); philosophical
reflections on the meaning of faces (Wittgenstein, Levinas, Deleuze); and psychological research on face perception and recognition (Baron-Cohen, Ekman,
Fridlund).
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class participation, presentation of research, and a term paper of 20-25 pages.
Enrollment limit: 14. Preference given to Graduate Program students and then to senior Art History majors.
Hour: 10:00-12:30 R RHIE
ARTH 564(S) Mining the Museum: Critical Revisions of Museum History and Practice (Same as ArtH 465)
This course will engage the evolving field of museology, the critical study of the museum--its history, its ideology, its practices, and its policies. In considering
"the museum" as the object of our inquiry, we will think about the impossibility of separating art and artifact from their institutional context. We will also reflect on
how the museum shapes the perception and reception of objects. Our readings will cover historical, theoretical, and critical positions from across the disciplines.
We will study modern and contemporary works by artists that appropriate the museum's unique visual "language" and that have also engaged in an institutional
critique. Artists to be considered include: Marcel Duchamp, Piero Manzoni, Andy Warhol, Hans Haacke, Fred Wilson and Mark Dion. Finally, we will examine
how museums have responded to issues raised by these critical revisions--for example, by changing approaches to the presentation of collections. Several class
meetings will involve field trips to area museums to create opportunities to integrate class discussions with conversations among students, curators, and museum
directors.
Format: seminar. Evaluation: students will prepare for and lead class discussions related to readings; they will complete two short critical analysis assignments
focusing on museum visits and one research paper that will be presented to the class in its preliminary stage prior to completion by the end of the course.
Enrollment limit: 14, with places for 7 undergraduate [ARTH 465] students (Juniors and Seniors only; preference will be given to declared majors in art history
and art studio practice) and 7 graduate students [ARTH 564] assured.
The instructor is the former director of the Williams College Museum of Art.
Hour: 10:00-12:30 T CORRIN
ARTH 595(F), 596(S) Private Tutorial
Students may petition to take a private tutorial by arrangement with the instructor and with permission of the Graduate Program Director.
ARTH 597(F), 598(S) Undergraduate Lecture Course Taken for Graduate Credit
LANGUAGE COURSES
The Graduate Program's degree requirements include reading competence in two languages (other than English) of scholarly and academic relevance to the
history of art. One of the two languages must be German. Many students select French as the second although, with permission of the Director, other languages
may serve. The Program offers dedicated courses in reading French and German for art history. Other language classes at Williams are listed in the course catalog,
although the coordination of undergraduate and graduate schedules can be challenging.
Incoming students' language preparation is assessed through exams administered at the outset of the semester. In French and German, scores attained on SAT
II reading examinations determine placement within the twosemester French/threesemester German sequence. If students attain a minimum score of 700 on
the placement exam, they are exempted from further coursework in that language. With a score between 500 and 700, they are placed into the graduate course of
readings in art history, French 512 or German 513. With a score below 500, they enroll in the appropriate introductory course (French 511 or German 511/512). In
the case of a second language other than French, arrangements will be made on an individual basis.
Returning students who have completed GERM 512 may, with the prior approval of the Director, satisfy the requirement of GERM 513 by successfully
completing an intensive Germanlanguage summer course.
GERM 511(F)-512(S) Reading German for Beginners (Same as German 111(F)-112(S))
German 511-512 is for students whose principal reason for acquiring German is to work with written materials. It is particularly appropriate for students majoring
in fields in which the ability to read primary and secondary texts in German can be crucial, such as Art History, Comparative Literature, History, Music, Philoso-
phy, Political Science, and Theatre. In the first semester students learn the elements of grammar and acquire a core vocabulary. In the second semester, while
covering advanced grammatical topics, they practice reading in a variety of textual genres in the humanities and social sciences. They also learn how to work with
dictionaries, encyclopedias, and other reference works, in both printed and online forms. By the end of the course they will have a solid foundation for building
proficiency in German, whether through self-study or further course work. Credit granted only on successful completion of 512.
Format: lecture and discussion. Principal requirements: written homework, quizzes, tests, active class participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 15). Preference given to Graduate Program students, seniors and juniors.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF B. KIEFFER
GERM 513(F) Readings in German Art History and Criticism
This is an advanced course in German reading, focused on the literature of art history. Texts are selected from fundamental works of art history and criticism and
from the writings related to concurrent seminars in the Graduate Program. The course includes a grammar review.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on written homework, quizzes, tests, and class participation.
Prerequisites: German 511-512 or equivalent preparation (a score of 500 or higher on SAT II German Reading Test).
Enrollment open to Graduate Program students; others by permission of the instructor.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF E. KIEFFER
RLFR 511(F) Intensive French Grammar and Translation
This course is designed to offer students a thorough and systematic review of sentence structures and grammar. Through this intensive study, students will learn to
decipher the subtleties of the written language, and as they become more confident they will start translating a variety of short excerpts. Students are also expected
to learn and develop a wide lexical range centered on art history and criticism, but not limited to it.
Format: Classes meet twice weekly and are conducted in English. Evaluation will be based on class participation, papers, a midterm, and a final examination.
Prerequisites: a strong interest and need to learn French.
Enrollment: although this course is to serve the needs of students enrolled in the Graduate Program in the History of Art, undergraduates may enroll by permis-
sion of the instructor.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR DESROSIERS
76
RLFR 512(S) Readings in French Art History and Criticism
This course is designed to provide Graduate Program students and interested others with knowledge of French acquired through translation and interpretation.
The core of this course is based on the reading and translating of a variety of critical works covering different periods and genres in the field of art history. The
material read (excerpts from museum catalogues; the Gazette des Beaux-Arts and other publications; Salons by Diderot, Baudelaire, and Thor; artists on their
works; and critics such as Francastel, Ch. Sterling, M. Far, Valry, Focillon will be analyzed in form and content, translated or summarized, in order to develop
the skills and understand the techniques necessary for reading French acurately. Grammar will be reviewed in context.
Format: seminar. Evaluation is based on class participation, papers, a midterm, and a final examination.
Prerequisite: French 511 or permission of instructor.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR DESROSIERS
ASIAN STUDIES (Div. I & II, see explanation below)
Chair, Associate Professor CECILIA CHANG
Professors: KUBLER, YAMADA***, YAMAMOTO. Associate Professors: CHANG, KAGAYA*, NUGENT. Assistant Professor: YU. Visiting
Assistant Professor: ABE. Visiting Lecturer: YAGI. Affiliated Faculty: Professors: CRANE, DREYFUS, JANG, JUST***, W. A. SHEPPARD**,
WONG. Associate Professors: C. BOLTON, SINIAWER*. Assistant Professors: CHAPMAN*, JOSEPHSON**, A. REINHARDT, VALIANI.
Visiting Assistant Professors: GUTSCHOW***. Language Fellows: HSIEH, ZHOU. Bolin Fellow: FLOYD.
The mission of the Department of Asian Studies is to help as many students as possible--both majors and non-majors--develop practical proficiency in Asian
languages and, in the tradition of the liberal arts, acquire a meaningful understanding of important facets of one or more of the disciplines represented within
Asian Studies (including anthropology, art history, economics, history, linguistics, literature, music, political science, religion, and sociology), so that they may
realize their fullest intellectual and personal potential and be able to make useful contributions to society.
We offer courses in English in the field of Asian Studies as well as courses in Chinese and Japanese language, literature, and culture. Three distinct majors are
offered: a major in Chinese; a major in Japanese; and an interdisciplinary Asian Studies major which allows students to choose from a wide range of courses in the
anthropology, art, economics, history, languages, linguistics, literatures, music, politics, religion, and sociology of China,Taiwan, Japan, and other Asian coun-
tries. Students with questions about the Asian Studies majors or about Asian Studies course offerings should consult the chair. Please note: Courses with ASST
prefix carry Division II credit and courses with CHIN and JAPN prefixes carry Division I credit unless otherwise noted.
THE MAJOR
All students wishing to major in the Department of Asian Studies are required to take and pass a total of eleven courses, as follows:
1) One course that explicitly compares at least two countries in Asia, such as ASST 126, ASST 201, ASST 245, ASST 250, ASST 256, ASST 269, ASST
270, or ASST 337. Or students may take instead a course on a country that is different from their country of primary focus.
2) Four semesters of Chinese or Japanese language (including no more than two 100level courses).
In addition to completing (1) and (2) above, all majors choose either an Area Studies track, leading to a major in Asian Studies; or a Language Studies track,
leading to a major in Chinese or Japanese. The requirements for each of these tracks are indicated below:
3A) Asian Studies Major
a. a threecourse qualification in one of the disciplines represented within Asian Studies (anthropology/sociology, art history, economics, history, linguistics,
literature, music, political science, religion). The qualification, to be determined through consultation between students and their advisor, normally includes
an introductory course and more advanced courses. At least two of these three courses must be on Asia.
b. three approved electives, which may include further language work.
3B) Chinese Major
a. four additional semesters of Chinese language (300level or higher)
b. Chinese 412
c. one approved course in Chinese literature or culture
3C) Japanese Major
a. four additional semesters of Japanese language (300level or higher)
b. one approved course in Japanese literature, language (400level), or culture
c. one elective on Japan
STUDY ABROAD
Students intending to major in Asian Studies are encouraged to study in Asia during one or both semesters of their junior year. Williams faculty serve on the
boards of several study abroad programs in China and Japan. Opportunities to study in India, Indonesia, Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, and other Asian countries are
also available. Prospective Asian Studies majors who are planning to study abroad should discuss their plans with their advisor as far in advance as possible. Up to
eight courses taken overseas can count toward graduation, and up to four courses taken off campus may be counted toward the major.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS
Students interested in writing an honors thesis in Asian Studies, Chinese, or Japanese should submit a proposal to the department chair before they pre-register
for senior courses in the spring of their junior year. The proposal should include a statement of the topic, a general description of the types of materials available for
study and how the study will be carried out, and the name of the faculty member who will serve as advisor. Admission to the honors thesis program will normally
be limited to students who have maintained at least a B+ average in their courses for the major.
Students admitted to the program should register for ASST 493-W31-494, CHIN 493-W31-494, or JAPN 493-W31-494. They will be expected to turn in the
final draft of their thesis shortly after spring break and to discuss their results formally with their faculty graders. Their final grades in the three courses listed above
and the award of Honors, Highest Honors, or no honors will be determined by the quality of the thesis and the student's performance in the oral defense.
THE ASIAN STUDIES ENDOWMENT
The Linen summer grants for study abroad, the Linen visiting professorships, and several other programmatic activities in the department are supported by an
endowment for Asian Studies established by family and friends in memory of James A. Linen III, Class of 1934, Trustee of the College from 1948 to 1953 and
from 1963 to 1982.
COURSES IN ASIAN STUDIES (Div. II)
ASST 103(F) Asian Art Survey: From the Land of the Buddha to the World of the Geisha (Same as ArtH 103)
(See under ARTH 103 for full description.) JANG
ASST 115 The World of the Mongol Empire (Same as History 115) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under HIST 115 for full description.) A. REINHARDT
ASST 117T Clash of Empires: China and the West, 1800-1900 (Same as History 117T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under HIST 117 for full description.) A. REINHARDT
Satisfies one semester of the Division II distribution requirement.
ASST 118 "Ten Years of Madness": The Chinese Cultural Revolution (Same as History 118) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under HIST 118 for full description.) A. REINHARDT
ASST 121T The Two Koreas (Same as History 121T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under HIST 121T for full description.) SINIAWER
ASST 126 Musics of Asia (Same as Music 126) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under MUS 126 for full description.) W. A. SHEPPARD
ASST 128(S) Chinese Music and Intercultural Influence: From the Silk Road to Korea and Japan (Same as Music 128) (D)
(See under MUS 128 for full description.) J. ROBERTS
77
ASST 201 Asia and the World (Same as International Studies 101 and Political Science 100) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under PSCI 100 for full description.) CRANE
Satisfies one semester of the Division II distribution requirement.
ASST 212(S) Transforming the "Middle Kingdom": China, 2000 BCE-1600 (Same as History 212) (D)
(See under HIST 212 for full description.) A. REINHARDT
Satisfies one semester of the Division II distribution requirement.
ASST 213 Modern China, 1600-Present (Same as History 213) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under HIST 213 for full description.) A. REINHARDT
Satisfies one semester of the Division II distribution requirement.
ASST 217 Early Modern Japan (Same as History 217 and Japanese 217) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under HIST 217 for full description.) SINIAWER
Satisfies one semester of the Division II distribution requirement.
ASST 218 Modern Japan (Same as History 218 and Japanese 218) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under HIST 218 for full description.) SINIAWER
Satisfies one semester of the Division II distribution requirement.
ASST 221(S) The Making of Modern South Asia (Same as History 221)
(See under HIST 221 for full description.) PARWANI
ASST 232(F) 20th-Century Korea Through Fiction and Film (Same as Comparative Literature 232)
In this course, students will gain an understanding of the key political, social, and cultural developments in 20th-century Korean history through close readings of
short stories, novels, and films. We will examine works produced during the era of Japanese colonial rule (1910-1945), including enlightenment and socialist
literature, and propaganda films produced in the 1930s and 1940s to promote the assimilation of Koreans as loyal Imperial subjects during WWII. Post-liberation
topics will include the Korean War, the consequences of national division, and dictatorship and democratization movements from the 1960s through the 1980s.
Along the way we will consider how these historical moments are reflected in literature and film, how artistic production was hampered under decades of censor-
ship, first under Japanese colonialism and later under the dictatorships of Park Chung Hee (1961-1979) and Chun Doo Hwan (1980-1987), and how literature and
film were transformed by freedom from censorship and the transition to democratic government in the 1990s. Looking at both contemporary and retrospective
representations of colonial Korea and life under the Park regime will reveal to us the nature and extent of that censorship. Throughout the course, we will also
examine the century through the theme of gender. We will look at the influences of Neo-Confucianism, colonialism, the "New Woman" phenomenon of the
1920s and 1930s, the U.S. military presence during and after the Korean War, North-South tensions, rapid industrial and economic growth in the 1960s and
1970s, and the age of global capitalism in the 1990s on gender relations and constructions of masculinity and femininity. All readings are in English, and all films
include English subtitles. No knowledge of the Korean language is required.
Format: seminar . Requirements: attendance (including film screenings) and class participation, short quizzes, leading discussion, short responses, one 5-page
paper, one long paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 12). Preference given to seniors.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR FLOYD
ASST 233 Spiritual Crossroads: Religious Life in Southeast Asia (Same as Anthropology 233 and Religion 249) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under ANTH 233 for full description.) JUST
Satisfies one semester of the Division II distribution requirement.
ASST 234 Modern Japanese and Korean Literature in Comparative Perspective (Same as Comparative Literature 234) (Not offered
2011-2012)
The modern histories of Japan and Korea were at first intertwined through the colonial relationship and the two countries shared many of the same social
concerns. From August 15, 1945, the day of Japan's defeat in WWII and Korea's liberation, their histories began to diverge. Korea would go on to survive a
civil war and a series of dictatorships while Japan reinvented itself as a peaceful, democratic society. Yet, they still had some experiences in common: life under
US military occupation, student democracy protests, and rejection of patriarchal tradition. In this course we will examine modern Japanese and Korean prose
fiction in the context of these developments, and examine how the compositional and thematic features of these texts illuminate, or even intervene in, the
historical moments in which they were produced. Topics include: the formation of the modern subject, the status of women, left-wing literature, the effects of
class and gender on colonial experience, war memory and trauma, and the rise of women writers in the 1970s and 1980s. No knowledge of Japanese or Korean
language is required.
Format: lecture/discussion, Requirements/evaluation: attendance (including film screenings), active class participation, response papers, two short essays, one
final paper
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 10-12).
FLOYD
ASST 236 The Greater Game? Central Asia and its Neighbors Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow (Same as History 216 and Religion 236) (Not
offered 2011-2012)
(See under REL 236 for full description.) DARROW
ASST 244(F) Mind and Persons in Indian Thought (Same as Religion 244)
(See under REL 244 for full description.) DREYFUS
ASST 245(S) Nationalism in East Asia (Same as History 318 and Political Science 354)
(See under PSCI 245 for full description.) CRANE
Satisfies one semester of the Division II distribution requirement.
ASST 247(S) Tibetan Civilization (Same as Religion 245) (D)
(See under REL 245 for full description.) JOSEPHSON
ASST 248(F) Body Politics, Gender and Religion in South Asia (Same as Anthropology 248, Religion 248 and Women's, Gender and
Sexuality Studies 249) (D)
(See under REL 248 for full description.) GUTSCHOW
ASST 250(S) Scholars, Saints and Immortals: The Religious Life in East Asia (Same as Religion 250) (D)
(See under REL 250 for full description.) JOSEPHSON
ASST 255 Buddhism in Society (Same as Religion 255) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under REL 255 for full description.) DREYFUS
ASST 256 Engendering Buddhism: How Women and Men Shape and Are Shaped by Buddhism (Same as Anthropology 256, Religion
256 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 256) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
(See under REL 256 for full description.) GUTSCHOW
ASST 269 Imagining Spaces of the British Empire in the Twentieth Century (Same as Sociology 269) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under SOC 269 for full description.) VALIANI
78
ASST 270(F) Cities and Citizenship (Same as Arabic 270 and Sociology 270)
(See under SOC 270 for full description.) VALIANI
ASST 284(F) Topics in Asian American History (Same as American Studies 284 and History 284) (D)
(See under HIST 284 for full description.) WANG
ASST 305(S) Cities of the Anglophone Chinese Imagination (Same as American Studies 305, Comparative Literature 303 and English
374) (D)
(See under AMST 305 for full description.) WANG
ASST 316(S) Japan since 1945 (Same as History 316)
(See under HIST 316 for full description.) HUFFMAN
ASST 319 Gender and the Family in Chinese History (Same as History 319 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 319) (Not offered
2011-2012) (D)
(See under HIST 319 for full description.) A. REINHARDT
ASST 320(S) Urban Spaces of Modern South Asia (Same as Arabic 320, History 317, International Studies 320 and Sociology 320)
(See under SOC 320 for full description.) VALIANI
ASST 321 History of U.S.-Japan Relations (Same as History 321 and Japanese 321) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under HIST 321 for full description.) SINIAWER
ASST 327(S) Violence, Terrorism, and Collective Healing (Same as Arabic 327 and Sociology 327)
(See under SOC 327 for full description.) VALIANI
ASST 337(F) Cultures of Protest in Modern South Asia (Same as Arabic 337, History 320 and Sociology 337)
(See under SOC 337 for full description.) VALIANI
ASST 347(F) Tribe and State on the Afghan-Pakistan Border (Same as Anthropology 347)
(See under ANTH 347 for full description.) D. EDWARDS
ASST 376(S) The Path to Enlightenment: Zen and Zen Art In China and Japan (Same as ArtH 376 and Religion 252) (W)
(See under ARTH 376 for full description.) JANG
ASST 389 The Vietnam Wars (Same as History 389) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under HIST 389 for full description.) CHAPMAN
ASST 390 The 1930s in Comparative Perspective: Germany, Italy, and Japan (Same as History 390 and Japanese 390) (Not offered
2011-2012) (D)
(See under HIST 390 for full description.) SINIAWER
ASST 414(S) Merchant Cultures and Capitalist Classes in China and India (Same as History 414)
(See under HIST 414 for full description.) A. REINHARDT
ASST 486T Historical Memory of the Pacific War (Same as History 486T and Japanese 486T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under HIST 486 for full description.) SINIAWER
Satisfies one semester of the Division II distribution requirement.
ASST 489T(S) Hiroshima and Nagasaki: Remembrance (Same as History 489T) (W)
(See under HIST 489 for full description.) HUFFMAN
ASST 493(F)-W31-494(S) Senior Thesis
Satisfies one semester of the Division II distribution requirement.
ASST 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
Satisfies one semester of the Division II distribution requirement.
COURSES IN CHINESE (Div. I)
The department regularly offers four levels of instruction in Modern Standard Chinese (Mandarin), designed to enable the student to become proficient in aural
comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing, as well as introductory courses in Cantonese, Taiwanese, Classical Chinese, and Chinese linguistics. The course
numbering system for Chinese is sequential. Students move from Chinese 101-102 to 201, 202, 301, 302, 401, and 402. Independent study (Chinese 497, 498)
may be offered depending on student needs and available resources. Those students entering with proficiency in Chinese should see the Coordinator concerning
placement.
The department also offers courses on Chinese literature and culture in English translation for students who wish to become acquainted with the major
achievements in Chinese literary, intellectual and cultural history. For the purpose of the distribution requirement, all courses in Chinese are considered Division I
unless otherwise noted.
STUDY ABROAD
Students majoring in Chinese are strongly encouraged to study in mainland China or Taiwan during one or both semesters of their junior year, during the
summer, or over Winter Study. It is important that students interested in any of these options consult as early as possible with the department and the Dean's Office
concerning acceptable programs.
CHIN 101(F)-W88-102(S) Basic Chinese (D)
An introduction to Mandarin, the language with the largest number of native speakers in the world, which is the official language of China and Taiwan, and one of
the official languages of Singapore. Course objectives are for the student to develop simple, practical conversational skills and acquire basic proficiency in reading
and writing in both the traditional and the simplified script at about the 500-character level. The relationship between language and culture and the sociolinguisti-
cally appropriate use of language will be stressed throughout. Both audio and video materials will be employed extensively. This is an EDI course. Throughout
the course we will address issues of how cultural difference inform and are informed by different linguistic contexts and practices.
Format of spoken classes: dialog performance, drills, communicative exercises. Format of written classes: oral reading, questions and discussion in Chinese,
translation and explanation in English. Evaluation is based on classroom performance, homework, quizzes, unit tests, and an oral and written final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit:12 (expected: 12 per section). Preference given to first-years and sophomores.
Credit granted only if both semesters and the winter study sustaining program are taken. May not be taken on a pass/fail basis
Hour: 8:00-8:50 MWF, 9:00-9:50 MWF and 8:30-9:45 TR, 10:00-10:50 MWF and 9:55-11:10 TR First Semester: KUBLER
8:00-8:50 MWF, 9:00-9:50 MWF and 8:30-9:45 TR, 10:00-10:50 MWF and 9:55-11:10 TR Second Semester: KUBLER
CHIN 131 Basic Cantonese (Not offered 2010-2011)
An introduction to Standard Cantonese, a major regional language of southern China which is spoken by over 50 million people in Hong Kong, Macao,
Guangdong, and Guangxi as well as by many overseas Chinese in Southeast Asia, Hawaii, and North America. Due to the pervasive influence of Hong Kong
as well as the economic transformation of Guangdong Province, the prestige of Cantonese within China has been rising steadily over the past few decades. Our
focus in this course will be on developing basic listening and speaking skills, though we will also study some of the special characters which have been used for
79
centuries to write colloquial Cantonese. Since students will ordinarily possess prior proficiency in Mandarin, a closely related language, we should be able to
cover in one semester about as much as is covered in the first two to three semesters of Mandarin.
Evaluation will be based on classroom performance, quizzes, tests, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Chinese 202 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 8).
KUBLER
CHIN 152 Basic Taiwanese (Not offered 2010-2011)
An introduction to Taiwanese, the majority language of Taiwan. Different varieties of this language, which is also known as Amoy, Southern Min, Hokkien,
and Fukienese, are spoken by over 60 million people in Taiwan, southern Fujian, the Philippines, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Singapore. Suppressed by the
Japanese from 1895-1945 and by the KMT Chinese government from 1945 through the 1970s, Taiwanese--in both its spoken and written forms--has been
experiencing a fascinating revival in recent years. This language, which is the most divergent of all the major Chinese "dialects," is of special linguistic interest
because it has preserved a number of features of Old Chinese. Our focus will be on developing basic listening and speaking skills, though we will also study
some of the special characters used to write Taiwanese. Since students in the course will ordinarily possess prior proficiency in Mandarin, a related language, we
should be able to cover in one semester about as much as is covered in the first two semesters of Mandarin.
Evaluation will be based on classroom performance, tests, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Chinese 202 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 8).
KUBLER
CHIN 201(F), 202(S) Intermediate Chinese (D)
These two courses are designed to consolidate the foundations built in Basic Chinese and continue developing students' skills in aural comprehension, speaking,
reading, and writing. Upon completion of the courses, students should be able to speak Chinese with fluency on everyday topics, reach a literacy level of 1000
characters (approximately 1200 common words written in both traditional and simplified characters), read materials written in simple Standard Written Chinese,
and produce both orally and in writing short compositions on everyday topics. Conducted in Mandarin. This is an EDI course. Throughout the course we will
address issues of how cultural differences inform and are informed by different linguistic contexts and practices.
Evaluation will be based on regular written and oral unit tests, a midterm, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Chinese 102 or permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 12 per section).
Hour: 11-11:50 MW and 8:55-9:45 TR, 12:00-12:50 MWF and 11:20-12:10 TR First Semester: YU
11-11:50 MW and 8:55-9:45 TR, 12:00-12:50 MWF and 11:20-12:10 TR Second Semester: NUGENT
CHIN 210(F) Cultures of China: Conflicts and Continuities (Same as History 220) (D)
This course provides a broad introduction to the cultures of China from earliest times to the contemporary era. The use of the plural "cultures" here is important.
The notion that Chinese culture, especially in "pre-modern" times, is a monolithic and unchanging entity is one that has been appealing to interests as diverse as
Western imperialist powers and the Chinese Communist Party. It is, however, a notion that is more fiction than fact, one story of many that can be told about the
area we now call China. This course is organized around a number of topics ranging across different periods and cultures in China, including the following:
language, protest, order (and disorder), commerce, the supernatural, reclusion, individualism, and beauty. Lectures and discussions will focus on texts from a wide
range of time periods and genres, from ancient poems to modern films, from Buddhist sutras to the writings of Mao Zedong. This course functions as an EDI
course in a number of ways. Throughout, we will compare the different cultures broadly considered Chinese to understand the ways in which they interacted,
influenced each other, and came into conflict. We will also examine issues of power and privilege as we analyze how different interests used cultural structures
and products to gain and maintain their power in society. No previous knowledge of China or Chinese expected. All readings in English.
Format: lecture. Requirements: short response papers, two longer papers (1700-2300 words), and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 25). Preference given to Chinese and history majors.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR NUGENT
CHIN 219 Popular Culture in Modern China (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course adopts a generic approach to introducing students to a variety of forms of popular culture in modern and contemporary China. The forms of popular
culture studied include popular readings (fiction, newspapers, magazines), advertisements, propaganda posters, popular music, television shows, film, and
popular religious movements. We will explore such themes as the definitions of "popular culture," globalization and cultural trends, the encoding and decoding
strategies of a popular "text," as well as the political, ideological and sociological messages behind a popular "text." All readings in English.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on attendance, in-class participation, oral presentations, two short response papers, and one final research
paper.
No prerequisites; open to all. No Chinese language required, though students with Chinese language background are encouraged to work with Chinese sources
if they wish. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). Preference given to Chinese or Asian Studies majors, and then to sophomores and juniors.
YU
CHIN 223(S) Ethnic Minorities in China: Past and Present (Same as Anthropology 223) (D)
By 2000, of the 1.3 billion population of China, more than 100 million were ethnic minorities (shaoshu minzu). Most of the minority groups reside in autonomous
regions and districts, which constitute 64% of China's total acreage. This course introduces students to the multiethnic aspect of China's past and present. We will
address topics such as the minoritygroup identification project; the definition of minzu; government policy toward and the current situation of the fiftyfive
official ethnic minority groups; historical sinocentric views about "foreigners" and "barbarians"; ideas of "diversity", "unity", and "sinicization"; and the roles
that "barbarians" have played in China's long history. All readings will be in English.
This is an EDI course. We will explore various meanings of "diversity" and "being ethnic" in the Chinese context and compare them with students' own experi-
ences through class discussions and an essay assignment.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on attendance, inclass participation and presentations, two short response papers, one midterm, and one
final paper.
No prerequisites. No knowledge of Chinese language required, though students with Chinese language background are encouraged to work with Chinese sources
if they wish. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 15). Preference is given to Chinese and Asian Studies majors, and then to firstyear students.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF YU
CHIN 224 Cultural Foundations: The Literature and History of Early China (Same as Comparative Literature 220 and History 315) (Not
offered 2011-2012) (D)
The early history of China witnessed many of humankind's most influential accomplishments, from the development of a civil bureaucracy to the invention of
printing, the compass, and gunpowder. It also saw the composition and spread of literary works and styles that continue to be both read and emulated up to the
present day not only in China but throughout the world. The acute awareness of early history and literature that runs through modern Chinese culture, in its
many manifestations and locales, is arguably unrivaled in the modern world. To understand modern China, one must understand the past that continues to shape
it today. The traditional view in China was that "literature, history and philosophy cannot be separated." Accordingly, this course will look at both the history
and literature of China from the 2nd millennium B.C. to the late 13th century A.D. In a typical week we will first read and discuss scholarship on the history and
culture of a given historical period. In the following class we will read selections of primary writings (in English translation) from the same period and analyze
them in their historical and cultural context. These writings will range from poems and short narratives to philosophical works and political tracts. Our goal is to
understand not only what modern scholarship says about early China, but what the people living in that period and culture had to say about themselves and their
world. This is an EDI course and will examine in depth the diverse cultural forces that have historically played a part in China's self-definition. All readings in
English.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: three short papers (1700-2300 words), and final exam. Participation in class discussions expected.
No prerequisites. No enrollment limit (expected: 15). Open to all.
NUGENT
CHIN 228 Traditional Chinese Poetry (Same as Comparative Literature 225) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
Poetry was the dominant form of literature in China for most of the pre-modern period. It could be used to justify the overthrow of dynasties or to court a
beloved; Chinese poets sang about communing with the gods and about brewing ale, sometimes in the same poem. In this course we will read and discuss
poems from the first 2000 years of the Chinese literary tradition. Some of the issues we will explore include the ways in which poems present the world and
make arguments about it; how Chinese poets construct different notions of the self through their poems; and how poetry can give voice to conflicts between
aesthetics and morality, between the self and the community, and between the state and other sources of social capital. We will also look at Chinese theories of
80
literature and poetry and compare them with dominant Western models. This is an EDI course and we will be concerned throughout with differences in the way
Chinese and other cultures thought about and utilized poetry. We will examine the implicit biases inherent in the ways Western scholars in particular have
analyzed and translated Chinese poetry. All readings in English translation.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: numerous short response papers, two longer papers (1700-2300 words), and a final exam; participation in class
discussions required.
No prerequisites; no previous experience with poetry or Chinese required; open to all. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to Chinese majors.
NUGENT
CHIN 235 China on Screen (Same as Comparative Literature 235) (Not offered 2011-2012)
From short films shown in teahouses in the late 19th century to international blockbusters in the early 21st, Chinese films have served as an important medium
for both the internal development of Chinese cultures and the presentation of those cultures to the world. In this course we will survey a wide range of works
from socially progressive films of the 1930s and 1940s to the martial arts hits of the last decade. These will include not only films from mainland China, but
from Hong Kong and Taiwan as well. We will use these films as a way to talk about such issues as visual culture, nationalism, technology, sexuality, social
change, and the representation of China on the world stage. All readings are in English and all films are subtitled in English.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: one short paper (5-7 pages), one longer paper (10-12 pages), take-home midterm, and final exam. Participation in
class discussions expected.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 30). Preference to Asian Studies majors and then to juniors and seniors.
NUGENT
CHIN 251T Crises and Critiques: The Literature and Intellectual History of Early 20th Century China (Same as Comparative Literature
256T and History 215T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
The first fifty years of the 20th century saw unprecedented changes in almost every sphere of Chinese society. A political system that had survived in some form
for over two millennia abruptly disintegrated. New ideas challenged orthodox intellectual culture in profound and complex ways. Chinese intellectuals ques-
tioned the value of inherited traditions while simultaneously facing the real possibility of the near total extinction of those traditions. Literature, which had
historically been an important locus of cultural debates, served this role to perhaps an even greater extent during this tumultuous period, as writers struggled
with questions of how to save a country and culture wracked by internal disintegration and facing urgent external threats. These debates framed many of the
issues that continue to influence the political, intellectual, and literary cultures of the People's Republic of China and Taiwan to this day. In this course we will
examine a broad range of sources that engage the key debates of this period. This is an EDI course in which we will address such questions as the role of
traditional culture versus that of modern or Western culture, the role of ideology and politics in literary and artistic production, ideas of nationhood and cultural
identity, and the relationship between the individual and the state. All readings will be in English translation.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: students will meet with the instructor in pairs for an hour each week. Every other week the student will write and present orally
a 5- to 7-page paper on the assigned topic of that week. In alternative weeks, the student will write a 2-page critique of the fellow student's paper. There will also
be a final paper dealing with the issues addressed during the course. Evaluation will be based on written work and analysis of the fellow student's work.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to Chinese majors.
CHIN 274(F) Chinese Calligraphy: Theory and Practice (Same as ArtH 274)
(See under ARTH 274 for full description.) JANG
CHIN 301(F), 302(S) Upper-Intermediate Chinese (D)
Although the oral skills will continue to receive attention, there is at this level increased emphasis on reading and writing. A major goal of the course will be
developing students' reading proficiency in standard written Chinese, the grammar and vocabulary of which differ considerably from the colloquial written
Chinese which was introduced during the first two years of instruction. About half of the course will be devoted to newspaper reading, with the remainder consist-
ing of several modules that may include short selections from modern Chinese fiction, films, or other types of performance literature. Both simplified and tradi-
tional character texts will be used. Conducted in Mandarin. This is an EDI course. In addition to involving immersion in a classroom Chinese environment, much
of our focus will be on the ways that various cultural issues are perceived and addressed differently (and, in many instances, in similar ways) in China and the US.
Requirements: two 75-minute classes plus two conversation sessions; primarily reading and discussion; students are required to write a short essay every other
week. Evaluation will be based on classroom performance, homework, quizzes, tests, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Chinese 202 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: none (expected: 15). Preference given to Chinese majors.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF Conferences: 11:00-11:50 MW, 12:00-12:50 MW First Semester: CHANG
1:10-2:25 TF Conferences: 11:00-11:50 MW, 12:00-12:50 MW Second Semester: CHANG
CHIN 352 Bridging Theory and Practice: Learning and Teaching Chinese as a Second Language (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course introduces students to the principles of second language acquisition (SLA), a field of study that investigates how people learn a foreign language
and provides a basis for understanding research related to foreign language learning and teaching. Theoretical issues to be covered include what it means to
know a language, how one becomes proficient in a foreign language, factors that affect the learning process, and the role of one's native language. We will also
examine what SLA research has discovered about teaching grammar, pronunciation, vocabulary, and writing. The goal is to explore ways in which SLA theo-
ries can be applied to facilitate acquisition of Chinese in terms of learning strategies and curriculum design. This course will be useful to both students who want
to improve their own learning of Chinese and those who plan to teach or conduct research on Chinese. All readings in English with some examples in Chinese.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, several oral presentations and short papers, and a final research project.
Prerequisites: Chinese 101 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 15).
C. CHANG
CHIN 401(F), 402(S) Advanced Chinese (D)
This course is designed to enhance the Chinese language proficiency of students who are already at relatively advanced levels. A wide assortment of materials is
used including (for speaking/comprehension) audiotapes, videotapes, and films featuring Chinese speakers from various segments of society; and (for reading)
newspaper and magazine articles dealing with Chinese politics and economics as well as selections from modern Chinese literature. Conducted in Mandarin.
This is an EDI course. In addition to involving immersion in a classroom Chinese environment, much of our focus will be on the ways that various cultural issues
are perceived and addressed differently (and, in many instances, in similar ways) in China and the US.
Class Format: two 75-minute classes plus a conversation session
Requirements/Evaluation: evaluation will be based on classroom performance, short essays every other week, homework, quizzes, tests, and a final exam
Prerequisites: Chinese 302 or permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected 13). Preference given to Chinese majors.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR Conferences: 12:00-12:50 F, 1:10-2:00 F First Semester: CHANG
2:35-3:50 MR Conferences: 12:00-12:50 F, 1:10-2:00 F Seceond Semester: YU
CHIN 404 Advanced Readings in Chinese Cultural and Social Issues (Not offered 2011-2012)
Using selections from Chinese literary works, as well as journalistic and academic articles, this advanced reading course is designed to further develop students'
abilities to analyze and discuss in Mandarin complex ideas related to Chinese cultural and social issues. Acquisition of specialized vocabulary and improving
proficiency in formal discourse, both oral and written, are two primary aims of this course.
Format: lecture; two 75-minute classes plus a conversation session; primarily reading and discussion . Evaluation based on class performance, homework,
quizzes, tests, and a final project.
Prerequisites: Chinese 402 or permission of instructor; open to first-year students. Preference given to Chinese majors.
CHIN 412(F) Introduction to Classical Chinese
Classical or "Literary" Chinese was the standard written language of China from around the seventh century BC until the 1920s and served for many centuries as
an important written language in Japan, Korea, and Vietnam as well. Moreover, remnants of Classical Chinese are still used frequently in Modern Chinese, in
both writing (e.g., newspaper, road signs and academic writing) and speech (e.g., proverbs and aphorisms). This course will serve as an introduction to the basic
grammar and vocabulary of Classical Chinese. We will focus on philosophical, political, and historical anecdotes from works from the Spring and Autumn period
(770-481 B.C.) through the Han Dynasty (202 B.C.-220 A.D.), as they served as the foundation for the language. While the main objective is to develop reading
proficiency in Classical Chinese, the course will also serve to enhance proficiency in Modern Chinese through classroom discussion in Mandarin, translation of
Classical Chinese into Modern Chinese, and comparison of Classical Chinese and Modern Chinese vocabulary and grammar. Conducted primarily in Mandarin.
Evaluation will be based on classroom performance, homework, tests, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Chinese 302 or permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 12).
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR NUGENT
81
CHIN 413(S) Intermediate Classical Chinese: Ideas of Authority in Classical Chinese Literature
This course builds on the base of vocabulary and grammar established in Chinese 412 to introduce students to a much broader range of Classical Chinese texts
and genres. The works we will read include poetic, philosophical, and historical texts that all deal in some way with evolving ideas of authority in the Chinese
tradition. Our focus in this course will be not only on careful translation and grammatical analysis of these texts, but also on the ideas they express and the different
rhetorical and linguistic modes they use to construct their arguments. Students will also be introduced to the major dictionaries and other resources for reading and
translating Classical Chinese. All primary readings will be in Classical Chinese. Translation will be primarily into English and classroom discussion will be in
English. However, students are expected to have sufficient proficiency in modern Chinese to read commentaries and notes on the texts written in that language.
Format: translation and discussion. Evaluation will be based on classroom performance, homework, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Chinese 412 or permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected:15).
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR NUGENT
CHIN 431 Introduction to Chinese Linguistics (Not offered 2011-2012)
Is Chinese--whose nouns "lack" number and whose verbs have no tense--a monosyllabic, "primitive" language? Are the Chinese characters a system of
logical symbols or "idiographs," which indicate meaning directly without regard to sound? Should (and could) the characters be done away with and alphabet-
ized? Are Cantonese, Hakka, and Taiwanese dialects or languages? And what is the relationship between Chinese, Japanese, Korean, and Vietnamese? These
are some of the questions we will be taking up in this one-semester introduction to the scientific study of the Chinese language. Topics to be covered include: the
phonological, syntactical, and lexical structure of Modern Standard Chinese; the Chinese writing system; the modern Chinese dialects; the history of the Chi-
nese language; sociolinguistic aspects of Chinese; and language and politics in the Chinese-speaking countries. Readings in English and Chinese, with class
discussion primarily in Mandarin.
Evaluation will be based on classroom performance, homework, two short papers, and one longer paper.
Prerequisites: Chinese 302 or permission of instructor.
KUBLER
CHIN 493(F)-W31-494(S) Senior Thesis
Satisfies one semester of the Division I distribution requirement.
CHIN 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
For students who have completed Chinese 402 and Chinese 412 or equivalent. Interested students must contact the Coodinator of the Chinese Program one
semester in advance and present a proposal to the Coordinator or the professor with whom they wish to study during pre-registration week.
COURSES IN JAPANESE (Div. I)
The department regularly offers four levels of language instruction in Modern Japanese, designed to enable the student to become proficient in aural compre-
hension, speaking, reading, and writing. Courses on Japanese literature in translation and film are also offered. The course numbering system for Japanese is
sequential. Students move from Japanese 101-102 to 201, 202, 301, 302, 401, 402 and, if appropriate, 403 and 404. Independent study (Japanese 497, 498) may
be offered for students who have completed 402 or the equivalent, depending on student needs and available resources. Students interested in pursuing indepen-
dent study must contact the Coordinator of the Japanese Program one semester in advance and present a proposal to the professor with whom they wish to study
by the first day of pre-registration week. Those students entering with proficiency in Japanese should see the Coordinator concerning placement. For the purpose
of the distribution requirement, all courses in Japanese are considered Division I unless otherwise noted.
STUDY ABROAD
Students majoring in Japanese are encouraged to consider study in Japan at some point in their Williams career-during one or both semesters of their junior
year, during the summer, or over Winter Study. It is important that students interested in any of these options consult carefully with the department and the Dean's
Office starting at an early date.
JAPN 101(F)-W88-102(S) Elementary Japanese (D)
An introduction to modern spoken and written Japanese, the course will emphasize oral skills in the fall semester, with somewhat more reading and writing in the
spring. The relationship between language and culture and the sociolinguistically appropriate use of language will be stressed throughout. Computer-assisted
learning materials will be used extensively. Classes consist of a combination of "act" classes, conducted exclusively in Japanese, where students use the language
in various types of drills and communicative activities, and "fact" classes, conducted in Japanese and English, where students learn about the language and
culture. This is an EDI course. Throughout the course we will address issues of how cultural difference inform and are informed by different linguistic contexts
and practices.
Evaluation will be based on daily classroom performance, homework, quizzes, a midterm, and a final exam.
No enrollment limit (expected: 15). Credit granted only if both semesters and the winter study sustaining program are taken.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR Conferences: 9:00-9:50, 10:00-10:50 MWF First Semester: YAMAMOTO (lecture), YAGI (conferences)
9:55-11:10 TR Conferences: 9:00-9:50, 10:00-10:50 MWF Second Semester: YAMAMOTO (lecture), YAGI (conferences)
JAPN 110(F) Bridging Japanese for Non-beginners I (D)
This course is designed for students who have prior experience in Japanese (i.e. high school Japanese courses), but are not quite ready for intensive training at the
intermediate level. It aims to enhance foundations and build up proficiency in all the four skills of speaking, listening, reading and writing, which is critical for
success in intermediate Japanese and beyond. The relationship between language and culture and the sociolinguistically appropriate use of language will be
stressed throughout. Classes consist of a combination of "act" classes, conducted exclusively in Japanese, where students use the language in various types of
drills and communicative activities, and "fact" classes, conducted in Japanese and English, where students learn about the language and culture. This is an EDI
course. Throughout the course we will address issues of how cultural difference inform and are informed by different linguistic contexts and practices. Students
should be already familiar with two phonetic syllabaries, hiragana and katakana. Classes meet for one hour, three times a week.
Evaluation will be based on daily performance, homework, quizzes, a midterm, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 5)
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF YAMAMOTO
JAPN 152(F) Japanese Film (Same as Comparative Literature 152)
(See under COMP 152 for full description.) C. BOLTON
JAPN 200(S) Bridging Japanese for Non-beginners II (D)
This course is designed for students who have prior experience in Japanese (i.e. high school Japanese courses), but are not quite ready for intensive training at the
intermediate level. It aims to enhance foundations and build up proficiency in all the four skills of speaking, listening, reading and writing, which is critical for
success in intermediate Japanese and beyond. The relationship between language and culture and the sociolinguistically appropriate use of language will be
stressed throughout. Classes consist of a combination of "act" classes, conducted exclusively in Japanese, where students use the language in various types of
drills and communicative activities, and "fact" classes, conducted in Japanese and English, where students learn about the language and culture. This is an EDI
course. Throughout the course we will address issues of how cultural difference inform and are informed by different linguistic contexts and practices. Students
should be already familiar with two phonetic syllabaries, hiragana and katakana, and have knowledge of approximately 100 kanji. Classes meet for one hour,
three times a week.
Evaluation will be based on daily performance, homework, quizzes, a midterm, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 5).
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF YAMAMOTO
JAPN 201(F), 202(S) Intermediate Japanese (D)
This course is a continuation of First-Year Japanese 101-102, further developing the four skills of speaking, listening, reading, and writing. The same general
methodology will be used. Upon completing the course, students will have been introduced to most of the major structural patterns of contemporary Japanese and
will be able to read simple expository prose. This is an EDI course. Throughout the course we will address issues of how cultural difference inform and are
informed by different linguistic contexts and practices.
Evaluation will be based on daily performance, homework, quizzes, a midterm, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Japanese 101-102 or permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 10).
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR Conference: 11:00-11:50 MWF First Semester: YAMADA (lecture), YAGI (conferences)
11:20-12:35 TR Conference: 11:00-11:50 MWF Second Semester: YAGI (lecture), ABE (conferences)
82
JAPN 217 Early Modern Japan (Same as Asian Studies 217 and History 217) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under HIST 217 for full description.) SINIAWER
Satisfies one semester of the Division II distribution requirement.
JAPN 218 Modern Japan (Same as Asian Studies 218 and History 218) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under HIST 218 for full description.) SINIAWER
Satisfies one semester of the Division II distribution requirement.
JAPN 220(F) Introduction to Linguistic Analysis
This course provides an opportunity to gain an understanding of the nature of human language and its patterns. Upon completion of this course, you will be able to
analyze speech sounds (phonetics and phonology), word and sentence structures (morphology and syntax) and meaning (semantics) using simple data from
English and other languages like Japanese and Chinese, and to apply analytical thinking to various linguistic phenomena including historical change and contex-
tual variation.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based on classroom performance, assignments, a midterm and a final exam.
No prerequisites; no previous knowledge of linguistics or of particular foreign languages is required; open to all students. No enrollment limit (expected: 15).
Distributional Requirements: Division 1
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR ABE
JAPN 222 Introduction to Postwar Japanese Cinema to 1960 (Same as Comparative Literature 222) (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course is an introduction to Japanese postwar cinema. The film screenings will be arranged chronologically, starting from 1948 and move forward until the
1960s. Due to time limitations the course will not be comprehensive but it will be critical, with an examination of major, pioneering Japanese directors and some
of their seminal films, their visual and narrative styles. Analytical attention will be paid to the cultural and historical background of the films before, during and
after WWII, and the influence of the American Occupation after 1945. There will be an exploration of the complexity and depth of the thematic topics that recur
across time, and how Japanese cinematic representation derived and departed from filmmaking in the West, all the while contributing to defining the film art
form in the twentieth century.
All films will be shown with English subtitles; no knowledge of Japanese is required.
Format: lecture and discussion. Requirements: critical (2-3) page responses after each screening and one research essay (10-15 pages) at the end of the term.
Attendance at weekly screenings is mandatory.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limi: 15.
Required reading text: Donald Richie, A Hundred Years of Japanese Film: A Concise History, with a Selective Guide to DVDs and Videos and Harp of Burma.
F. STEWART
JAPN 223 Physical Theatre Japan (Same as Theatre 233) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
Japanese n, a 600 yearold composite of poetry, dance and chant, persists to this day not as a mere relic, but as a thriving cultural institution. N performers
train decades before they attain professional status, and professional performers enjoy the patronage of thousands of student amateurs who dedicate themselves
to lifetime study of one or more of the constituent arts (singing, dancing, or instrumental accompaniment) and who are the core of their audiences.
Through readings, discussions and handson training, this course looks into both the historical circumstances and the intrinsic properties of the art that have
allowed it to attract and cultivate a dedicated following of patronpractitioners. We will also look into how this product of a Japanese cultural milieu has been
able to transcend that milieu, compelling western theatre artists (from Eugene O'Neill to Eugenio Barba) and composers (from Benjamin Britten to David
Byrne) to look to it for sources of inspiration. Finally we consider the diaspora of n as a performed art outside Japan, and in languages other than Japanese.
Throughout the semester, we will delve into the training, history and literature of n, and investigate how it operates as theatre, how it tells its stories. Along the
way, students will learn, rehearse, and be expected to perform one or more basic dances (shimai) and songs (utai) from traditional or emerging repertoire. No
experience in dancing or singing is necessaryjust an ounce or two of courage! Readings will include English translations of several n plays (Japanese
versions are also available upon request). Other readings offer departure points for our discussions. Where possible, I will endeavor to provide optional opportu-
nities to attend live performances that illustrate the principles at play in our readings and discussions.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active participation in discussions and training sessions; inclass performances; several abstracts and other short written as-
signments. Final projects may take the form of either a creative work or a research paper, and will be designed in direct consultation with the instructor. Some
rehearsals outside of regularly scheduled class periods may also be required.
Prerequisite: sophomore standing or higher (waived with permission of the instructor). Material and Lab fee (for rehearsal fan and tabi): $75.
O'CONNOR
JAPN 224 Issues in Contemporary Japan through Literature and Film (Same as Comparative Literature 224) (Not offered 2011-2012)
Truancy, hikikomori (reclusion), otaku (manic obsessiveness), neet (willful disengagement), enjoksai (dates for hire), parasite singles, working poor, low
birth-rate, aging and senior care--these are some of the issues actively discussed and debated in contemporary Japanese society. This course explores ways in
which these and other societal phenomena are depicted through literature, film, and other media, and thereby probes questions at the crossroads of popular/
youth-culture, national identity, and the shifting narratives of minority and gender. All readings, discussions, films, and other media will be in English, or
subtitled in English. Some materials may also be available in Japanese for those interested.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: active class participation, presentations, two short essays, and one final project paper.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15). Preference to Japanese majors, then Asian Studies majors, and then seniors.
KAGAYA
JAPN 252 The Masks of Japanese Literature (Same as Comparative Literature 252) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under COMP 252 for full description.) C. BOLTON
JAPN 254 Japanese Literature and the End of the World (Same as Comparative Literature 264) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under COMP 264 for full description.) C. BOLTON
JAPN 255(S) Love and Death in Modern Japanese Literature (Same as Comparative Literature 255) (D)
(See under COMP 255 for full description.) C. BOLTON
JAPN 256 Confession and Deception in Japanese Literature (Same as Comparative Literature 266) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under COMP 266 for full description.) C. BOLTON
JAPN 260 Japanese Theatre and its Contemporary Context (Same as Comparative Literature 261) (Not offered 2011-2012)
Japan's rich and varied performance traditions, old and new, born of different historical settings, coexist to this day and compete for the attention of audiences,
domestically and abroad. The forms to be considered (Nohgaku, Kabuki, Bunraku, Shingeki and Butoh, among others) are all dynamic. Each has transformed
itself in response to evolving social conditions. This course examines these performance traditions, considers how each reflects the social, cultural, and political
context of its birth, and poses the question: "Of what relevance is this to a contemporary audience?" Some of the other questions we will explore include: How
have these performing traditions transformed themselves throughout history? What do we mean by `traditional' vs. `contemporary'? How are traditional and
contemporary performance genres interacting with each other? And how have the central themes of these works evolved? All readings and discussion will be in
English.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: active class participation, presentations, written journals, two short papers, and one longer paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15). Open to all.
KAGAYA
JAPN 270(S) Japanese Art and Culture (Same as ArtH 270)
(See under ARTH 270 for full description.) JANG
JAPN 271 Transitional Japanese Literature into the Twentieth Century (Same as Comparative Literature 269) (Not offered 2011-2012)
After more than two centuries of National Seclusion, Japan's modern era began suddenly in the middle of the nineteenth century, with the unexpected arrival of
Commodore Perry, the destabilization of the 250-year old shogunal government, and the violent restoration of Imperial rule. Rapid and radical changes fol-
lowed in every aspect of society, from fashion to philosophy. This course will explore how such changes have been expressed through literature, film and
83
performance. We will trace how the authors of literary and other artistic works perceived, integrated and at times rejected experiences of the new and the
foreign. All readings and discussions will be in English.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: evaluation will be based on active class participation, presentations, written journals, two short and one longer paper.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15). Preference given to majors first and then seniors and juniors.
KAGAYA
JAPN 276 Premodern Japanese Literature and Performance (Same as Comparative Literature 278) (Not offered 2011-2012)
Some of Japan's performance traditions, which developed in different historical settings, have survived to this day and continue to coexist and compete for the
attention of audiences both domestically and abroad. This course examines the Japanese literature of three major periods in Japan's history, focusing on how
literary and performance traditions have been interrelated in the unfolding of Japanese literary history. We will begin by looking into the Heian period
(794-1185), when the work of female authors occupied center stage and some of the canonical texts of the Japanese literary and cultural tradition were born.
Next we will consider the medieval period (1185-1600), which saw the rise of the samurai class and the consequent shift in the domain of artistic creation. Then
we will look at the Edo period (1600-1867), when a new bourgeois culture flourished and audiences were greatly transformed. We will also explore the contin-
uing force of premodern literary traditions in contemporary performing arts. All readings and discussions will be in English.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: active class participation, presentations, written journals, two essay questions, one paper, and attendance of live
performance events.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15).
KAGAYA
JAPN 301(F), 302(S) Upper-Intermediate Japanese (D)
This course is a continuation of Japanese 201, 202, further developing the four skills of speaking, listening, reading, and writing. The same general methodology
will be used. Upon completing the course, students will have been introduced to all the major structural patterns of contemporary Japanese and will have begun to
emphasize vocabulary building through the study of situationally oriented materials stressing communicative competence. The reading of expository prose of
intermediate difficulty will also receive some attention. This is an EDI course. In addition to involving immersion in a classroom Japanese environment, much of
our focus will be on the ways that various cultural issues are perceived and addressed differently (and, in many instances, in similar ways) in Japan and the US.
Evaluation will be based on daily performance, homework, quizzes, a midterm, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Japanese 202 or permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 10).
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF First Semester: YAMADA
8:30-9:45 MWF Second Semester: ABE
JAPN 321 History of U.S.-Japan Relations (Same as Asian Studies 321 and History 321) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under HIST 321 for full description.) SINIAWER
Satisfies one semester of the Division II distribution requirement.
JAPN 390 The 1930s in Comparative Perspective: Germany, Italy, and Japan (Same as Asian Studies 390 and History 390) (Not offered
2011-2012) (D)
(See under HIST 390 for full description.) SINIAWER
JAPN 401, 402 Advanced Japanese (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
A continuation of Japanese 302, developing speaking, listening, reading, and writing skills in the discussion of social issues in current Japan. Topics may vary
according to the level of the students. This is an EDI course. In addition to involving immersion in a classroom Japanese environment, much of our focus will be
on the ways that various cultural issues are perceived and addressed differently (and, in many instances, in similar ways) in Japan and the US.
Evaluation will be based on daily performance, homework, quizzes, a midterm, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Japanese 302 or permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 8).
JAPN 403(F) Advanced Seminar in Japanese I (D)
This course provides advanced training in listening, speaking, reading and writing Japanese, making use of materials such as newspapers, magazine articles,
television broadcasts, and on-line materials that focus on current issues in Japan. This is an EDI course. In addition to involving immersion in a classroom Japa-
nese environment, much of our focus will be on the ways that various cultural issues are perceived and addressed differently (and, in many instances, in similar
ways) in Japan and the US.
Evaluation will be based on classroom performance, homework, quizzes, a midterm and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Japanese 402 or permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 5).
Hour: 12:00-12:50 MWF ABE
JAPN 404(S) Advanced Seminar in Japanese II (D)
This course is designed for advanced Japanese language students. The goal is for students to be able to carry on extended discourse--such as a discussion, a
speech, or an interview--in a culturally appropriate manner; to read authentic materials such as newspapers, magazine articles and literary works with ease; and
to make presentations and write research papers on issues of interest. The course also makes use of video-conferencing and pod-casting and will focus on current
social, cultural, educational, and political issues in Japan. This course, which is conducted entirely in Japanese, has the EDI designation since students are im-
mersed in a Japanese language environment and the course materials will involve critical thinking and discussion of two diverse cultures, Japan and the U.S.
Evaluation will be based on daily classroom performance, homework, quizzes, and projects.
Prerequisites: Japanese 403 or permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 5).
Hour: 12:00-12:50 MWF ABE
JAPN 406(F) Thematic Reading and Writing in Japanese II (D)
This course is designed for the advanced students of Japanese who want to develop their reading and writing skills intensively. Students will be exposed to various
genres of readings on the themes of modern and pre-modern Japanese society in contrast to those of the U.S. Research and writing skills will be developed in
conjunction with student projects. This course also aims to develop a high level of speaking proficiency through discussion and narrative discourse. This is an EDI
course because students are immersed in a Japanese environment in class and will learn how to express their ideas and opinions using Japanese discourse patterns
both in texts and dialogues. This requires reflective thinking over different cultural perspectives between Japan and the U.S. or whatever cultural heritage each
student may have.
Format: seminar. Requirements: evaluation will be based on daily preparation and in-class performance, a weekly journal, and a final research paper.
Prerequisites: any one of Japanese 400's courses or permission of instructor; open to all. Enrollment limit: 5 (expected: 5). Preference given to majors first and
then seniors and juniors.
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M YAMAMOTO
JAPN 486T Historical Memory of the Pacific War (Same as Asian Studies 486T and History 486T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under HIST 486 for full description.) SINIAWER
Satisfies one semester of the Division II distribution requirement.
JAPN 493(F)-W31-494(S) Senior Thesis
Satisfies one semester of the Division I distribution requirement.
JAPN 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
For students who have completed Japanese 402 or the equivalent.
ASTRONOMY (Div. III)
Chair, Professor JAY M. PASACHOFF
Professors: KWITTER, PASACHOFF. Observatory Supervisor/Lecturer: SOUZA.
How long will the Sun shine? When will we discover Earth-like planets among the many circling other stars? How did the universe begin and how has it
evolved over its 13.7 billion-year history? Astronomy is the science that asks and tries to answer questions like these. We have come a long way toward under-
84
standing what makes the sky appear as it does and how the Universe is fashioned. The Astronomy Department offers courses for anyone who is interested in
learning about the Universe, and who would like to be able to follow new astronomical discoveries as they are made. All courses in Astronomy satisfy the
Division III requirement. The Astrophysics major (administered jointly with the Physics Department) and the Astronomy major, are described below.
The beginning astronomy courses are offered on two levels. Astronomy 101, 102, 104, and 330-range courses are intended primarily for non-science majors,
and have no prerequisite. Astronomy 111 is designed for students with some exposure to or interest in physics. It has a prerequisite of one year of high school
physics or permission of the instructor, and a corequisite of Mathematics 104 or equivalent background in calculus.
Most of the astronomy courses take advantage of our observational and computational facilities including a 24-inch computer-controlled telescope with sensi-
tive electronic detectors, and our own computer network for image processing and data analysis. The Astronomy Department homepage can be found at
http://www.williams.edu/Astronomy.
ASTROPHYSICS MAJOR
The Astrophysics major is designed for students who want a rigorous introduction to the field, and includes not only those who plan graduate study in astrono-
my, astrophysics, or a closely related area, but also those interested in a wide variety of careers. Alumni are not only astronomers but also computer scientists,
geologists, teachers, doctors, lawyers, business school professors, and so on. In recent years, many astrophysics majors have had a second major in fields as wide
ranging as mathematics, geosciences, economics, English, and art history. This major emphasizes the description of the Universe and its constituents in terms of
physical processes. Potential Astrophysics majors should consult early with members of the Astronomy and Physics Departments to determine their most ap-
propriate route through the major. An essential ingredient in such students' undergraduate training is experience in physics and mathematics. Therefore, the major
normally will begin in the first year a student is at Williams with Physics 131, 141, or 151 and Mathematics 104 or 105 or 106 in the fall. Students with very good
background placing them out of Physics 142 and out of Mathematics 104 may choose to take Physics 201 and Mathematics 105 or 106 instead. Astronomy 111
will often be taken in the fall of the sophomore year; however, many students take it in the fall of their first year at Williams, along with physics and math. Students
who might place out of physics courses should read the section on placement under Physics; those who place out of Physics 131 or 141 into Physics 142 or 151
should particularly consider taking Astronomy 111 in the fall of their first year.
In addition to the major courses described below, other courses in geosciences, mathematics, and computer science may also be appropriate.
MAJOR REQUIREMENTS FOR ASTROPHYSICS
Astronomy 111 Introduction to Astrophysics
or Astronomy 101 Stars: From Suns to Black Holes
and either Astronomy 102 The Solar System--Our Planetary Home
or Astronomy 104 The Milky Way Galaxy and the Universe Beyond
Three 400-level astronomy courses
or Two 400-level astronomy courses and one of the following:
Astronomy 211 Astronomical Observing, Image Processing, and Analysis
Physics 302 Statistical Physics
Physics 402T Applications of Quantum Mechanics
Physics 405T Electromagnetic Theory
Physics 411T Classical Mechanics
Physics 418 Gravity
Physics 131 Particles and Waves
or Physics 141 Particles and Waves--Enriched
or equivalent placement
Physics 142 Foundations of Modern Physics
or Physics 151 Seminar on Modern Physics
Physics 201 Electricity and Magnetism
Physics 202 Waves and Optics
Physics/Mathematics 210 Mathematical Methods for Scientists
Physics 301 Introductory Quantum Physics
Mathematics 105 Multivariable Calculus
or Mathematics 106 Multivariable Calculus
The total number of courses required for the Astrophysics major, an interdisciplinary major, is eleven. Students entering with Advanced Placement in physics
and/or mathematics may obtain credit toward the major for the equivalent of Physics 141 and/or Mathematics 104 and/or 105 or 106 taken elsewhere, but at least
8 courses in astronomy, physics, and mathematics must be taken at Williams. There are some aspects of astrophysics that are closely related to chemistry or
geosciences. In recognition of this relation, certain advanced courses in those departments can be accepted for credit toward the Astrophysics major on a two-for-
one basis. It is not possible to double major in Astrophysics and Physics.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN ASTROPHYSICS
The honors degree in Astrophysics will be awarded on the basis of a senior thesis presenting the results of an original observational, experimental, or
theoretical investigation carried out by the student under the direction of a faculty member in Astronomy or Physics. There are no specific grade require-
ments (other than College-wide requirements for remaining in good academic standing) for entry into the thesis research program; however, a student
wishing to do a thesis should have demonstrated both ability and motivation for independent work in previous courses and in any earlier research involve-
ment. Students doing theses will normally choose a topic and an advisor early in the second semester of their junior year and usually begin their thesis work
during the summer. During the senior year, those students whose proposals have been approved will elect two courses and a winter study project in addition
to the minimum requirements for the major. Preparation for the thesis will occupy at least one course (Astrophysics 493) and the winter study project
(Astrophysics 031). At the end of the winter study period, the departments will decide, in consultation with each student, whether to admit that student to
honors candidacy. Both a written thesis and an oral presentation to faculty and fellow students are required. The degree with honors will be awarded to those
who meet these requirements with distinction. The degree with highest honors will be awarded to those who fulfill the requirements with unusually high
distinction.
The departments will be flexible with regard to the number and timing of courses devoted to thesis research within the general guidelines of two courses and a
winter study project over and above the minimum major requirements and the written and oral presentations, especially in cases of students with advanced
standing and/or summer research experience. Students considering unusual requests are urged to consult with potential advisors or the department chairs as early
as possible.
ASTRONOMY MAJOR
The Astronomy major is designed for students with an interest in learning about many aspects of modern astronomy, but who do not choose to take the
advanced physics courses of the astrophysics major. It is also appropriate as a second major for students concentrating in another field. The Astronomy major
emphasizes understanding the observed properties of the physical systems that comprise the known Universe, from the Sun and solar system, to the evolution of
stars and star clusters, to the Milky Way Galaxy, to external galaxies and clusters of galaxies. Because some knowledge of physics and calculus is necessary to
understand many astronomical phenomena, the Astronomy major requires the first two semesters each of the physics and calculus that are also required of Phys-
ics majors and Astrophysics majors.
There are several possible routes through the Astronomy major, depending on preparation and interest. Students considering a major in Astronomy should
consult with members of the department early and often. A first-year student, unsure about choosing between Astronomy and Astrophysics, may wish to take not
only Astronomy 111 but also Physics 131, 141, or 151 and Mathematics 104 (if necessary) in the fall. Students who might place out of physics courses should
read the section on placement under Physics.
MAJOR REQUIREMENTS FOR ASTRONOMY
Astronomy 111 Introduction to Astrophysics
or Astronomy 101 Stars: From Suns to Black Holes
and either Astronomy 102 The Solar System--Our Planetary Home
or Astronomy 104 The Milky Way Galaxy and the Universe Beyond
Two 200-level Astronomy courses (or additional 400-level Astronomy courses as substitutes)
85
Two 400-level Astronomy courses
Physics 131 Particles and Waves
or Physics 141 Particles and Waves--Enriched
or equivalent placement
Physics 142 Foundations of Modern Physics
or Physics 151 Seminar on Modern Physics
Mathematics 104 Calculus II
Mathematics 105 Multivariable Calculus
or Mathematics 106 Multivariable Calculus
or equivalent placement
The total number of courses required for the Astronomy major is nine. Students entering with Advanced Placement in physics and/or math may obtain credit
toward the major for the equivalent of Physics 142 and/or Mathematics 105 or 106 taken elsewhere. There are some aspects of astronomy that are closely related
to chemistry or geosciences. In recognition of this, certain advanced courses in those departments can be accepted for credit toward the Astronomy major.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN ASTRONOMY
The honors degree in Astronomy will be awarded on the basis of a senior thesis presenting the results of an original observational, experimental, or theoretical
investigation carried out by the student under the direction of a faculty member in Astronomy. There are no specific grade requirements (other than College-wide
requirements for remaining in good academic standing) for entry into the thesis research program; however, a student wishing to do a thesis should have demon-
strated both ability and motivation for independent work in previous courses and in any earlier research involvement. Students doing theses will normally choose
a topic and an advisor early in the second semester of their junior year and usually begin their thesis work during the summer. During the senior year, those
students whose proposals have been approved will elect two courses and a winter study project in addition to the minimum requirements for the major. Prepara-
tion for the thesis will occupy at least one course (Astronomy 493) and the winter study project (Astronomy 031). At the end of the winter study period, the
department will decide, in consultation with each student, whether to admit that student to honors candidacy. Both a written thesis and an oral presentation to
faculty and fellow students are required. The degree with honors will be awarded to those who meet these requirements with distinction. The degree with highest
honors will be awarded to those who fulfill the requirements with unusually high distinction.
The department will be flexible with regard to the number and timing of courses devoted to thesis research within the general guidelines of two courses and a
winter study project over and above the minimum major requirements and the written and oral presentations, especially in cases of students with advanced
standing and/or summer research experience. Students considering unusual requests are urged to consult with potential advisors or the department chair as early
as possible.
ASTRONOMY COURSES
COURSES FOR NON-MAJORS WITH NO PREREQUISITES
ASTR 101(F) Stars: From Suns to Black Holes
What makes a star shine? For how long will the Sun keep shining? What are black holes and how can they form? Astronomy 101, a non-major, general introduc-
tion to the part of contemporary astronomy that includes how stars form and how they end their existence, will provide answers to these questions and more. The
course gives special attention to the exciting discoveries of the past few years. Topics include modern astronomical instruments such as the Hubble Space Tele-
scope, the Chandra X-ray Observatory, the Herschel Space Telescope, the Kepler mission to discover extrasolar planets, the new generation of 8- and 10-meter
mountaintop telescopes, and results from them; how astronomers interpret the light received from distant celestial objects; the Sun as a typical star (and how its
future will affect ours); and our modern understanding of how stars work and how they change with time. We will also discuss how pulsars and black holes result
from the evolution of normal, massive stars and how giant black holes are at the center of galaxies and quasars. We will discuss the discovery of planets around
stars other than the Sun. We regularly discuss the latest news briefs and developments in astronomy and relate them to the topics covered in the course. This
course is independent of and on the same level as Astronomy 102 and 104, and students who have taken those courses are welcome.
Observing sessions will include use of the 24-inch telescope and other telescopes for observations of stars, star clusters, planets and their moons, nebulae, and
galaxies, as well as daytime observations of the Sun.
Format: lecture (three hours per week), observing sessions (scattered throughout the semester), afternoon labs (five times per semester), and a planetarium dem-
onstration. Evaluation will be based on two hour tests, a final exam, an observing portfolio, and laboratory reports.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 48 (expected: 48). Non-major course.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR Lab: 1-2:30 T,W 2:30-4 T,W PASACHOFF (lectures) SOUZA (labs)
ASTR 102(S) Our Solar System and Others
What makes Earth different from all the other planets? Did Mars ever have running water? What is Pluto? Will asteroids or comets collide with the Earth? What is
a solar eclipse like? Astronomy 102, a nonmajor, general introduction to the part of contemporary astronomy that comprises the study of the solar system, will
provide answers to these questions and more. We will cover the historical development of humanity's understanding of the solar system, examining contributions
by Aristotle, Ptolemy, Copernicus, Galileo, Newton, Einstein, and others. We will discuss the discovery of over 1000 exoplanets around stars other than the Sun.
The course gives special attention to exciting discoveries of the past few years by space probes and by the Hubble Space Telescope and the Herschel Space
Observatory We regularly discuss the latest news briefs and developments in astronomy and relate them to the topics covered in the course. This course is inde-
pendent of, and on the same level as Astronomy 101 and 104, and students who have taken those courses are welcome.
Observing sessions include use of the 24-inch telescope and other telescopes for observations of stars, star clusters, planets and their moons, nebulae, and galaxies,
as well as daytime observations of the Sun.
Format: lecture (three hours per week), observing sessions (scattered throughout the semester), afternoon labs (five times per semester), and a planetary demon-
stration. Evaluation will be based on two hour tests, a final exam, an observing portfolio, and laboratory reports. To be eligible for the Gaudino grade, which
stipulates "intellectual presence," a student must demonstrate commitment to engaging the course material in all its aspects: lectures, reading, labs, observing,
homework, and exams.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 48 (expected: 48). Non-major course.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR Lab: 1-2:30 T,W 2:30-4 T,W PASACHOFF (lectures) SOUZA (labs)
ASTR 104 The Milky Way Galaxy and the Universe Beyond (Not offered 2011-2012)
It has been less than a century since the Sun was discovered not to be at the center of the Milky Way Galaxy, and the Milky Way Galaxy was determined to be
only one of countless "island universes" in space. A host of technological advances is enabling us to understand even more clearly our place in the universe and
how the universe began. For example, the Hubble Space Telescope, the Herschel Space Observatory, and the Chandra Xray Observatory bring clearer images
and cover a wider range of the spectrum than has ever been obtainable before; they are speeding up progress on determining the past and future of the Universe.
They are confirming and enlarging our understanding of the Big Bang. In addition, the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe and Planck spacecraft's study
of the early Universe and largescale mapping programs such as the Sloan Digital Sky Survey are giving clues into how the Universe's currently observed
structure arose. Astronomy 104, a nonmajor, general introduction to part of contemporary astronomy comprising the study of galaxies and the Universe,
explores the answers to questions like: What is the Milky Way?; Why are quasars so luminous?; Is the Universe made largely of "dark matter" and "dark
energy"?; What determines the ultimate fate of the Universe? How have studies of Cepheid variables and distant supernovae with the Hubble Space Telescope
determine that the Universe is 13.7 billion years old and indicated that the Universe's expansion is accelerating. We regularly discuss the latest news briefs and
developments in astronomy and relate them to the topics covered in the course. This course is independent of, and on the same level as Astronomy 101 and 102,
and students who have taken those courses are welcome.
Observing sessions will include use of the 24-inch telescope and other telescopes for observations of stars, star clusters, planets and their moons, nebulae, and
galaxies, as well as daytime observations of the Sun.
Format: lectures (three hours per week), observing sessions (scattered throughout the semester), afternoon labs (five times per semester), and a planetarium
demonstration. Evaluation will be based on two hour tests, a final exam, an observing portfolio, and laboratory reports. To be eligible for the Gaudino grade,
which stipulates "intellectual presence," a student must demonstrate commitment to engaging the course material in all its aspects: lectures, reading, labs,
observing, homework, and exams.
No prerequisites; not open to students who have taken or are taking Astronomy 330. Enrollment limit: 48 (expected: 48). Non-major course.
PASACHOFF (lectures) SOUZA (labs)
ASTR 330(S) The Nature of the Universe
A journey through space and time from the first 10-43 seconds to the ultimate fate of the Universe billions of years in the future. Topics include inflation,
conditions during the first three minutes, creation of the elements, stellar and giant black holes, the Big Bang and its remnant cosmic background radiation,
relativity, galaxies and quasars, the large scale structure of the Universe, and current ideas about the future of the Universe and the end of time. In particular, we
86
will explore the acceleration of the Universe's expansion, and the possible contributions of string theory to our understanding.
Format: lecture/discussion, three hours per week. Evaluation will be based on two hour tests, a small observing portfolio, occasional homework, and a final
exam. To be eligible for the Gaudino grade, which stipulates "intellectual presence," a student must demonstrate commitment to engaging the course material in
all its aspects: lectures, reading, labs, observing, homework, and exams.
No prerequisites; open only to juniors and seniors; closed to students who have taken or are taking ASTR 104, and closed to Astronomy, Astrophysics, or
Physics majors. Non-major course. Courses in the 33X-sequence are meant as general-education courses for students in all majors. Enrollment limit: 48
(expected: 48).
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR KWITTER
ASTR 336 Science, Pseudoscience, and the Two Cultures (Same as History of Science 336) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
A famous dichotomy between the sciences and the humanities, and public understanding of them, was laid down by C. P. Snow and has been widely discussed,
with ignorance of the second law of thermodynamics compared with ignorance of Shakespeare. In this seminar, we will consider several aspects of science and
scientific culture, including how scientific thinking challenges the claims of pseudoscience. We will consider C. P. Snow and his critics as well as the ideas about
the Copernican Revolution and other paradigms invented by Thomas Kuhn. We will discuss the recent "Science Wars" over the validity of scientific ideas. We
will consider the fundamental originators of modern science, including Tycho, Kepler, Galileo, and Newton, viewing their original works in the Chapin Library
of rare books and comparing their interests in science with what we now call pseudoscience, like alchemy. We will review the history and psychology of
astrology and other pseudosciences. Building on the work of Martin Gardner in Fads and Fallacies in the Name of Science, and using the current journal The
Scientific Review of Alternative Medicine, we consider from ascientific point of view what is now called complementary or alternative medicine, including both
versions such as chiropractic, osteopathy, and homeopathy, and newer nonscientific practices. We will discuss the current global-climate-change deniers and
their effects on policy. We consider such topics as GM (genetically modified) foods, the safety and regulation of dietary supplements, and the validity of govern-
ment and other recommendations relevant to the roles of dietary salt and fat in health. We consider the search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) and reports
of UFO's and aliens. We consider the possible effects that superstitious beliefs have on the general public's cooperation in vaccination programs and other
consequences of superstition. We also consider the recently increased range of dramas that are based on scientific themes, such as Tom Stoppard's Arcadia and
Michael Frayn's Copenhagen.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on biweekly 5-page papers, participation in discussions, and a 15-page final paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 12).
Non-major course. Does not count toward the Astrophysics, Astronomy or Physics major. Courses in the 33X-sequence are meant as general-education
courses for students in all majors.
PASACHOFF
ASTR 338 The Progress of Astronomy: Galileo through the Hubble Space Telescope (Same as History of Science 338 and Leadership Studies
338) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Our capabilities of understanding the Universe have progressed over the 500 plus years since Copernicus moved the sun into the center. Galileo's breakthrough
observations of the sky with the new-fangled telescope led to hundreds of years of improving observations. In a seminar format, week by week, we will discuss
each of the following topics (and look at original first-editions in the Chapin Library): Copernicus and rare-book variations and annotations; Galileo and his
discoveries; mapping the sky and constellations 1540 to the present through star atlases; William and Caroline Herschel and the discovery of a new planet;
asteroids from 1 Ceres to 5100 Pasachoff and beyond, contemporary surveys, the extinction of the dinosaurs, and possible dangers to the Earth and its inhabit-
ants; astronomy teaching from when Williams College students first built its Hopkins Observatory through the Committee of Ten to the Journal of Astronomy
Education Research; planetariums from pasted stars to optomechnical and digital 21st-century projection; woman astronomers and astronauts and their recep-
tion and roles; transits of Venus: from Horrocks and Capt. Cook through the 2004/2012 pair; the launch of Sputnik and the race to the Moon; the formation of
NASA and its transformation through space shuttles and the International Space Station; the past, present, and future of the Hubble Space Telescope; NASA's
"Great Observatories," including not only Hubble but also the Chandra X-ray Observatory and the Spitzer Space Telescope; NASA's "Vision" of sending
astronauts to the Moon and Mars; advances in ground-based observatories and telescopes; mapping the Universe through projects like the Sloan Digital Sky
Survey and 2dF; and the discovery that the Universe's expansion is accelerating and its ramifications. We consider the role of individual leadership in the
various topics.
Format: seminar, one three-hour meeting a week. Planetarium demonstration, with individual planetarium work on request. Evaluation will be based on two
10-page papers and participation in discussions.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 10). Preference will be given to juniors and seniors and to those with backgrounds in science, history of
science, or philosophy. Non-major course. Does not count toward the Astrophysics, Astronomy, or Physics major. Courses in the 33X-sequence are meant as
general-education courses for students in all majors.
PASACHOFF
COURSES WITH PREREQUISITES
ASTR 111(F) Introduction to Astrophysics (Q)
How do stars work? This course is a survey of some of the main ideas in modern astrophysics, with an emphasis on the observed properties and evolution of stars;
this course is the first in the Astrophysics and Astronomy major sequences. It is also appropriate for students planning to major in one of the other sciences or
mathematics, and for others who would like a quantitative introduction that emphasizes the relationship of contemporary physics to astronomy. Topics include
radiation laws and stellar spectra, astronomical instrumentation, physical characteristics of the Sun and other stars, star formation and evolution, nucleosynthesis,
white dwarfs and planetary nebulae, pulsars and neutron stars, supernovae, relativity, and black holes. Observing sessions include use of the 24inch and other
telescopes for observations of stars, nebulae, planets and galaxies, as well as daytime observations of the Sun.
Format: lecture/discussion, observing sessions, and five labs per semester. Evaluation will be based on weekly problem sets, two hour tests, a final exam, lab
reports, and an observing portfolio. To be eligible for the Gaudino grade, which stipulates "intellectual presence," a student must demonstrate commitment to
engaging the course material in all its aspects: lectures, reading, labs, observing, homework, and exams.
Prerequisites: a year of high school Physics, or concurrent college Physics, or permission of instructor, and Mathematics 104 or equivalent. Enrollment limit: 28
(expected: 20).
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR Lab: 1-4 M,R KWITTER (lectures) SOUZA (labs)
ASTR 207T Extraterrestrial Life in the Galaxy: A Sure Thing, or a Snowball's Chance? (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
A focused investigation of the possibility of life arising elsewhere in our Galaxy, and the chances of our detecting it. In this course, pairs of students will explore
the astronomical and biochemical requirements for the development of Earth-like life. We will consider the conditions on other planets within our solar system
as well as on newly-discovered planets circling other stars. We will also analyze the famous "Drake Equation," which calculates the expected number of
extraterrestrial civilizations, and attempt to evaluate its components. Finally, we will examine current efforts to detect signals from intelligent alien civilizations
and contemplate humanity's reactions to a positive detection.
Format: tutorial. Evaluation will be based on the student's papers, responses to the partner's papers, and evidence of growth in understanding over the semester.
Prerequisites: Astronomy 111 or Biology 101-102, Chemistry 101-102, or Geosciences 101 or equivalent science preparation. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected:
10). Instructor's permission required. If overenrolled, preference given to students who have had Astronomy 111.
KWITTER
ASTR 211(F) Observation and Data Reduction Techniques in Astronomy (Q)
This course will introduce techniques for obtaining and analyzing astronomical data. We will begin by learning about practical observation planning and move on
to discussion of CCD detectors, signal statistics, digital data reduction, and image processing. We will make use of data we obtain with our 24-inch telescope, as
well as data from other optical ground-based observatories and archives. We also learn about and work with data from space-based non-optical observatories such
as the Chandra X-Ray Observatory the Spitzer Space Telescope (infrared).
Format: lecture/discussion plus computer work and observing. Evaluation will be based on weekly problem sets, an hour exam and an observing project.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 105 or 106. Prior experience with Unix is helpful, but not required. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 6).
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W Lab: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M KWITTER
ASTR 217T Planetary Geology (Same as Geosciences 217T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under GEOS 217 for full description.) COX
ASTR 402 Between the Stars: The Interstellar Medium (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
The matter between the stars--the interstellar medium--manifests itself in many interesting and unexpected ways, and, as the detritus of stars, its properties and
behavior hold clues to the history and future evolution of both stars and the galaxies that contain them. Stars are accompanied by diffuse matter all through their
lifetimes, from their birthplaces in dense molecular clouds, to the stellar winds they eject with varying ferocity as they evolve, to their final fates as they shed
87
their outer layers, whether as planetary nebulae or dazzling supernovae. As these processes go on, they enrich the interstellar medium with the products of the
stars' nuclear fusion. The existence of life on Earth is eloquent evidence of this chemical enrichment.
In this course we will study the interstellar medium in its various forms. We will discuss many of the physical mechanisms that produce the radiation we
observe from diffuse matter, including radiative ionization and recombination, collisional excitation of "forbidden" lines, collisional ionization, and synchrotron
radiation. This course is observing-intensive. Throughout the semester students will work in small groups to design, carry out, analyze, and critique their own
observations of the interstellar medium using the equipment on our observing deck.
Format: seminar/discussion, plus computer work and observing projects. Evaluation will be based on homework, class presentations/problem-solving, and
observing projects.
Prerequisite: Physics 201. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 8).
KWITTER
ASTR 408T The Solar Corona (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
The solar corona has recently been revealed as the connection between the Sun and the Earth. Observations from the 10 instruments on the Solar and Helio-
spheric Observatory (SOHO) now aloft are showing the flow of material from the Sun to the Earth in unprecedented detail. Further, data from total solar
eclipses will be used to study the cause of the heating of the solar corona and will be linked to space observations from SOHO, TRACE, and Yohkoh solar
satellites. We discuss theoretical aspects and observational techniques, and will make solar observations. Students will meet weekly with the professor in groups
of two or three to discuss readings, solve problems, present short papers, and/or make observations.
Format: tutorial. Evaluation will be based on the submitted material and on tutorial participation, as well as on a final paper.
Prerequisites: Astronomy 111 (or Astronomy 101 and either 102 or 104 with permission of instructor) and a 200-level Physics or Astronomy course. Enroll-
ment limit: 10.
PASACHOFF
ASTR 412T(S) Solar Physics (W)
We study all aspects of the Sun, our nearest star. We discuss the interior, including the neutrino experiment and helioseismology, the photosphere, the chromo-
sphere, the corona, and the solar wind. We discuss the Sun as an example of stars in general. We discuss both theoretical aspects and observational techniques,
including work at recent total solar eclipses. We discuss results from current spacecraft, including the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) and the Tran-
sition Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE). We also discuss data analysis of recent transits of Mercury across the face of the Sun and the June 8, 2004, transit
of Venus, the first transit of Venus since 1882.
Students will meet weekly with the professor in groups of two or three to discuss readings and present short papers.
Format: tutorial. Evaluation will be based on four 5-page papers, discussions, and presentations. Students will be expected to improve their writing throughout the
course, with the aid of careful editing by and comments from the professor.
Prerequisites: Astronomy 111 (or Astronomy 101 and either 102 or 104 with permission of instructor) and a 200-level Physics or Astronomy course. Enrollment
limit: 12 (expected: 10).
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. PASACHOFF
ASTR 420 Observational Cosmology: Observing and Modeling the Universe (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
Recent astronomical observations have revealed that the universe contains large amounts of dark matter (most probably consisting of undetected yet very-
weakly-interacting particles) and dark energy (a strange kind of uniformly-distributed energy that creates negative pressure causing accelerated expansion of the
universe), while ordinary radiating matter (stars, galaxies and clouds of gas) is only a minor addition. In this course we will discuss the most important observa-
tions that lead us to these conclusions. We will start by studying and classifying galaxies. Eighty years ago Hubble discovered that the universe is expanding and
20 years later Gamow proposed the Big Bang model of the evolution of the universe. We will discuss observational data that support the Big Bang model,
concentrating on the microwave background radiation and its properties, along with the process of primordial nucleosynthesis. Recent observational data indi-
cate that at a very early stage of evolution the universe passed through a phase of very rapid exponential expansion called "inflation." We will develop and
discuss the Standard Cosmological Model that describes the evolution of the universe from the Big Bang to its present state. In particular we will discuss the
early phases of radiation-dominated evolution and the late process of structure formation. Finally we will concentrate on the observations indicating that the
universe is now dominated by dark matter and dark energy.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: evaluation will be based on classroom participation, homework assignments, a midterm exam and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Physics 201 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 12). If overenrolled, preference will be given to Astronomy and Astro-
physics majors.
DEMIANSKI
ASTR 493(F)-W31, W31-494(S) Senior Research in Astronomy
An original experimental or theoretical investigation is carried out under the direction of a faculty member in Astronomy, as discussed under the heading of the
degree with honors in Astronomy above.
Prerequisites: permission of the department.
Hour: TBA Members of the Astronomy Department
ASPH 493(F)-W31, W31-494(S) Senior Research in Astrophysics
An original experimental or theoretical investigation is carried out under the direction of a faculty member in Astronomy or Physics, as discussed under the
heading of the degree with honors in Astrophysics above.
Prerequisites: permission of the department.
Hour: TBA Members of the Astronomy and Physics Departments
ASTR 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study in Astronomy
ASPH 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study in Astrophysics
ASTR 499(F,S) Physics and Astronomy Colloquium (Same as Physics 499)
Physics and Astronomy researchers from around the country come to explain their research. Students of Physics and Astronomy at any level are welcome. This is
not a for-credit course. Registration is not necessary to attend.
Hour: 2:30-3:45 F TBA
BIOCHEMISTRY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY
(Div. III)
Chair, Professor AMY GEHRING
Advisory Committee: Professors: ALTSCHULER, DEWITT, KAPLAN, LOVETT, D. LYNCH**, RAYMOND, ROSEMAN*, SAVAGE***,
SWOAP. Associate Professors: BANTA, GEHRING, TING. Assistant Professor: LEBESTKY.
Biochemistry and molecular biology are dynamic fields that lie at the forefront of science. Through elucidation of the structure and function of biologically
important molecules (such as nucleic acids, lipids, proteins, and carbohydrates) these disciplines have provided important insights and advances in the fields of
molecular engineering (recombinant DNA technology, "intelligent" drug design, "in vitro evolution"), genomics and proteomics, signal transduction, immunolo-
gy, developmental biology, and evolution.
The Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Program is designed to provide students with an opportunity to explore living systems in molecular terms. Bio-
chemistry and molecular biology are at the interface between the chemical and biological methods of looking at nature; therefore, the program draws heavily from
these disciplines. While chemistry is concerned with the relationship between molecular structure and reactions, and biology focuses on cells and organisms,
biochemistry and molecular biology probe the details of the structures and interactions of molecules in living systems in order to provide the foundation for a
better understanding of biological molecules both individually and as members of more complex structures.
PROGRAM
While aspects of biochemistry and molecular biology can be very diverse, a common set of chemical and biological principles underlie the more advanced
topics. With this in mind, the program has been structured to provide the necessary background in chemistry and biology and the opportunity to study the many
88
facets of the modern areas of the biochemical sciences. Students interested in the Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Program should plan their course selection
carefully. Since it is expected that Biochemistry 321 and 322 would be taken in the junior year, students are advised to take the prerequisites for those courses in
both chemistry and biology during their first two years at Williams. While the program is open to all students, it is expected that it will appeal primarily to majors
in biology and chemistry because of the number of courses required in those fields. In addition to taking the required courses, students planning to complete the
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Program are strongly encouraged to elect courses in mathematics and physics.
The following interdepartmental courses serve as the core of the Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Program.
BIMO 321 and 322 provide a comprehensive introduction to biochemistry. BIMO 401, the capstone course for the concentration, provides students the oppor-
tunity to examine the current scientific literature in a wide variety of BIMO-related research areas.
BIMO 321(F) Biochemistry I--Structure and Function of Biological Molecules (Same as Biology 321 and Chemistry 321) (Q)
This course introduces the basic concepts of biochemistry with an emphasis on the structure and function of biological macromolecules. Specifically, the structure
of proteins and nucleic acids are examined in detail in order to determine how their chemical properties and their biological behavior result from those structures.
Other topics covered include catalysis, enzyme kinetics, mechanism and regulation; the molecular organization of biomembranes; and the flow of information
from nucleic acids to proteins. In addition, the principles and applications of the methods used to characterize macromolecules in solution and the interactions
between macromolecules are discussed. The laboratory provides an opportunity to study the structure of macromolecules and to learn the fundamental experi-
mental techniques of biochemistry including electrophoresis, chromatography, and principles of enzymatic assays.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; laboratory, four hours per week. Evaluation will be based on quizzes, a midterm exam, a final exam, problem sets and
performance in the laboratories including lab reports.
Prerequisites: Biology 101 and Chemistry 251/255 and Chemistry 155/256. Enrollment limit: 48 (expected: 48). Preference given to junior and senior Biology
and Chemistry majors and BIMO concentrators.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-5 M,W, R GEHRING
BIMO 322(S) Biochemistry II--Metabolism (Same as Biology 322 and Chemistry 322) (Q)
This lecture course provides an in-depth presentation of the complex metabolic reactions which are central to life. Emphasis is placed on the biological flow of
energy including alternative modes of energy generation (aerobic, anaerobic, photosynthetic); the regulation and integration of the metabolic pathways including
compartmentalization and the transport of metabolites; and biochemical reaction mechanisms including the structures and mechanisms of coenzymes. This com-
prehensive study also includes the biosynthesis and catabolism of small molecules (carbohydrates, lipids, amino acids, and nucleotides). Laboratory experiments
introduce the principles and procedures used to study enzymatic reactions, bioenergetics, and metabolic pathways.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; laboratory, four hours per week. Evaluation will be based on several exams and performance in the laboratories including
lab reports that emphasize conceptual and quantitative and/or graphic analysis of the data generated.
Prerequisites: Biology 101 and Chemistry 251/255. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 40). Preference given to junior and senior Biology and Chemistry majors and
BIMO concentrators.
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 T,W D. LYNCH
BIMO 401(S) Topics in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (W)
This seminar course involves a critical reading, analysis, and discussion of papers from the current biochemistry and molecular biology literature. Specific topics
vary from year to year but are chosen to illustrate the importance of a wide range of both biological and chemical approaches to addressing important questions in
the biochemical and molecular biological fields. To facilitate discussion, students will prepare written critiques analyzing the data and conclusions of the chosen
literature.
Format: seminar, three hours per week. Evaluation will be based on class presentations and discussions, frequent short papers, and a final paper.
Prerequisites: Biology 202 and BIMO 321. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 8). Preference given to those completing the BIMO concentration; open to others with
permission of instructor.
Hour: 1:103:50 W GEHRING
To complete the concentration in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, a student must complete all of the required courses listed below, take one
elective not within the student's major from the list below, and attend at least eight Biology and/or Chemistry Department colloquia. Since the Chemis-
try Department counts two biology courses and the Biology Department counts two chemistry courses toward the majors (each of which can be com-
pleted with only eight other courses), a student majoring in either chemistry or biology would have to take only two or three additional courses to
complete the program.
Required Courses
BIOL 101 The Cell
BIOL 102 The Organism
BIOL 202 Genetics
CHEM 151 or 153 or 155 Concepts of Chemistry
CHEM 156 Organic Chemistry: Introductory Level
CHEM 251 Organic Chemistry: Intermediate Level
CHEM 256 Foundations of Physical and Inorganic Chemistry
(CHEM 256 is not required if CHEM 155 was taken.)
BIMO/BIOL/CHEM 321 Biochemistry IStructure and Function of Biological Molecules
BIMO/BIOL/CHEM 322 Biochemistry IIMetabolism
BIMO 401 Topics in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
Students can check with the department coordinator to see if other courses not listed here might count as
electives.
Elective Courses
BIOL 301 Developmental Biology
BIOL 304 Neurobiology
BIOL 306 Cellular Regulatory Mechanisms
BIOL 308 Integrative Plant Biology: Fundamentals and New Frontiers
BIOL 310 Neural Development
BIOL 313 Immunology
BIOL 315 Microbiology, Diversity, Cellular Physiology, and Interactions
BIOL/CHEM/CSCI/MATH/PHYS 319 Integrative Bioinformatics, Genomics, and Proteomics Laboratory
BIOL 405 Stem Cells and Cellular Identity in Development and Disease
BIOL 407/NSCI 347 Neurobiology of Emotion
BIOL 408 RNA Worlds
BIOL 409 Molecular Physiology
BIOL 413 Molecular Basis of Biological Clocks
BIOL 414 Life at Extremes: Molecular Mechanisms
BIOL 416 Epigenetics
BIOL 426T Frontiers in Muscle Physiology: Controversies
BIOL 430T Genome Science: At the Cutting Edge
CHEM 324 Enzyme Kinetics and Reaction Mechanisms
CHEM 341 Toxicology and Cancer
CHEM 342 Synthetic Organic Chemistry
CHEM 343 Medicinal Chemistry
CHEM 344T Physical Organic Chemistry
CHEM 348 Polymer Chemistry
CHEM 364 Instrumental Methods of Analysis
CHEM 366 Physical Chemistry: Thermodynamics
CHEM 367 Biophysical Chemistry
89
Colloquium Requirement
Concentrators must attend at least eight Biology and/or Chemistry Department colloquia. The Biology and Chemistry Departments hold colloquia on Friday
afternoons during the fall and spring semesters. Scientists from other academic or research institutions are invited to present their research to students and faculty.
There are approximately a dozen colloquia offered each semester among which BIMO concentrators may choose. Attendance at the honors student research
presentations and the spring BIMO Alumni Reunion poster session also count toward the colloquium requirement. Concentrators may receive credit for colloquia
attended during any of their semesters at Williams College.
BIOINFORMATICS, GENOMICS, AND PROTEOMICS
Chair, Professor CHARLES M. LOVETT, Jr.
Advisory Committee: Professors: AALBERTS, ALTSCHULER, BAILEY, R. DE VEAUX, J. EDWARDS, KAPLAN, LOVETT, D. LYNCH, RAY-
MOND. Associate Professors: BANTA, DEVADOSS, GEHRING, MORALES, TING. Senior Lecturer: D. C. SMITH. Assistant Professors: MA-
ROJA, SNOW.
Bioinformatics, genomics, and proteomics are rapidly advancing fields that integrate the tools and knowledge from biology, chemistry, computer science,
mathematics, physics, and statistics in research at the intersection of the biological and informational sciences. Inspired by the enormous amount of biological
data that are being generated from the sequencing of genomes, these new fields will help us pose and answer biological questions that have long been considered
too complex to address. Research in genomics, proteomics, and bioinformatics will also significantly impact society affecting medicine, culture, economics, and
politics.
The Bioinformatics, Genomics, and Proteomics curriculum involves faculty from the biology, chemistry, computer science, mathematics/statistics, and phys-
ics departments and was designed to provide students with an understanding of these revolutionary new areas of investigation. The introductory level courses,
Computation and biology and Statistics for Biologists are accessible to all students interested in gaining familiarity with the power of genomic analysis. Students
interested in graduate work in bioinformatics, genomics, and proteomics should take the core courses and five of the recommended courses. Interested students
are also encouraged to participate in independent research with members of the advisory faculty as they explore the development of these new fields.
Core course:
BIOL/CHEM/CSCI /MATH/PHYS 319 Bioinformatics, Genomics, and Proteomics Laboratory
[CSCI /BIOL 106 Life as an Algorithm--last offered Fall 2006]
Recommended courses (in addition to the core course):
BIOL 202 Genetics
BIOL 206T Genomes, Transcriptomes and Proteomes
BIOL 305 Evolution
CSCI 134 Introduction to Computer Science
CSCI 136 Data Structures and Advanced Programming
CSCI 256 Algorithm Design and Analysis
PHYS /INTR/CSCI 315 Computational Biology
STAT 101 or 201 Statistics
Related courses:
BIMO/BIOL/CHEM 321 Biochemistry IStructure and Function of Biological Molecules
BIMO/BIOL/CHEM 322 Biochemistry IIMetabolism
CHEM 111 Fighting Disease: The Evolution and Operation of Human Medicine
MATH 357 Phylogenetics
[PHIL 334 Philosophy of Biology--last offered Spring 2007]
PHYS 302 Statistical Physics
STAT 231 Statistical Design of Experiments
BIOLOGY (Div. III)
Chair, Professor STEVEN SWOAP
Professors: ALTSCHULER, ART*, DEWITT, J. EDWARDS, D. LYNCH**, RAYMOND, ROSEMAN*, SAVAGE***, SWOAP, WILLIAMS,
ZOTTOLI***. Associate Professors: BANTA, MORALES**, TING. Senior Lecturer: D. C. SMITH. Assistant Professors: LEBESTKY, MARO-
JA. Visiting Assistant Professor: SNOW. Professor of Marine Science for the WilliamsMystic Program: CARLTON. Lecturer: DEAN, MACIN-
TIRE.
The Biology curriculum has been designed to provide students with a broad base for understanding principles governing life processes at all levels, from
biochemistry and cell biology to physiology to ecology and behavior. Courses emphasize fundamentals common to all subdisciplines including the coupling of
structure to function, the transfer of energy in living systems, communication, and the molding of diversity by the evolutionary process. In upperlevel courses
and in independent and honors research, students have the opportunity to investigate areas at the frontiers of modern biology.
Although the Biology major is specifically designed to provide a balanced curriculum in the broader context of the liberal arts, it is also excellent preparation
for graduate studies in the life sciences and in the health professions.
MAJOR REQUIREMENTS
In order to make the major accessible to students with diverse interests, required courses are kept to a minimum. The Biology major is satisfied by nine courses,
as follows:
Biology 101 The Cell
Biology 102 The Organism
Biology 202 Genetics
Any two 300-level courses, each of which must have a laboratory associated with it
Any one 400-level course other than 493-494
Any other three courses or any other two courses and two semesters of Organic Chemistry
NOTE: Independent study courses and AMS 311 (Same as Biology 231) do not fulfill the 300-level or 400-level course requirements. WIOX 316,
Biology: Evolution, in the Williams Oxford Program qualifies for major credit at the 200-level.
Distribution Requirement
In order to ensure that majors broaden their knowledge of biology, one of the elective courses for the major must include an upper-level course covering
biological processes at levels of organization above the cell. Courses that satisfy this distribution requirement are indicated in the individual course description.
COURSE SELECTION AND PLACEMENT
It is preferable for students who plan to major in biology, or think they may be interested in doing so, to take Biology 101, 102 during their first year at
Williams. It is also possible to begin the Biology major during the sophomore year, although students should understand that it may require taking two or more
biology courses during several semesters.
Students interested in biology, whether or not they intend to major in it, are encouraged to take Biology 101, 102. It is also possible, with permission of the
instructor, to take Biology 203 Ecology, Biology 204 Animal Behavior and Biology 220 Field Botany without prerequisite. Other 100level biology courses are
designed specifically for students who do not intend to take additional upperlevel courses in biology. All of these courses satisfy the Division III distribution
requirement.
Beginning students should normally enroll in Biology 101 and 102. Students with unusually strong backgrounds in biology, such as those with outstanding
performance on the College Board Biology Advanced Placement Test, may be permitted to elect a sophomore-level course in lieu of Biology 101 and/or Biology
102 upon successful completion of a departmental qualifying exam, administered during First Days.
COURSES RELATED TO THE BIOLOGY MAJOR
Students planning to pursue their interest in biology and related fields after completing their undergraduate degrees are strongly encouraged to take one year of
chemistry, at least one semester of mathematics (a course in statistics is recommended), and one semester of physics. Students may wish to check the require-
ments for graduate admission at relevant universities, and are also encouraged to consult with the Biology Department's graduate school advisor about prerequi-
sites for admission to graduate programs.
90
BIOCHEMISTRY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY
Students interested in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (BIMO) should consult the general statement under Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.
BIOINFORMATICS, GENOMICS AND PROTEOMICS
Students interested in Bioinformatics, Genomics and Proteomics (BiGP) should consult the general statement under Bioinformatics, Genomics and Proteom-
ics. Biology majors interested in this field are strongly encouraged to enroll in Integrative Bioinformatics, Genomics, and Proteomics (Biology 319).
NEUROSCIENCE
Students interested in Neuroscience (NSCI) should consult the general statement under Neuroscience.
ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES
Students interested in Environmental Studies (ENVI) should consult the general statement under Environmental Studies.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN BIOLOGY
In order to be recommended for the degree with honors, a Biology major is normally expected to have completed the equivalent of two semesters and a winter
study (031) of independent research culminating in a thesis which demonstrates outstanding achievement of an original and innovative nature. Although the
presentation of a thesis and associated oral presentation in the fall and poster defense in the spring are required for consideration for a degree with honors, their
completion should not be interpreted as a guarantee of a degree with honors. The principal considerations in admitting a student to the program of independent
honors research will be mastery of fundamental material and skills, ability to pursue independent study successfully, and demonstrated interest and motivation.
Students interested in participating in the honors program should consult with the department early in the spring semester of the junior year; approval must be
received before spring registration in the junior year. The number of Biology Department faculty available to mentor research students and the number of students
each can accommodate in her/his lab vary from year to year. Although the department will make every effort to provide an opportunity for students to conduct
Honors research, you should be aware that it may not be possible to assign all applicants to a laboratory.
The minimum course requirements for a degree with honors in Biology are Biology 101, Biology 102, Biology 202, two 300-level biology courses (each of
which must have a laboratory associated with it), one 400-level biology course, Biology 493, Biology 494, WSP 031, and any other two courses in biology (or
any other one course and two semesters of Organic Chemistry). Note: A student who has a double major cannot count any course twice. For example, if a student
is a Biology and Chemistry major, Organic Chemistry can only be counted in one of the two majors.
In addition to the normal honors route, which includes two semesters (Biology 493-494) and a winter study of research (WSP 031) during senior year, students
have the option, subject to the approval of their thesis advisor, to begin the honors research during winter study junior year or during the second semester junior
year. In general, thesis students who start during WSP or spring semester of their junior year are working on a project that requires winter or spring field work.
Students beginning honors in winter study of junior year would take Biology 494 in the spring of their junior year followed by Biology 493 in the fall of their
senior year; students beginning honors during the second semester of junior year would take Biology 494 that semester, followed by Biology 493 in the fall of
senior year and winter study research in the winter of the senior year.
STUDY ABROAD
Students planning on majoring in Biology are strongly advised to take Biology 202 before going abroad, since Biology 202 is required for the major and a
prerequisite for many upper-level courses; a Genetics course taken while studying away cannot substitute for Biology 202. Biology majors studying abroad may
receive credit toward the major for at most two 200-level electives; the departmental distribution requirement can be satisfied through an appropriate course taken
during study abroad. Students should meet with the Department Chair to discuss study abroad options.
CREDIT FOR COURSES AT OTHER INSTITUTIONS
Students who enroll in study away programs may receive credit for up to two 200-level electives towards the biology major upon approval of the course syllabi
by the Biology Department Chair.
Students wishing to satisfy prerequisites for courses offered by the Biology Department with courses taken at other institutions should consult, in person, with a
member of the Biology Department, prior to registering for the course that requires a prerequisite. Such consultations will include a review of the course syllabi
and the transcripts of the relevant previous college work, and students should bring these materials with them.
BIOL 101(F) The Cell
This course provides an introduction to cellular and molecular aspects of modern biology. It explains the development of cell structure and function as a conse-
quence of evolutionary processes, and it stresses the dynamic properties of living systems. Topics considered include biological molecules and enzyme action,
membrane structure and function, energy exchange and design of metabolic systems, expression of genetic information, cell signalling, cell trafficking, the cell
cycle, and cancer. In addition to textbook and laboratory assignments, articles from the recent biological literature will be assigned and discussed.
Format: lecture, 3 hours per week; laboratory and discussion, 3 hours per week. Evaluation will be based on hour tests, a final exam, lab reports, discussion
assignments, and discussion participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 192 (expected: 192--48 per section.)
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF, 9:55-11:10 TR, 11:00-11:50 MWF, 11:20-12:35 TR Lab: 1-4 M,T,W,R DEWITT, RAYMOND
BIOL 102(S) The Organism
This course focuses upon the developmental and evolutionary processes that have given rise to a wide diversity of multicellular organisms. We consider many
levels of biological organization, from molecular and cellular to individuals and populations. Topics include meiosis and sexual reproduction, animal and plant
development, evolutionary mechanisms, and speciation, with examples from the three main groups of multicellular organisms (animals, plants, and fungi). Read-
ings are drawn from a variety of sources, including the recent biological literature.
Format: lecture/discussion/laboratory, six hours per week. Evaluation will be based on hour tests, a final exam, three lab reports, and problem sets.
Prerequisites: Biology 101. No enrollment limit (expected: 152--2 sections of 76).
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR, 11:00-11:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 M,T,W,R TING, D. C. SMITH
BIOL 132(S) The Human Genome
An ambitious plan was launched in 1988 to determine the DNA sequence of the human genome. That project was "completed" in 2001--but that was really only
the beginning. Sequencing of additional genomes goes on, but, more importantly, scientists and society are putting considerable effort into trying to understand
what all those A's, G's, C's, and T's mean. Lectures will acquaint students with the fundamentals of human DNA research and its applications in the fields of
medicine, human evolution, and biotechnology. The implications of this research for individuals and for society as a whole will be addressed in readings and
discussions.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; discussion one hour every other week. Evaluation will be based on three exams, discussion participation and one short
paper.
Prerequisites: none; open to students who have not taken BIOL 202. Enrollment limit: 60 (expected: 60).
Hour: 12:00-12:50 MWF Conference: 1:10-2:25 T,W 2:353:50 T,W ALTSCHULER
BIOL 133(F) Biology of Exercise and Nutrition
This class, intended for the nonscientist, focuses on the impact of exercise and nutrition on the human body. We will discuss topics such as how different types of
training influence exercise performance; the changes that occur in the cardiovascular system during an exercise routine; the inherent limits of the body to perform
aerobic and anaerobic tasks; and the longterm health consequences of a lifetime of activity of inactivity. We will also examine how nutrition and metabolism
affect body composition. For example, we will rigorously and scientifically scrutinize the use of "fad" diets as a means to lose weight.
Format: lecture, three hours per week. Evaluation will be based on exams, lab notebook and class participation.
Prerequisites: none. Enrollment limit: 120 (expected: 120). Preference given to seniors, juniors, sophomores, and first-year students--in that order. Does not
count for major credit in biology.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR Lab: 1-4 M,T,W,R SWOAP
BIOL 134 The Tropics: Biology and Social Issues (Same as Environmental Studies 134) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
Intended for the nonscientist, this course explores the biological dimensions of social issues in tropical societies, and focuses on specifically on the peoples and
cultures of tropical regions in Africa, Asia, Latin America, Oceanea, and the Caribbean. Tropical issues have become prominent on a global scale, and many
social issues in the tropics are inextricably bound to human ecology, evolution, and physiology. The course begins with a survey of the tropical environment of
humans, including major climatic and habitat features. The next section focuses on human population biology, and emphasizes demography and the role of
disease particularly malaria and AIDS. The final part of the course covers the place of human societies in local and global ecosystems including the challenges
of tropical food production, the importance of organic diversity, and the interaction of humans with their supporting ecological environment.
Format: lecture/debate, three hours per week. Evaluation will be based on two hour exams, a short paper, panel preparation, and a final exam.
91
Prerequisites: none. Enrollment limit: 60 (expected: 60).
This course fulfills the EDI requirement. Through lectures, debates and readings, students confront social issues in the tropics from the perspective of biologist.
This builds a framework for life long exploration of human diversity.
D. C. SMITH
BIOL 202(F) Genetics (Q)
Genetics, classically defined as the study of heredity, has evolved into a discipline whose limits are continually expanded by innovative molecular technologies.
This course covers the experimental basis for our current understanding of the inheritance, structures, and functions of genes. It introduces approaches used by
contemporary geneticists and molecular biologists to explore questions in areas of biology ranging from evolution to medicine. The laboratory part of the course
provides an experimental introduction to modern genetic analysis. Laboratory experiments include linkage analysis, bacterial transformation with plasmids and
DNA restriction mapping.
Format: lecture/laboratory, six hours per week. Evaluation will be based on problem sets, weekly laboratory exercises and laboratory reports, and examinations.
Prerequisites: Biology 101 and 102; open to first-year students with permission of the Biology department. No enrollment limit (expected: 84).
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 M,T,W,R MAROJA
BIOL 203(F) Ecology (Same as Environmental Studies 203) (Q)
This course combines lectures with field and indoor laboratory exercises to explore factors that determine the distribution and abundance of plants and animals in
natural systems. The course begins with an overall view of global patterns and then builds from the population to the ecosystem level. An emphasis is given to
basic ecological principles and relates them to current environmental issues. Selected topics include population dynamics (competition, predation, mutualism);
community interactions (succession, food chains and diversity) and ecosystem function (biogeochemical cycles, energy flow).
Format: lecture/laboratory, six hours per week. Evaluation will be based on problem sets, lab reports, hour exams, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Biology 101 and 102, or Environmental Studies 101 or 102, or permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 35).
Required course in the Environmental Studies Program. Satisfies distribution requirement in major.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 M,T D. C. SMITH
BIOL 204(S) Animal Behavior
Making sense of what we see while watching animals closely is both an enthralling pastime and a discipline that draws on many aspects of biology. Explanations
can be found on many levels: evolutionary theory tells us why certain patterns have come to exist, molecular biology can help us understand how those patterns
are implemented, neuroscience gives insights as to how the world appears to the behaving animal, endocrinology provides information on how suites of behav-
iors are regulated. The first part of the course focuses upon how descriptive studies provide the basis for formulating questions about behavior as well as the
statistical methods used to evaluate the answers to these questions. We then consider the behavior of individuals, both as it is mediated by biological mechanisms
and as it appears from an evolutionary perspective. The second half of the course is primarily concerned with the behaviors of groups of animals from a wide
variety of vertebrate and invertebrate species, concentrating upon the stimuli, responses, and internal mechanisms that maintain social systems and on the selec-
tion pressures that drive animals toward a particular social system.
Format: lecture/laboratory, six hours per week. Evaluation will be based on examinations, lab reports, and a research paper.
Prerequisites: Biology 102, or Psychology 101, or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 32 (expected: 32). Preference given to seniors and Biology majors.
Satisfies distribution requirement in the major.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR Lab: 1-4 T,W MORALES
BIOL 205(S) Physiology
This lecture-based course examines principles, patterns, and mechanisms of biological function from the level of cells and tissues to the whole organism. The
themes of the course include structure and function, mechanisms of regulation, control and integration, and adaptation to the environment. Examples of these
themes are taken from a wide variety of organisms with a focus on vertebrates. Laboratories provide practical experience in measurement and experimental
elucidation of physiological phenomena and functional analysis of gross structure.
Evaluation will be based on hour exams, laboratory practical, laboratory reports, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Biology 101 and 102. Enrollment limit: 32 (expected: 32). Preference given to juniors and seniors.
Satisfies distribution requirement in major.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 M,T,W SWOAP
BIOL 211(S) Invertebrate Paleobiology (Same as Geosciences 212)
(See under GEOS 212 for full description.) M. JOHNSON
Prerequisites: Biology 101, 102, or 203, or any 100-level Geosciences course.
BIOL 212(F) Neuroscience (Same as Neuroscience 201 and Psychology 212)
A study of the relationship between brain, mind, and behavior. Topics include a survey of the structure and function of the nervous system, basic neurophysiolo-
gy, development, learning and memory, sensory and motor systems, language, consciousness and clinical disorders such as schizophrenia, Parkinson's disease,
and Alzheimer's disease. The laboratory focuses on current topics in neuroscience.
Format: lecture, three hours a week; laboratory, every other week. Evaluation will be based on a lab practical, lab reports, two hour exams and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Psychology 101 or Biology 101; open to first-year students who satisfy the prerequisites, or by permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 72 (ex-
pected: 72). Preference given to sophomores and to Biology and Psychology majors.
Satisfies one semester of the Division III requirement.
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR Lab: 1-4 M,T,W N, SANDSTROM and H. WILLIAMS (lecture) MARVIN (labs)
BIOL 218T(F) DNA, Life and Everything (W)
Since the molecular biology revolution of the 1960s, a view of biology has developed which regards living organisms as predictable products of their encoded
DNA programs. A motto for this philosophy and scientific approach could be "To know my DNA is to know me." In this tutorial we'll examine the power and the
limitations of DNA analysis and manipulation for understanding life. Students will read and discuss scientific articles that deal with creating artificial life (the field
of synthetic biology), environmental DNA sampling (to deduce community structure; to discover new, uncultured species), human genome diversity surveys (to
discover the basis for human phenotypic variation and human evolutionary history), comparative genomics to address evolutionary questions (ex., chimps and
Neanderthals compared to humans), and resurrecting extinct organisms.
Format: tutorial. Evaluation will be based on 5 papers (45 pages each) and on inclass performance as a presenter or challenger. No prerequisites. Enrollment
limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to juniors, seniors, then sophomores.
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. ALTSCHULER
BIOL 220(S) Field Botany and Plant Natural History (Same as Environmental Studies 220)
This field-lecture course covers the evolutionary and ecological relationships among plant groups represented in our local and regional flora. Lectures focus on
the evolution of the land plants, the most recent and revolutionary developments in plant systemics and phylogeny, cultural and economic uses of plants, and
characteristics of plant families and native species. The labs cover field identification, natural history, and ecology of local species.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 25). Preference given to seniors, Biology majors, and Environmental Studies majors or concentrators.
Satisfies distribution requirement in major.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 T,W J. EDWARDS
BIOL 231(F,S) Marine Ecology (Same as Maritime Studies 311) (Offered only at Mystic Seaport.)
(See under MAST 311 for full description.) CARLTON
Prerequisites: Biology 101 and 102 or permission of instructor.
BIOL 301(F) Developmental Biology
Developmental biology has undergone rapid growth in recent years and is becoming a central organizing discipline that links cells and molecular biology, evolu-
tion, anatomy and medicine. We are now beginning to have a molecular understanding of fascinating questions such as how cells decide their fate, how patterns
are created, how male and females are distinguished, and how organisms came to be different. We have also discovered how the misregulation of important
92
development regulatory genes can lead to a variety of known cancers and degenerative diseases in humans. In this course we will examine these and related topics
combining a rich classical literature with modern genetic and molecular analyses.
Format: lecture/discussion/laboratory, six hours per week. Evaluation will be based on hour exams, short papers, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Biology 202 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 24 (expected: 15)
Open to first year students? No
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 T,W SAVAGE
BIOL 302 Communities and Ecosystems (Same as Environmental Studies 312) (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
An advanced ecology course that examines how organisms interact with each other and with abiotic factors. This course emphasizes phenomena that emerge in
complex ecological systems, building on the fundamental concepts of population biology and ecosystem ecology. Lectures and workshops explore how com-
munities and ecosystems are defined, and how theoretical, comparative, and experimental approaches are used to elucidate their structure and function. Field
laboratories emphasize hypothesis-oriented experiments; field trips introduce the diversity of natural communities and ecosystems in New England.
Format: lecture/laboratory, six hours a week. Evaluation will be based on lab reports, a term project with presentation, a midterm exam, a midterm paper, and a
final exam.
Prerequisites: Biology/Environmental Studies 203 or 220. Enrollment limit: 28 (expected: 24). Preference given to Biology majors and Environmental Studies
majors or concentrators.
MORALES
BIOL 304(F) Neurobiology (Same as Neuroscience 304)
This course is concerned with understanding the biology of the nervous system, focusing primarily on the cellular bases of neuronal function. Lectures will cover
such topics as nerve resting and action potentials, ion channels, neurotransmitters and synapses, and the neural correlates of behavior in organisms with simple
nervous systems. Reading original research papers and discussing them constitutes an important part of the course. Some of the topics that may be covered
include: transmitter release mechanisms, ion permeation through channels, plasticity in the nervous system, and various clinical disorders. Laboratories are de-
signed to introduce the students to modern techniques in neurobiology including extracellular and intracellular recording, histochemistry, and immunohistoche-
mistry.
Format: lecture/laboratory, six hours per week. Evaluation will be based on class participation, laboratory notebooks and posters, two hour exams and a final
exam.
Prerequisites: Neuroscience 201 or Biology 205. Enrollment limit: 16 (expected: 16). Preference given to Biology majors and Neuroscience concentrators.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR Lab: 1-4 M,W ZOTTOLI
BIOL 305(S) Evolution (Q)
This course offers a critical analysis of contemporary concepts and controversies in evolution. We focus on the relation of evolutionary mechanisms (e.g., selec-
tion, drift, and migration) to long term evolutionary patterns (e.g., evolutionary innovations, origin of major groups, and the emergence of diversity). Topics
include micro-evolutionary models, natural selection and adaptation, sexual selection, kin selection, speciation, and the inference of evolutionary history.
Format: lecture/discussion/laboratory, six hours per week. Evaluation will be based on written assignments and exams (70%, including an independent research
project), problem sets (10%), and participation in discussions (20%).
Prerequisites: Biology 202 or Biology 212. Enrollment limit: 24 (expected: 24). Preference given to Biology majors.
Satisfies distribution requirement in major.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 W,R MAROJA
BIOL 306(S) Cellular Regulatory Mechanisms
This course explores the regulation of cellular function and gene expression from a perspective that integrates current paradigms in molecular genetics, signal
transduction, and genomics. Topics include: transcriptional and posttranscriptional control, chromatin regulation of gene silencing and imprinting, chromosome
instability, protein degradation, organellar and cytoskeletal dynamics, and programmed cell death. The course will culminate with an indepth look at how these
cellular functions are used in concert in the generation and function of mammalian innate immune cells. A central feature of the course will be discussion of
articles from the primary literature, with an emphasis on the molecular bases for a variety of human pathologies, especially focused on cancer. The laboratory will
consist of a semesterlong research project that integrates recombinant DNA techniques with genomic tools.
Format: lecture/discussion/laboratory. Evaluation will be based on three tests, in-class discussion of papers, the laboratory notebook, an independent research
project, and a research paper.
Prerequisites: Biology 202; not open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 24 (expected: 24). Preference given to Biology majors.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR Lab: 1-4 T,W SNOW
BIOL 308 Integrative Plant Biology: Fundamentals and New Frontiers (Not offered 2011-2012)
Plants are one of the most successful groups of organisms on Earth and have a profound impact on all life. Successful use of plants in addressing global
problems and understanding their role in natural ecosystems depends on fundamental knowledge of the molecular mechanisms by which they grow, develop,
and respond to their environment. This course will examine the molecular physiology of plants using an integrative approach that considers plants as dynamic,
functional units in their environment. Major emphasis will be on understanding fundamental plant processes, such as photosynthesis, growth and development,
water transport, hormone physiology, and flowering, from the molecular to the organismal level. Environmental effects on these processes will be addressed in
topics including photomorphogenesis, stress physiology, mineral nutrition, and plant-microbe interactions. Discussions of original research papers will examine
the mechanisms plants use to perform these processes and explore advances in the genetic engineering of plants for agricultural, environmental, and medical
purposes. Laboratory activities stress modern approaches and techniques used in investigating plant physiological processes.
Format: lecture/discussion/laboratory, six hours per week. Evaluation will be based on lab reports, a term paper, and exams.
Prerequisites: Biology 202. Enrollment limit: 24 (expected: 12). Preference given to Biology majors.
Satisfies distribution requirement in major.
TING
BIOL 310(S) Neural Development and Plasticity (Same as Neuroscience 310)
Development can be seen as a tradeoff between geneticallydetermined processes and environmental stimuli. The tension between these two inputs is particular-
ly apparent in the developing nervous system, where many events must be predetermined, and where plasticity, or altered outcomes in response to environmental
conditions, is also essential. Plasticity is reduced as development and differentiation proceed, and the potential for regeneration after injury or disease in adults is
limited; however some exceptions to this rule exist, and recent data suggest that the nervous system is not hardwired as previously thought. In this course we will
discuss the mechanisms governing nervous system development, from relatively simple nervous systems such as that of the roundworm, to the more complicated
nervous systems of humans, examining the roles played by genetically specified programs and nongenetic influences.
Format: lecture/discussion/laboratory, six hours per week. Evaluation will be based on exams, class participation and lab reports.
Prerequisites: BIOL 212/NSCI 201. Enrollment limit: 24 (expected: 12/lab section). Preference given to Biology majors and Neuroscience concentrators.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 M,T LEBESTKY
BIOL 313(F) Immunology
The rapidly evolving field of immunology examines the complex network of interacting molecules and cells that function to recognize and respond to agents
foreign to the individual. In this course, we will focus on the cellular and biochemical mechanisms that act to regulate the development and function of the
immune system and how alterations in different system components can cause disease.
Format: lectures, three hours a week; laboratory, three hours a week. Evaluation will be based on exams, laboratory reports, and a research paper.
Prerequisites: Biology 202. Enrollment limit: 24 (expected: 24). Preference given to senior and then to junior Biology majors.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR Lab: 1-4 T,W SNOW
BIOL 315(S) Microbiology: Diversity, Cellular Physiology, and Interactions
Bioterrorism and the alarming spread of antibiotic resistant bacteria are but two of the reasons for the resurgence of interest in the biology of microorganisms. This
course will examine microbes from the perspectives of cell structure and function, genomics, and evolution. A central theme will be the adaptation of bacteria as
they evolve to fill specific ecological niches, with an emphasis on microbe:host interactions that lead to pathogenesis. We will consider communication among
bacteria as well as between bacteria and their environment. Topics include: microbial development, population dynamics, bioremediation, plant and animal de-
fenses against infection, and bacterial strategies to subvert the immune system. In the lab, major projects will focus on horizontal gene transfer, metagenomics,
93
and the isolation and characterization of bacteria from natural environments. Students will also use flow cytometry to investigate fundamental aspects of the
mammalian immune system. The lab experience will culminate in multi-week independent investigations. Readings will be supplemented by articles from the
primary literature.
Format: lectures, three hours a week; laboratory, three hours a week. Evaluation will be based on three exams, a lab report, and a poster presentation or term
paper.
Prerequisites: Biology 202. Enrollment limit: 24 (expected: 24). Preference given to senior and then to junior Biology majors.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 T,R BANTA
BIOL 319(F) Integrative Bioinformatics, Genomics, and Proteomics Lab (Same as Chemistry 319, Computer Science 319, Mathematics 319
and Physics 319) (Q)
What can computational biology teach us about cancer? In this capstone experience for the Genomics, Proteomics, and Bioinformatics program, computational
analysis and wet-lab investigations will inform each other, as students majoring in biology, chemistry, computer science, mathematics/statistics, and physics
contribute their own expertise to explore how ever-growing gene and protein data-sets can provide key insights into human disease. In this course, we will take
advantage of one well-studied system, the highly conserved Ras-related family of proteins, which play a central role in numerous fundamental processes within
the cell. The course will integrate bioinformatics and molecular biology, using database searching, alignments and pattern matching, and recombinant DNA
techniques to reconstruct the evolution of the RAS gene family by focusing on the gene duplication events and gene rearrangements that have occurred over the
course of eukaryotic speciation. By utilizing high through-put approaches to investigate genes involved in various signal transduction pathways, students will
identify pathways that are aberrantly activated in mammalian cell lines carrying a mutant, constantly active Ras protein. This functional genomic strategy will be
coupled with microscopic examination of tissue sections from a variety of human colon tumors, using phosphorylation-state specific antisera, to test our hypothe-
ses. Proteomic analysis will introduce the students to de novo structural prediction and threading algorithms, as well as data-mining approaches to identify specif-
ic amino acids involved in protein-protein contacts. Flow cytometry and mass spectrometry will be used to study networks of interacting proteins in normal colon
and colon tumor tissue.
Format: lab, with one-hour of lecture per week. Evaluation will be based on lab participation and several short papers/lab reports.
Prerequisites: Biology 202; alternatively, students who have not taken Biology 202 but have taken Biology 101/AP Biology and Computer Science 315 or Phys-
ics 315 or Computer Science 106, may enroll with permission of instructor. Enrollment: 12 (expected: 12). Preference given to seniors, then juniors/sophomores.
Hour: 12:25-1:10 W Lab: 1:15-4 W, R BANTA
BIOL 321(F) Biochemistry I--Structure and Function of Biological Molecules (Same as Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 321 and
Chemistry 321) (Q)
This course introduces the basic concepts of biochemistry with an emphasis on the structure and function of biological macromolecules. Specifically, the structure
of proteins and nucleic acids are examined in detail in order to determine how their chemical properties and their biological behavior result from those structures.
Other topics covered include catalysis, enzyme kinetics, mechanism and regulation; the molecular organization of biomembranes; and the flow of information
from nucleic acids to proteins. In addition, the principles and applications of the methods used to characterize macromolecules in solution and the interactions
between macromolecules are discussed. The laboratory provides an opportunity to study the structure of macromolecules and to learn the fundamental experi-
mental techniques of biochemistry including electrophoresis, chromatography, and principles of enzymatic assays.
The laboratory provides an opportunity to study the structure of macromolecules and to learn the fundamental experimental techniques of biochemistry including
electrophoresis, chromatography, and principles of enzymatic assays.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; laboratory, four hours per week. Evaluation will be based on quizzes, a midterm exam, a final exam, problem sets and
performance in the laboratories including lab reports.
Prerequisites: Biology 101 and Chemistry 251/255 and Chemistry 155/256. Enrollment limit: 48 (expected: 48). Preference given to junior and senior Biology
and Chemistry majors and BIMO concentrators.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-5 M,W, R GEHRING
BIOL 322(S) Biochemistry II--Metabolism (Same as Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 322 and Chemistry 322) (Q)
This lecture course provides an in-depth presentation of the complex metabolic reactions which are central to life. Emphasis is placed on the biological flow of
energy including alternative modes of energy generation (aerobic, anaerobic, photosynthetic); the regulation and integration of the metabolic pathways including
compartmentalization and the transport of metabolites; and biochemical reaction mechanisms including the structures and mechanisms of coenzymes. This com-
prehensive study also includes the biosynthesis and catabolism of small molecules (carbohydrates, lipids, amino acids, and nucleotides). Laboratory experiments
introduce the principles and procedures used to study enzymatic reactions, bioenergetics, and metabolic pathways.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; laboratory, four hours per week. Evaluation will be based on several exams and performance in the laboratories including
lab reports that emphasize conceptual and quantitative and/or graphic analysis of the data generated.
Prerequisites: Biology 101 and Chemistry 251/255. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 40). Preference given to junior and senior Biology and Chemistry majors and
BIMO concentrators.
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 T,W D. LYNCH
BIOL 407(F) Neurobiology of Emotion (Same as Neuroscience 347)
Emotion is influenced and governed by a number of neural circuits and substrates, and emotional states can be influenced by experience, memory, cognition, and
many external stimuli. We will read and discuss articles about mammalian neuroanatomy associated with emotion as defined by classic lesion studies, phar-
macology, electrophysiology, fMRI imaging, knockout mouse studies, as well as new optigenetic methods for investigating neural circuit function in order to
gain an understanding of the central circuits and neurotransmitter systems that are implicated in emotional processing and mood disorders.
Format: lecture, three hours per week. Evaluation will be based on class participation and several short papers.
Prerequisites: Biology 202 and 212. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 12). Preference given to senior Biology majors who have not taken a 400level Biology
course, then to eligible NSCI concentrators.
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR LEBESTKY
BIOL 408(S) RNA Worlds
Ribonucleic acids (RNAs) serve as genomes, catalysts, messengers, adaptors, regulators, structural components, and evolutionary substrates. Noncoding RNAs
such as microRNAs, ribozymes, and small interfering RNAs control a diverse range of biological processes including plant and animal development, translation,
epigenetic chromosome silencing, and cancer. This course explores recently discovered noncoding RNAs and considers evidence for their mechanisms of
action. Through extensive reading of primary literature, we will analyze experimental investigations that reveal our current understanding of the functions and
evolution of noncoding RNAs in all three domains of life.
Format: discussion, three hours per week. Evaluation will be based on class participation and several short papers.
Prerequisites: Biology 202. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 12). Preference given to senior Biology majors who have not taken a 400level course and BIMO
concentrators.
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR, 11:20-12:35 TR RAYMOND
BIOL 413(S) Molecular Basis of Biological Clocks
Circadian rhythms have been described in all organisms studied, including humans, a wide range of other eukaryotes and several prokaryotes. With periods of
about 24 hours, these rhythms regulate biochemical, cellular, physiological and behavioral activities. Circadian rhythms are generated by cellular clocks--geneti-
cally determined internal pacemakers that maintain their oscillations in the absence of environmental cues but may be reset by periodicities in the environment,
especially the light-dark cycle. Only recently have we begun to understand how circadian rhythms are generated and controlled at the cellular level. This course
will explore the basic biochemical features of biological clocks with the aim of understanding their crucial role in regulating key biological parameters, such as
enzyme levels, levels of hormones and other regulatory molecules, and activity and sleep cycles. Class discussions will focus on readings in the original literature.
Format: discussion, three hours per week. Evaluation will be based on class participation and several short papers.
Prerequisites: Biology 202. Enrollment limit: 2 sections of 12 per section (expected: 12 ). Open to juniors and seniors, with preference given to senior Biology
majors who have not taken a 400-level course. Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR, 9:55-11:10 TR DEWITT
BIOL 414(F) Life at Extremes: Molecular Mechanisms
All organisms face variability in their environments, and the molecular and cellular responses to stresses induced by environmental change often illuminate
otherwise hidden facets of normal physiology. Moreover, many organisms have evolved unique molecular mechanisms, such as novel cellular compounds or
macromolecular structural modifications, which contribute to their ability to survive continuous exposure to extreme conditions, such as high temperatures or low
94
pH. This course will examine how chaperonins, proteases, and heat and cold-shock proteins are regulated in response to changes in the external environment.
We will then consider how these and other molecular mechanisms function to stabilize DNA and proteins--and, ultimately, cells and organisms. Other extreme
environments, such as hydrothermal vents on the ocean floor, snow fields, hypersaline lakes, the intertidal zone, and acid springs provide further examples of
cellular and molecular responses to extreme conditions. Biotechnological applications of these molecular mechanisms in areas such as protein engineering will
also be considered. Class discussions will focus upon readings from the primary literature.
Format: discussion, three hours per week. Evaluation will be based on class participation and several short papers.
Prerequisites: Biology 202. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 12). Open to juniors and seniors, with preference given to senior Biology majors who have not taken a
400level course, then to juniors.
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR TING
BIOL 416 Epigenetics (Not offered 2011-2012)
After decades of studies emphasizing the role of DNA in heredity, scientists are now turning their attention from genetics to a variety of heritable phenomena
that fall under the heading of epigenetics, heritable changes that do not result from an alteration in DNA sequence. Research reveals that stable changes in cell
function can result from, for example, stable changes in protein conformation, protein modification, DNA methylation, or the location of a molecule within the
cell. Using readings from the primary literature, we will explore the epigenetic nature and molecular mechanisms underlying a diverse array of phenomena such
as prion propagation, genetic imprinting, dosage compensation, transvection, centromere formation, synapse function, and programmed genome rearrange-
ments. The significance of epigenetic processes for development, evolution, and human health will be discussed.
Format: discussion, three hours per week. Evaluation will be based on class participation and several short papers.
Prerequisites: Biology 202. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 12). Open to juniors and seniors, with preference given to senior Biology majors who have not
taken a 400-level course, then to juniors.
ALTSCHULER
BIOL 422T Ecology of Sustainable Agriculture (Same as Environmental Studies 422T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
A tutorial course investigating patterns, processes, and concepts of stability in human-dominated, food production ecosystems. As a capstone course in biology,
the tutorial will draw heavily upon the experiences that students have had in courses such as Ecology and Genetics. Topics will include: the relationships among
diversity, ecosystem function, sustainability, resilience, and stability of food production systems, nutrient pools and processing in human-dominated ecosys-
tems. Two field trips will be taken to agricultural operations in the region.
Each student will write five 5-page papers that deal with topics requiring extensive reading of primary resources. Paper presentations will alternate with serving
as a critic of other student papers. Students will be given the opportunity to revise and rewrite two of the first four papers in the week following their tutorial
presentation thereby being able to respond to the criticism and discussion of the tutorial group.
Format: tutorial/field trip, one to three hours per week. Requirements: evaluation will be based on writing assignments, tutorial presentation, performance in the
role of paper critic, and course participation.
Prerequisites: Biology 203 or Biology 302 or Environmental Studies 203 or permission of instructor; open to juniors and seniors. Enrollment limit: 10 (ex-
pected: 10). Preference given to senior Biology majors who have not taken a 400-level course, then to senior Environmental Studies majors or concentrators.
Satisfies the distribution requirement in the Biology major; the Natural World distributional requirement of the Environmental Studies program.
ART
BIOL 424T(F) Conservation Biology (Same as Environmental Studies 424T) (W)
This tutorial examines the application of population genetics, population ecology, community ecology, and systematic to the conservation of biological diversity.
While the focus of this tutorial is on biological rather than social, legal, or political issues underlying conservation decisions, the context is to develop science
based recommendations that can inform policy. Topics include extinction, the genetics of small populations, habitat fragmentation, the impact of invasive species,
restoration ecology, design of reserves and conservation strategies.
Format: tutorial/field trip, one to three hours per week. Evaluation will be based on 5 writing assignments, tutorial presentation, performance in the role of paper
critic, and course participation.
Prerequisites: Biology 203 or Biology 302 or 305 or permission of instructor; open to juniors and seniors. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to
senior Biology majors who have not taken a 400level course, then to senior Environmental Studies majors or concentrators.
Satisfies the distribution requirement in the Biology major; the Natural World distributional requirement of the Environmental Studies program.
Tutorial meetings to be arranged J. EDWARDS
BIOL 426T Frontiers in Muscle Physiology: Controversies (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
While an active muscle produces force, contraction of muscle is far from the only function of this intriguing organ system. Muscle plays a major role in meta-
bolic regulation of organisms, acts as a glucose storage facility, regulates blood pressure in mammals, and produces numerous hormones. The mechanism for
contractile activity varies not only among different organisms, but also among different muscles within the same organism. Controversies, disagreements, and
arguments pervade the muscle biology literature perhaps because of the integrative nature of the science. In this tutorial course, we will utilize molecular,
physiological, comparative, and evolutionary aspects of muscle biology to address current controversies of this dynamic tissue. Some questions that will be
addressed include: 1) Lactic acid generated by skeletal muscle is / is not involved with fatigue at high exercise intensity, 2) Satellite cells are / are not obligatory
for skeletal muscle hypertrophy, 3) Do mammals possess the same "stretch activation" of skeletal muscle as seen in insect flight muscle?, 4) Are smooth and
skeletal muscles from the same lineage of cells, or do they represent convergent evolution on the tissue level? After an initial group meeting, students meet
weekly with a tutorial partner and the instructor for an hour each week. Every other week at this tutorial meeting, students present a written and oral critical
analysis of the assigned research articles. Students not making a presentation question and critique the work of their colleague.
Format: tutorial meeting one hour a week. Evaluation is based on five tutorial papers of four pages each, five critiques, tutorial presentations, and general
participation.
Prerequisite: Biology 205. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected:10). Preference will be given to biology majors who have not had a 400-level biology course. Not
available for the Gaudinio option.
SWOAP
BIOL 430T Genome Sciences: At the Cutting Edge (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Research in genomics has integrated and revolutionized the field of biology, including areas of medicine, plant biology, microbiology, and evolutionary biology.
Moreover, recent developments in "metagenomics" (genomic studies of entire communities of microorganisms in natural environments, such as the mammali-
an gut and the deep sea) and "metatranscriptomics" (studies of genome wide changes in expression and mRNA levels in natural communities of organisms)
have generated unprecedented knowledge about the genomic potential of a community and the in situ biological activity of different ecological niches. In this
course we will explore how research in these and related areas, including proteomics, have advanced our fundamental understanding of (1) organisms in the
three domains of life, and their interactions and evolutionary relationships; (2) biological systems and environments, such as the human body, extreme environ-
ments, and the oceans; (3) strategies for solving global challenges in medicine, agriculture, energy resources, and environmental sciences. During the course,
students will meet each week for one hour with a tutorial partner and the instructor. Every other week, students will present a written and oral critical analysis of
the assigned research articles. On alternate weeks, students will question/critique the work of their colleague.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: evaluation will be based on five (4-5 page) papers, tutorial presentations, and the student's effectiveness as a critic.
Prerequisites: Biology 202; open to juniors and seniors. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to senior Biology majors who have not taken a
400-level course.
TING
RESEARCH AND THESIS COURSES
Individual research projects must be approved by the department. Application should be made to the department prior to spring registration.
NOTE: Senior thesis and independent study courses do not count as 300-level or 400-level course requirements for the major. Only one
research course (i.e., BIOL 297, BIOL 298, BIOL 493, or BIOL 494) may be counted towards the major requirements.
BIOL 297(F), 298(S) Independent Study
Each student carries out independent field or laboratory research under the supervision of a member of the department.
95
BIOL 493(F,S)-494(F,S)-W31 Senior Thesis Research
Each student prepares a thesis under the supervision of a member of the department. Thesis work can begin either in the spring of the junior or the fall of the senior
year, and includes the Winter Study period of the senior year.
The number of Biology Department faculty available to mentor research students and the number of students each can accommodate in her/his lab vary from year
to year. Although the department will make every effort to provide an opportunity for students to conduct Honors research, you should be aware that it may not be
possible to assign all applicants to a laboratory.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 F Staff
CHEMISTRY (Div. III)
Chair, Professor JOHN W. THOMAN, Jr.
Professors: KAPLAN, LOVETT, PARK, PEACOCKLPEZ, RICHARDSON**, T. SMITH**, THOMAN. Associate Professors: BINGEMANN,
GEHRING, S. GOH***. Assistant Professors: C. GOH*. Professor Emeritus: R. CHANG. Senior Lecturer Emerita: SKINNER. Lecturers: MA-
CINTIRE, TRURAN.
MAJOR
Through a variety of individual courses and sequential programs, the department provides an opportunity for students to explore the nature and significance of
chemistry, an area of important achievement in our quest for knowledge about ourselves and the world around us. The student of chemistry is able to become
aware of the special viewpoint of chemists, the general nature of chemical investigation, some of its important results, how these results are expressed, and
something of their significance within the fields of science and in the area of human endeavor as a whole. The Chemistry major provides excellent preparation for
graduate study in chemistry, biochemistry, chemical engineering, environmental science, materials science, medicine, and the medical sciences.
A major in chemistry can be achieved in several ways, preferably beginning in the student's first year at Williams, but also beginning in the sophomore year.
Building on a foundation in general chemistry, organic chemistry, and physical chemistry, a student elects additional advanced courses to complete a major that is
consistent with his or her background in other sciences, interests, and goals. A student's program might emphasize biochemistry, organic chemistry, physical
chemistry, or inorganic chemistry, with additional courses available in analytical chemistry, environmental science, and materials science. Students considering a
major in chemistry should consult with a member of the department as early as possible in order to plan a program which best suits their interests and abilities and
which makes full use of their previous preparation.
All students begin their study in the department with either Chemistry 151, 153, or 155. Placement at the introductory level is based upon performance on the
departmental placement test results and consultation with the chair; results of the College Board Advanced Placement Test or the International Baccalaureate
Exam are also taken into account. The first year is completed with Chemistry 156. In the second year at the introductory level, students take Chemistry 251 (or
255) and Chemistry 256 (those students who complete 155 are exempted from 256). Completion of a Chemistry major requires either nine semester chemistry
courses or eight semester chemistry courses plus two approved courses from among the following: Biology 101; Computer Science 134; Mathematics 103, 104,
105, 106; Physics 131, 141; or any courses in these departments for which the approved courses are prerequisites. Starting at the 300 level, at least three of the
courses taken must have a laboratory component, and at least one must be selected from Chemistry 361, 366, 364, or 367. (The specific course elected, in con-
sultation with the chair or major advisor, will depend on the student's future plans.) In addition, the department has a number of "Independent Research Courses"
which, while they do not count toward completion of the major, provide a unique opportunity to pursue an independent research project under the direction of a
faculty member.
Required Courses
First Year:
Fall: 151,153 or 155 Introductory Chemistry
Spring: 156 Organic Chemistry: Introductory Level
Second Year:
Fall: 251 (or 255) Organic Chemistry: Intermediate Level
Spring: 256 Foundations of Modern Chemical Science
Elective Courses
319 Integrative Bioinformatics, Genomics, and Proteomics Lab
321 Biochemistry I-Structure and Function of Biological Molecules
322 Biochemistry II-Metabolism
324 Enzyme Kinetics and Reaction Mechanisms
335 Inorganic/Organometallic Chemistry
336 Materials Chemistry
341 Toxicology and Cancer
342 Synthetic Organic Chemistry
343 Medicinal Chemistry
344T Physical Organic Chemistry
348 Polymer Chemistry
361 Physical Chemistry: Structure and Dynamics
364 Instrumental Methods of Analysis
366 Physical Chemistry: Thermodynamics
367 Biophysical Chemistry
368T Quantum Chemistry and Molecular Spectroscopy
Independent Research Courses
393-W31-394 Junior Research and Thesis
397, 398 Independent Study, for Juniors
493-W31-494 Senior Research and Thesis
497, 498 Independent Study, for Seniors
For the purpose of assisting students in selecting a program consistent with their interests and possible continuation of their studies at the gradu-
ate level, the following groupings of electives and faculty advisors are suggested. However, a case can be made for selecting courses from the
different groups.
Biochemistry: Chemistry 321, Chemistry 322, Chemistry 324, Chemistry 341, Chemistry 364, Chemistry 367. Students interested in biochemistry
should consult with Professors Gehring, Kaplan, or Lovett.
Organic Chemistry: Chemistry 341, Chemistry 342, Chemistry 343, Chemistry 344T, Chemistry 348, Chemistry 364, Chemistry 361, Chemistry 366.
Students interested in organic chemistry should consult with Professors S. Goh, Richardson, or Smith.
Physical and Inorganic Chemistry: Chemistry 335, Chemistry 336, Chemistry 361, Chemistry 364, Chemistry 366, Chemistry 368T. Students interested
in physical chemistry should consult with Professors Bingemann, Peacock-Lpez, or Thoman. Students interested in inorganic chemistry should consult
with Professor C. Goh or Park. Students interested in materials science should consult with Professors C. Goh or Park.
While any accepted route through the major would permit a student to proceed to graduate study in chemistry, four electives should be consid-
ered a minimum, and at least a semester of research is strongly recommended.
The department is accredited by the American Chemical Society (A.C.S.), a professional body of academic, industrial, and research chemists.
The A.C.S. suggests the following courses for someone considering graduate study or work in chemistry or a related area: 151 (153 or 155),
156, 251 (255), 256, 335, 361, 364, 366, 493-494; and at least two courses from 321, 322, 342, 344T, 348, 368T, BIMO 401. Students complet-
ing these courses are designated Certified A.C.S. Majors.
BIOCHEMISTRY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY (BIMO)
Students interested in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology should consult with the general statement under the Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Program
(BIMO) in the Courses of Instruction. Students interested in completing the BIMO program are also encouraged to complete the biochemistry courses within the
chemistry major by taking 321, 322, 324, and 367 in addition to the first and second year required courses.
BIOINFORMATICS, GENOMICS, AND PROTEOMICS (BiGP)
Students interested in Bioinformatics, Genomics, and Proteomics should consult the general statement under Bioinformatics, Genomics, and Proteomics in the
Courses of Instruction. Students interested in these areas are also encouraged to complete the biochemistry courses within the chemistry major by taking 319, 321,
322, 324 and 367 in addition to the first and second year required courses.
96
MATERIALS SCIENCE
Students interested in Materials Science are encouraged to elect courses from the Materials Science program offered jointly with the Physics Department, and
should consult that listing.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN CHEMISTRY
The degree with honors in Chemistry provides students with an opportunity to undertake an independent research project under the supervision of a faculty
member, and to report on the nature of the work in two short oral presentations and in a written thesis.
Chemistry majors who are candidates for the degree with honors take the following in addition to a major outlined above:
Chemistry 493-W31-494 Senior Research and Thesis
The principal considerations in admitting a student to a program of independent research are mastery of fundamental materials and skills, ability to pursue
independent study successfully, and demonstrated student interest and motivation. In addition, to enroll in these courses leading to a degree with honors, a student
must have at least a B- average in all chemistry courses or the permission of the chair. At the end of the first semester of the senior year, the department reviews the
student's progress and determines whether the student is a candidate for a degree with honors. The designation of a degree with honors in Chemistry or a degree
with highest honors in Chemistry is based primarily on a departmental evaluation of the accomplishments in these courses and on the quality of the thesis.
Completion of the research project in a satisfactory manner and preparation of a well-written thesis usually results in a degree with honors. In cases where a
student has demonstrated unusual commitment and initiative resulting in an outstanding thesis based on original results, combined with a strong record in all of
his or her chemistry courses, the department may elect to award a degree with highest honors in Chemistry.
EXCHANGE AND TRANSFER STUDENTS
Students from other institutions wishing to register for courses in chemistry involving college-level prerequisites should do so in person with a member of the
Chemistry Department. Registration should take place by appointment during the spring semester prior to the academic year in which courses are to be taken.
Students are requested to have with them transcripts of the relevant previous college work.
COURSES FOR NON-MAJORS WITH NO PREREQUISITES
Students with principal interests outside of the sciences may extend a secondary school foundation in chemistry by electing a basic two-semester introductory
course of a general nature or they may elect semester courses designed for non-majors. All courses in chemistry satisfy the divisional distribution requirement.
STUDY ABROAD
Students who wish to complete a chemistry major (or chemistry requirements for pre-medical study) as well as to study abroad during their junior
year are encouraged to begin taking chemistry in their first semester at Williams, and should consult with members of the department as early as pos-
sible.
COURSES FOR NON-MAJORS WITH NO PREREQUISITES
CHEM 113(S) Chemistry and Crime: From Sherlock Holmes to Modern Forensic Science
In this course, designed for students who do not plan to major in the natural sciences, we use a case-oriented approach to explore selected topics of forensic
science. These include: (1) the scientific and technological foundation for the examination of physical, chemical, and biological items of evidence, and (2) the
scope of expert qualifications and testimony, the legal status of scientific techniques, and the admissibility of the results in evidence. The analysis of trace evi-
dence, including glass, soil, gunpowder residues and bullet fragments, and inorganic and heavy metal poisons are discussed through an understanding of the basic
concepts of chemistry and analytical chemistry. Forensic toxicology and pharmacology are applied to the analysis of alcohol, poisons, and drugs based upon the
principles of organic chemistry and biochemistry. The characterization of blood and other body fluids necessitate an understanding of serology and molecular
genetics. The cases which stimulate the exploration of these areas include: the John and Robert Kennedy assassinations, the Jeffrey MacDonald case (Fatal
Vision), the Wayne Williams case, the deaths of celebrities Marilyn Monroe, John Belushi, and Janis Joplin, the authenticity of the Shroud of Turin, the Lindberg
baby kidnapping, the Tylenol poisonings, and the identity of Anastasia.
An interactive laboratory program provides an appreciation of scientific experimentation in general and the work of a crime lab in particular. It includes an
analysis of evidence collected at various crime scenes and provides an opportunity to learn forensic techniques such as chromatography (for ink, drug, and fire
accelerant analysis), spectroscopy (for alcohol and drug analysis), and electrophoresis (for DNA fingerprinting).
This course is designed for the non-science major who does not intend to pursue a career in the natural sciences.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; laboratory, four hours per week. Evaluation will be based on problem sets and/or quizzes, hour tests, a final exam, and
laboratory performance.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 30).
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-5 M, W KAPLAN
CHEM 115(S) AIDS: The Disease and Search for a Cure
Since the discovery of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) in 1983, modern techniques of molecular biology have revealed much about its structure and
life cycle. The intensity of the scientific investigation directed at HIV-1 is unprecedented in history. We now know more about this virus than any other known
pathogen. However, the early optimism concerning the prospects for an effective AIDS vaccine has now waned and HIV strains that are resistant to drug therapies
are common. We are now nearly three decades into the AIDS pandemic and the World Health Organization estimates that there are more than 33 million HIV-in-
fected persons worldwide.
After an introduction to chemical structure, we examine the molecular biology of the HIV virus, the molecular targets of anti-HIV drugs, and the prospects for a
cure. We look at how HIV-1 interacts with the human immune system and discuss both old and new methods of vaccine development as well as the prospects for
making an effective AIDS vaccine.
This course is designed for the non-science major who does not intend to pursue a career in the natural sciences.
Format: lecture, three hours per week. Evaluation will be based on problem sets, a midterm, quizzes, a final exam, and a paper/discussion.
No prerequisites. No enrollment limit (expected: 60).
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF LOVETT
CHEM 262T Applying the Scientific Method to Archaeology and Paleoanthropology (Same as Anthropology 262T) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(W)
How do we `know' early hominids migrated from Africa to Europe? What's the origin of Grecian pottery glazes? Archaeological studies of human environ-
mental impact include materials as recent as nineteenth century glass, or as ancient as hundred-thousand year old stone tools. Paleoanthropology, the study of
early humans, covers materials that are millions of years old. Natural science can answer many questions, not just how old an object is, but also where, how and
sometimes why an object was made. These answers in turn tell us about patterns of human development and settlement, and also help us distinguish forgeries
from genuine artifacts. Understanding when we do not know an answer is also important. This tutorial will introduce science students to interesting applica-
tions, and introduce students from anthropology, art history, or just possessing general curiosity to the methods and limits of `scientific analysis'. Given the wide
scope of this field, students will decide some of the topics. Papers will be thoroughly edited for style, grammar and syntax, as well as the quality of argument.
Students will improve their writing by integrating into successive papers the editorial comments they receive and also by editing the writing of their tutorial
partners.
Format: tutorial. Evaluation will be based on five 5- to 6-page papers.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to sophomores.
INTRODUCTORY- AND INTERMEDIATE-LEVEL COURSES
CHEM 151(F) Introductory Concepts of Chemistry (Q)
This course provides a general introduction to chemistry for those students who are anticipating professional study in chemistry, in related sciences, or in one of
the health professions, as well as for those students who are interested in exploring the fundamental ideas of chemistry as part of their general education. In
addition to presenting an overview of chemical concepts, the course provides the foundation for the further study of organic chemistry, physical chemistry, and
biochemistry, and it gives special attention to the principles of qualitative and quantitative analysis.
The principal topics include chemical bonding, molecular structure, stoichiometry, chemical equilibrium, acid-base reactions, oxidation-reduction reactions, solu-
bility equilibria, and related applications. Laboratory work comprises a system of qualitative analysis and quantitative techniques.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; laboratory, four hours per week. Evaluation will be based on quantitative weekly problem set assignments, laboratory work
and reports, quizzes, one hour test, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: basic proficiency in mathematics as demonstrated in the diagnostic test administered to all first-year students at the beginning of the academic year.
In lieu of that, Chemistry 151 may be taken concurrently with Mathematics 100/101/102--see under Mathematics. Chemistry 151 or its equivalent is prerequisite
to Chemistry 156. Those students with a strong background in chemistry from high school are encouraged to consider Chemistry 153 or 155. No enrollment limit
(expected: 100).
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF Lab: 1-5 M,T,W,R; 8 a.m.-12 T; 7-11 p.m. M LOVETT
97
CHEM 153(F) Introductory Concepts of Chemistry: Advanced Section (Q)
This course parallels Chemistry 151 and provides a foundation in chemistry for students who are anticipating professional study in chemistry, related sciences, or
one of the health professions, as well as for those who are interested in exploring the fundamental ideas of chemistry as part of their general education. It is
designed for those with sound preparation in secondary school chemistry and to provide the foundation for further study of organic (Chemistry 156) or inorganic/
physical (Chemistry 256) chemistry. Principal topics include kinetic theory of gases, modern atomic theory, molecular structure and bonding, states of matter,
chemical equilibrium (acid-base and solubility), and an introduction to atomic and molecular spectroscopies.
Laboratory work includes synthesis, qualitative and quantitative chemical analysis, and molecular modeling.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; laboratory, four hours per week. Evaluation will be based on quantitative weekly problem set assignments, laboratory work
and reports, hour tests, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: placement exam administered during First Days and permission of instructor are required. No enrollment limit (expected: 25).
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF Lab: 1-5 M,T THOMAN
CHEM 155(F) Principles of Modern Chemistry (Q)
This course provides a foundation in chemistry for those students who are anticipating professional study in chemistry, related sciences, or one of the health
professions, as well as for those students who are interested in exploring the fundamental ideas of chemistry as part of their general education. This course is
designed for those students with strong preparation in secondary school chemistry and will focus on topics in physical and inorganic chemistry and their practical
applications, providing a foundation for advanced study in these areas. Topics include chemical thermodynamics, kinetics, structure and bonding, coordination
chemistry, electrochemistry and spectroscopy and their application to fields such as materials science, industrial, environmental, biological, and medicinal chem-
istry.
Laboratory work includes synthesis, characterization, and reactivity of coordination complexes, electrochemical analysis, materials chemistry, qualitative analy-
sis, and molecular modeling.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; laboratory, four hours per week.
Requirements: Evaluation will be based on quantitative weekly problem set assignments, laboratory work and reports, hour tests, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: placement exam administered during First Days and permission of instructor.
No enrollment limit (expected: 25).
Preference: none.
Hour: 8:00-8:50 MWF Lab: 1-5 W,R PEACOCK-LPEZ
CHEM 156(S) Organic Chemistry: Introductory Level (Q)
This course provides the necessary background in organic chemistry for students who are planning advanced study or a career in chemistry, the biological
sciences, or the health professions. It initiates the systematic study of the common classes of organic compounds with emphasis on theories of structure and
reactivity. The fundamentals of molecular modeling as applied to organic molecules are presented. Specific topics include basic organic structure and bonding,
isomerism, stereochemistry, molecular energetics, the theory and interpretation of infrared and nuclear magnetic spectroscopy, substitution and elimination reac-
tions, and the addition reactions of alkenes and alkynes. The coordinated laboratory work includes purification and separation techniques, structure-reactivity
studies, organic synthesis, IR and NMR spectroscopy, and the identification of unknown compounds.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; laboratory, four hours per week. Evaluation will be based on quantitative problem sets, laboratory performance, including
written lab reports, three midterm exams, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 151 or 153 or 155 or placement exam or permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 120).
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-5 M,T,W,R; 8 a.m.-12 T; 7-11 p.m. M RICHARDSON
CHEM 251(F) Organic Chemistry: Intermediate Level
This course is a continuation of Chemistry 156 and it concludes the systematic study of the common classes of organic compounds with emphasis on theories of
structure and reactivity. Specific topics include radical chemistry, an introduction to mass spectrometry and ultraviolet spectroscopy, the theory and chemical
reactivity of conjugated and aromatic systems, the concepts of kinetic and thermodynamic control, an extensive treatment of the chemistry of the carbonyl group,
alcohols, ethers, polyfunctional compounds, the concept of selectivity, the fundamentals of organic synthesis, an introduction to carbohydrates, carboxylic acids
and derivatives, acyl substitution reactions, amines, and an introduction to amino acids, peptides, and proteins. The coordinated laboratory work includes applica-
tion of the techniques learned in the introductory level laboratory, along with new functional group analyses, to the separation and identification of several un-
known samples. Skills in analyzing NMR, IR, and MS data are practiced and further refined.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; laboratory, four hours per week. Evaluation will be based on midterm exams, problem sets, laboratory performance, in-
cluding written lab reports, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 156 or permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 100).
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-5 M,T,W,R; 8 a.m.-12 T S. GOH
CHEM 255(F) Organic Chemistry: Intermediate Level--Special Laboratory Section
This course is a continuation of Chemistry 156 and contains the same material as Chemistry 251 except for the laboratory program described below:
The aim of this advanced laboratory section is to enrich and enhance the laboratory experiences of motivated students of recognized ability by providing a labora-
tory program that more closely resembles the unpredictable nature and immediacy of true chemical research. Students synthesize, isolate, and characterize (using
a range of modern physical and spectroscopic techniques) a family of unknown materials in a series of experiments constituting an integrated, semester-long
investigation. A flexible format is employed in which the students are responsible for helping to plan the course of their laboratory work based upon discussions
with the instructor about the previous week's experimental results. Students are drawn from Chemistry 156 with placement based upon student selection and
nomination by the Chemistry 156 instructor. Participants attend their regular Chemistry 251 lecture but attend the special laboratory section instead of a Chemis-
try 251 laboratory section.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; laboratory, four hours per week; weekly one-hour discussion. Evaluation will be based on the requirements for the Chemis-
try 251 lecture and performance in this special laboratory section including written laboratory reports and participation in discussions.
Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 12). Preference given to sophomores. Permission of instructor is required.
This course was developed under a grant from the Ford Foundation.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-5 R L. PARK
CHEM 256(S) Foundations of Modern Chemical Science
This course treats an array of topics in modern chemistry, emphasizing broad concepts that connect and weave through the various traditional subdisciplines of the
field. We begin at the microscopic level (atomic, molecular) with an introduction to coordination complexes (with applications in bioinorganic and geochemistry
for instance.) From here we move on to a detailed description of structure and bonding, comparing the strengths, weaknesses and appropriate application of
various bonding theories to different types of chemical complexes (small organic molecules, biomolecules, coordination complexes, and organic electronic mate-
rials for instance). We then transition to a broader, more macroscopic perspective, covering chemical thermodynamics and kinetics. In this section we emphasize
how these broader views allow us to study different aspects of chemical reactivity of all types. Laboratory work includes experiments involving synthesis, charac-
terization, and reactivity studies of coordination and organic complexes, spectroscopic analyses, thermodynamics, kinetics, electrochemical, and nuclear chemis-
try.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; laboratory, four hours per week. Evaluation will be based on homework assignments, laboratory work, hour tests, and a
final exam.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 251/255, or permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 60).
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF Lab: 1-5 M,T,W,R; 8 a.m.-12 T PEACOCK-LPEZ
UPPER-LEVEL COURSES
CHEM 319(F) Integrative Bioinformatics, Genomics, and Proteomics Lab (Same as Biology 319, Computer Science 319, Mathematics 319
and Physics 319) (Q)
(See under BIOL 319 for full description.)
CHEM 321(F) Biochemistry I--Structure and Function of Biological Molecules (Same as Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 321 and
Biology 321) (Q)
This course introduces the basic concepts of biochemistry with an emphasis on the structure and function of biological macromolecules. Specifically, the structure
of proteins and nucleic acids are examined in detail in order to determine how their chemical properties and their biological behavior result from those structures.
Other topics covered include catalysis, enzyme kinetics, mechanism and regulation; the molecular organization of biomembranes; and the flow of information
98
from nucleic acids to proteins. In addition, the principles and applications of the methods used to characterize macromolecules in solution and the interactions
between macromolecules are discussed. The laboratory provides an opportunity to study the structure of macromolecules and to learn the fundamental experi-
mental techniques of biochemistry including electrophoresis, chromatography, and principles of enzymatic assays.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; laboratory, four hours per week. Evaluation will be based on quizzes, a midterm exam, a final exam, problem sets and
performance in the laboratories including lab reports.
Prerequisites: Biology 101 and Chemistry 251/255 and Chemistry 155/256. Enrollment limit: 48 (expected: 48). Preference given to junior and senior Biology
and Chemistry majors and BIMO concentrators.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-5 M,W,R GEHRING
CHEM 322(S) Biochemistry II--Metabolism (Same as Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 322 and Biology 322) (Q)
This lecture course provides an in-depth presentation of the complex metabolic reactions which are central to life. Emphasis is placed on the biological flow of
energy including alternative modes of energy generation (aerobic, anaerobic, photosynthetic); the regulation and integration of the metabolic pathways including
compartmentalization and the transport of metabolites; and biochemical reaction mechanisms including the structures and mechanisms of coenzymes. This com-
prehensive study also includes the biosynthesis and catabolism of small molecules (carbohydrates, lipids, amino acids, and nucleotides). Laboratory experiments
introduce the principles and procedures used to study enzymatic reactions, bioenergetics, and metabolic pathways.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; laboratory, four hours per week. Evaluation will be based on several exams and performance in the laboratories including
lab reports that emphasize conceptual and quantitative and/or graphic analysis of the data generated.
Prerequisites: Biology 101 and Chemistry 251/255. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 40). Preference given to junior and senior Biology and Chemistry majors and
BIMO concentrators.
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 T,W D. LYNCH
CHEM 324(S) Enzyme Kinetics and Reaction Mechanisms
Enzymes are complex biological molecules capable of catalyzing chemical reactions with very high efficiency, stereo-selectivity and specificity. The study of
enzymatically-catalyzed reactions gives insight into the study of organic reaction mechanisms in general, and into the topic of catalysis especially. This course
explores the methods and frameworks for determining mechanisms of enzymatic reactions. These methods are based on a firm foundation of chemical kinetics
and organic reaction mechanisms. The first portion of the course is devoted to enzyme kinetics and catalysis including discussions of transition state theory,
structure-reactivity relationships, Michaelis-Menten parameters, pH-dependence of catalysis, and methods for measuring rate constants. As the course prog-
resses, the concepts of mechanism and its elucidation is applied to specific enzymatic processes as we discuss reaction intermediates and stereochemistry of
enzymatic reactions. Our discussions of modern methods include the use of altered reactants, including mechanism-based inactivators and genetically modified
enzymes as tools for probing enzymatic reactions.
Format: lecture, three hours per week. Evaluation will be based on problem sets, quizzes, a midterm exam, a paper, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Chemistry/Biology/BIMO 321 or permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 10).
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR GEHRING
CHEM 335(F) Inorganic/Organometallic Chemistry
This course addresses fundamental issues in chemistry of transition metals and main group elements that are relevant to a variety of important areas, including
applications in organic synthetic transformations, medicine, and industrial and biological catalysis. The course introduces symmetry and group theory concepts,
and applies them in a systematic approach to the study of structure, bonding, and spectroscopy of coordination and inorganic compounds. The course also covers
selected inorganic and organometallic reactions and their mechanisms and bioinorganic chemistry. Primary literature and review articles are used to discuss recent
developments and applications in the field.
Format: lecture, three hours per week. Evaluation will be based on problem sets, exams, an independent project and participation.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 155 or 256 and 251/255. No enrollment limit (expected: 10).
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR L. PARK
CHEM 336(S) Materials Chemistry
Materials Science focuses on the study of bulk physical properties such as hardness, electrical conductivity, optical behavior, and elasticity. Materials chemists
bridge the gap between traditional synthetic chemists and materials scientists, by working to understand the relationships between bulk physical properties, length
scale (mesoscale, nanoscale), and molecular structure. This course will cover a variety of different types of materials and their properties including solids (insula-
tors, semiconductors, conductors, superconductors, magnetic materials), soft materials (polymers, gels, liquid crystals), nanoscale structures, and organic elec-
tronics. We'll examine some of the latest developments in materials chemistry, including new strategies for the synthesis and preparation of materials on different
length scales, as well as a variety of potential applications of emerging technologies. Laboratory work will include analysis of thermal properties, optical proper-
ties, force curves, as well as the preparation and measurement of mesoscale and nanoscale structures and their properties.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; laboratory, four hours per week. Evaluation is based on problem sets, laboratory work, reviews of research articles, hour
exams, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 251/255. Enrollment limit:16 (expected: 16).
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR Lab: 1-5 T,R L. PARK
CHEM 341 Toxicology and Cancer (Same as Environmental Studies 341) (Not offered 2011-2012)
What is a poison and what makes it poisonous? Paracelcus commented in 1537: "What is not a poison? All things are poisons (and nothing is without poison).
The dose alone keeps a thing from being a poison." Is the picture really this bleak; is modern technology-based society truly swimming in a sea of toxic
materials? How are the nature and severity of toxicity established, measured and expressed? Do all toxic materials exert their effect in the same manner, or can
materials be poisonous in a variety of different ways? Are the safety levels set by regulatory agencies low enough for a range of common toxic materials, such
as mercury, lead, and certain pesticides? How are poisons metabolized and how do they lead to the development of cancer? What is cancer and what does it take
to cause it? What biochemical defense mechanisms exist to counteract the effects of poisons?
This course attempts to answer these questions by surveying the fundamentals of modern chemical toxicology and the induction and progression of cancer.
Topics will range from description and quantitation of the toxic response, including risk assessment, to the basic mechanisms underlying toxicity, mutagenesis,
carcinogenesis, and DNA repair.
Format: lecture, three hours per week. Evaluation will be based on two hour tests, a class presentation and paper, participation in discussion sessions, a self-ex-
ploration of the current toxicological literature, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 156. May be taken concurrently with Chemistry 251/255. A basic understanding of organic chemistry will be required. Enrollment
limit: 30 (expected: 24).
CHEM 342 Synthetic Organic Chemistry (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
The origins of organic chemistry are to be found in the chemistry of living things and the emphasis of this course is on the chemistry of naturally-occurring
compounds. This course presents the logic and practice of chemical total synthesis while stressing the structures, properties and preparations of terpenes, poly-
ketides and alkaloids. Modern synthetic reactions are surveyed with an emphasis on the stereochemical and mechanistic themes that underlie them. To meet the
requirements for the semester's final project, each student chooses an article from the recent synthetic literature and then analyzes the logic and strategy in-
volved in the published work in a final paper. A summary of this paper is also presented to the class in a short seminar. Laboratory sessions introduce students to
techniques for synthesis and purification of natural products and their synthetic precursors.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; laboratory, four hours per week. Evaluation will be based on problem sets, midterm exams, laboratory work, a final
project, and class participation.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 251/255. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 10).
CHEM 343 Medicinal Chemistry (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course explores the design, development, and function of pharmaceuticals. Fundamental concepts of organic chemistry are extended to the study of phar-
macodynamics-the interactions between drugs and their targets that elicit a biological effect-and pharmacokinetics-the study of how the body absorbs, distrib-
utes, metabolizes, and eliminates drugs. The path of drug development is traced from discovery of an initial lead, through optimization of structure, to patenting
and production. Mechanisms by which drugs target cell membranes, nucleic acids, and proteins are discussed. Drug interactions with enzyme and receptor
targets are studied extensively. Specific drug classes selected for detailed analysis may include opiate analgesics, aspirin and other NSAIDs, antibacterial agents,
cholinergic & adrenergic agents, CNS agents, as well as antiviral, antiulcer, and anticholesterol drugs.
99
Format: lecture, three hours per week. Evaluation will be based on problem sets, midterm exams, class participation, and a final project.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 251; not open to students who have taken Chemistry 111 or Chemistry 112. No enrollment limit (expected: 20).
CHEM 344T Physical Organic Chemistry (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course extends the background derived from previous chemistry courses to the understanding of organic reaction mechanisms. Correlations between
structure and reactivity are examined in terms of kinetic and thermodynamic parameters including: solvent effects, isotope effects, stereochemical specificity,
linear free energy relationships, acid/base theory, delocalized bonding, and aromaticity.
For the first 7 weeks, the class meets once a week for an introductory lecture. A second tutorial meeting between the instructor and 1-2 other students occurs
early the following week, for example during the laboratory time period. During this time, students work through and present solutions to an assigned problem
set. For the remaining 5 weeks, students execute a self-designed set of laboratory experiments that revolve around physical organic methods. Students present
and critique results each week (in the hour time slot). The experiments culminate in a final paper.
Format: tutorial, one hour per week; laboratory four hours per week. Evaluation will be based on problem sets, participation, laboratory work, and a final
laboratory paper.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 251/255. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to Chemistry majors.
CHEM 348 Polymer Chemistry (Not offered 2011-2012)
From synthetic to natural macromolecules, we encounter polymers everywhere and everyday. This course explores the multitude of synthetic techniques avail-
able and discusses how structure defines function. Topics include condensation and chain (anionic, cationic, radical) polymerizations, dendrimers, controlling
molecular weight, ring opening, and biopolymer syntheses. Fundamentals of composition and physical properties of polymers, and methods of characterization
are also covered. Laboratory experiments give students hands on experience in polymer synthesis and characterization, with opportunities for exploration of
advanced structures and applications.
Format: lecture, one hour per week; laboratory, four hours per week. Requirements: evaluation will be based on problem sets, participation, two exams, labora-
tory, and a final paper.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 251/255. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 12). Preference given to Chemistry majors.
CHEM 361(F) Physical Chemistry: Structure and Dynamics
This course integrates a number of physical chemistry topics. In the first part of the course, an introduction to quantum mechanics provides the basis for under-
standing atomic and molecular structure as well as spectroscopic methods. In the second part of the course we discuss chemical kinetics and molecular reaction
dynamics in the gas phase and in solution. Applications of these principles are chosen from a variety of areas, including polymer chemistry, biochemistry, photo-
chemistry, and solid and liquid state chemistry. Quantitative laboratory experiments and consultation with the scientific literature provide the background neces-
sary for carrying out an independent theoretical or experimental project.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; discussion, one hour per week; laboratory, four hours per week. Evaluation will be based on class participation, problem
sets, oral presentation and discussion on selected problems, laboratory work, and an independent project.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 155 or 256. No enrollment limit (expected: 10).
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF Lab: 1-5 T BINGEMANN
CHEM 364(S) Instrumental Methods of Analysis (Same as Environmental Studies 364)
This course provides the student an understanding of the applicability of current laboratory instrumentation both to the elucidation of fundamental chemical
phenomena and to the measurement of certain atomic and molecular parameters. Experimental methods, including absorption and emission spectroscopy in the
x-ray, ultraviolet, visible, infrared, microwave, and radio frequency regions, chromatography, electrochemistry, mass spectrometry, magnetic resonance, and ther-
mal methods are discussed, with examples drawn from the current literature. The analytical chemical techniques developed in this course are useful in a wide
variety of scientific areas. The course also covers new developments in instrumental methods and advances in the approaches used to address modern analytical
questions.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; discussion, one hour per week; laboratory, four hours per week. Evaluation will be based on class participation, problem
sets, oral presentation and discussion of selected topics, laboratory work, and an independent project.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 155 or 256 and 251/255; may be taken concurrently with Chemistry 256 with permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 18 (expected:
8).
This course satisfies "The Natural World" requirement for the Environmental Studies concentration.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF Lab: 1-5 R BINGEMANN
CHEM 366(S) Physical Chemistry: Thermodynamics
The thermodynamic laws provide us with our most powerful and general scientific principles for predicting the direction of spontaneous change in physical,
chemical, and biological systems. This course develops the concepts of energy, entropy, free energy, temperature (and absolute zero), heat, work, and chemical
potential within the framework of classical and statistical thermodynamics. The principles developed are applied to a variety of problems: chemical reactions,
phase changes, energy technology, industrial processes, and environmental science. Laboratory experiments provide quantitative and practical demonstrations of
the theory of real and ideal systems studied in class.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; laboratory, four hours per week. Evaluation will be based on problem sets, laboratory work, exams, and an independent
project.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 155 or 256, and a basic knowledge of applied integral and differential calculus. No enrollment limit (expected: 12).
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF Lab: 1-5 M THOMAN
CHEM 367(F) Biophysical Chemistry
This course is designed to provide a working knowledge of basic physical chemistry to students primarily interested in the biochemical, biological, or medical
professions. Topics of physical chemistry are presented from the viewpoint of their application to biochemical problems. Three major areas of biophysical chem-
istry are discussed: 1) the conformation of biological macromolecules and the forces that stabilize them; 2) techniques for the study of biological structure and
function including spectroscopic, hydrodynamic, electrophoretic, and chromatographic; 3) the behavior of biological macromolecules including ligand interac-
tion and conformational transitions.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; laboratory, four hours per week. Evaluation will be based on problem sets and/or quizzes, laboratory work, hour tests, and a
final exam.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 155 or 256 and 251/255, and Mathematics 104 or equivalent. No enrollment limit (expected: 25). Preference given to junior and senior
Chemistry majors.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR Lab: 1-5 T,R KAPLAN
CHEM 368T Quantum Chemistry and Molecular Spectroscopy (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course provides an introduction to the principles of computational quantum mechanics and their application to problems of chemical interest such as
chemical bonding, chemical reactivity, and molecular spectroscopy. Emphasis is placed upon modern electronic structure calculations, their fundamentals,
practical considerations, interpretation, and applications to current research questions. Under guidance in the laboratory session and through independent work,
students use computational methods to explore assigned weekly research problems. The research results are presented to and discussed with the tutorial partner
at the end of each week.
Format: tutorial, one hour per week; laboratory, three hours per week. Evaluation will be based on tutorial participation, presentations, and submitted papers.
Prerequisites: Chemistry 361 or equivalent background in Physics. No enrollment limit (expected: 5).
RESEARCH AND THESIS COURSES
CHEM 393(F), 394(S) Junior Research and Thesis
CHEM 493(F)-W31-494(S) Senior Research and Thesis
Individual research projects in a field of interest to the student are carried out under the direction of a faculty member and culminate in a thesis. Students in this
program are strongly encouraged to keep 1:10 p.m. to 2:25 p.m. on Friday free for departmental colloquia.
CHEM 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study, for Juniors
CHEM 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study, for Seniors
100
Individual research projects in a field of interest to the student are carried out under the direction of a faculty member.
CLASSICS (Div. I)
Chair, Professor MEREDITH HOPPIN
Professors: CHRISTENSEN, HOPPIN. Associate Professor: DEKEL. Assistant Professors: RUBIN, WILCOX.
The course offerings in Classics enable students to explore the ancient Greek, Roman, and Greco-Roman worlds from various perspectives, including litera-
ture, history, archaeology, art, philosophy, and religion. Courses are of two types: language (Greek and Latin) and translation (Classical Civilization). The
100-level language courses are intensive introductions to Greek and Latin grammar; the 200-level language courses combine comprehensive grammar review
with readings from Greek or Latin texts of pivotal historical periods; Latin 302 and the 400-level language courses are seminars that explore in depth selected
authors or topics and the methods of analysis appropriate to each of them. Courses in which texts are read in translation provide both surveys and more specialized
study of the classical world from earliest historical times through late antiquity.
MAJOR
Majors and prospective majors are encouraged to consult with the department's faculty to ensure a well-balanced and comprehensive selection of Classics
courses appropriate to their individual interests. A course or courses in ancient history are strongly recommended. Majors may also benefit from advice on
courses offered in other departments that would complement their particular interests in Classics. A reading knowledge of French, German, and Italian is useful
for any study in Classics and is required in at least two of these modern languages by graduate programs in classics, ancient history, classical art and archaeology,
and medieval studies.
The department offers two routes to the major: Classics and Classical Civilization.
Classics: (1) Six courses in Greek and/or Latin, with at least two 400-level courses in one language; (2) Three additional courses, elected from the
offerings in Greek, Latin, or Classical Civilization or from approved courses in other departments; 3) Participation in the Senior Colloquium.
Classical Civilization: (1) Either Classics 101 or 102 and one of Classics 222, 223, or 224; (2) Three additional courses from the offerings in Classical Civiliza-
tion or from approved courses in other departments (3) Three courses in Greek or Latin with at least one at the 400 level, or four courses in Latin at any level; (4) A
senior independent study is normally required to complete the Classical Civilization major. Several of the courses elected, including the independent study, should
relate to each other in such a way as to reflect a concentration on a particular genre, period, or problem of Greek and Roman civilization, including topics in
ancient art and archaeology, religion in the Greco-Roman world, and ancient philosophy; 4) Participation in the Senior Colloquium.
A number of courses from other departments are cross-listed with Classics and may be elected for the major, for instance, ArtH 213 Greek Art and Myth,
Philosophy 201 Greek Philosophy, and Religion 210 Reading Jesus, Writing Gospels. Appropriate courses that are not cross-listed may also count toward the
major with the approval of the Chair of Classics. Examples of such courses, which vary from year to year, are Art History 105 Picturing God in the Middle Ages,
Religion/Jewish Studies 201 The Hebrew Bible, Religion 212 The Development of Christianity, and Political Science 231 Ancient Political Thought.
Senior Colloquium: Senior majors are required to enroll in CLAS 499 in both semesters. The topics and activities of this colloquium, which normally meets
every other week for an hour, vary according to the interests of the participants. Junior majors are also encouraged to participate.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN CLASSICS
Students who wish to be considered for the degree with honors will normally prepare a thesis or pursue appropriate independent study in one semester and
winter study of their senior year. The thesis or independent study offers students the opportunity to work in depth on a topic of their choosing and to apply and
develop the techniques and critical methods with which they have become acquainted during their regular course work. It may also include relevant work with
members of other departments. In order to write a thesis, students normally must have a minimum GPA of 3.3 in their major courses and must submit a thesis
proposal before the end of the spring semester of their junior year that earns departmental approval. To be awarded the degree with honors in Classics, the student
is required to have taken a minimum of ten semester courses in the department (not including the thesis or independent study) and to have demonstrated original
or superior ability in studies in the field both through course work and through the thesis or equivalent independent study.
COURSE NUMBERING SYSTEM
Language Courses: The numbering of courses through the 300 level reflects the prerequisites involved. The only prerequisite for any 400-level course is Greek
201 or Latin 302, or equivalent language preparation. The rotation of 400-level courses is arranged to permit exposure, in a three- to four-year period, to most of
the important periods and genres of classical studies. Students may enter the rotation at any point.
Classical Civilization Courses: The numbering of these courses often suggests a recommended but rarely necessary sequence of study within a given area of
classical studies. Most of these courses do not assume prior experience in Classics or a cross-listed field.
STUDY ABROAD
We strongly encourage Classics majors to study abroad in their junior year, at programs in Italy (especially the semester-length program at the Intercollegiate
Center for Classical Studies in Rome), at programs in Greece (especially the College Year in Athens, which students need only attend for one semester), and in the
Williams at Oxford Program. Our majors have also had excellent Classics experiences in other study-abroad programs in Italy and Greece and at various universi-
ties in Europe and the United Kingdom. In addition, we encourage students to take advantage of opportunities available in the summer: study abroad programs in
Italy and Greece, archaeological digs, or even carefully planned individual travel to sites in Greece, Italy or other areas of the ancient Greco-Roman world. When
the college cannot do so, the department may be able to provide some financial support for summer study abroad. The department's faculty are always available to
advise students, the chair has materials to share, and students can visit the department's website for information and links to helpful sites.
CLASSICAL CIVILIZATION
CLAS 101(S) The Trojan War (Same as Comparative Literature 107)
The Trojan War may or may not have taken place near the end of the Bronze Age (c1100), but it certainly provided poets, visual artists, historians, philosophers,
and many others in archaic and classical Greece (750-320) with a rich discourse for engaging questions about gender, exchange, desire, loss, and remembrance,
and about friendship, marriage, family, army, city-state and religious cult. This discourse of "The Trojan War" attained a remarkable coherence yet also thrived on
substantial variations and changes over the 300-400 years of Greek literature we will explore, a dynamic of change and continuity that has persisted through the
more than two millenia of subsequent Greek, Roman, Western, and non-Western participation in this discourse.
More than half of the course will be devoted to the Homeric Iliad and Odyssey; we will also read brief selections from lyric poetry (e.g. Archilochus, Sappho of
Lesbos), some selections from the historians Herodotus and Thucydides, and several tragedies (e.g. Aeschylus' Oresteia, Sophocles' Ajax, Euripides' Trojan
Women). We may briefly consider a few short selections from other ancient Greek and Roman authors and/or one or two modern poets. We will also watch
several films, e.g. Troy, Oh Brother, Where Art Thou?, Gods and Monsters, Fight Club, In the Bedroom, Grand Illusion.
Format: lecture and discussion. Evaluation will be based on a series of short papers involving close textual analysis, several short response papers, two 5-page
papers, and contributions to class discussion.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 35 (expected: 35). Preference given to majors in Classics and Comparative Literature, with attention also given to assuring a
balance of class years and majors.
Hour: 9:5511:10 TR HOPPIN
CLAS 102(F) Roman Literature: Foundations and Empire (Same as Comparative Literature 108)
In the first book of Vergil's Aeneid, the god Jupiter prophesies the foundation and the greatness of Rome: "I place no limits on their fortunes and no time; I grant
them empire without end." Yet elsewhere in this epic account of Rome's origins, this promise of unlimited power for the descendants of Romulus seems to be
seriously abridged. Some readers have seen, not only in the Aeneid but throughout classical Roman literature, a persistent tendency to inscribe the decay and
disintegration of Roman power into the very works that proclaim and celebrate Roman preeminence. This course explores the ancient Romans' own interpreta-
tions of their past, their present, and their destiny: the humble beginnings of their city, its rise to supreme world power, and premonitions of its decline. Related
topics for our consideration will include Roman constructions of gender, the location and expression of virtue in public and private spheres, the connections and
conflicts between moral probity and political success, the exercise of individual power versus action on behalf of the commonwealth, the absorption of foreign
customs and peoples into Rome, the management of literal and imaginary frontiers, and other anxieties of empire. We will read selections and complete works by
a wide variety of Roman authors, including Cicero, Catullus, Caesar, Vergil, Sallust, Horace, Ovid, Seneca, and Tacitus. All readings will be in translation.
Format: discussion/lecture. Evaluation will be based on short written assignments, midterm and final exams with essays, and contributions to class discussion.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 15). Preference will be given to first-year students and sophomores and to majors in Classics and Comparative
Literature.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF WILCOX
CLAS 201(S) History of Ancient Greek Philosophy (Same as Philosophy 201)
(See under PHIL 201 for full description.) A. WHITE
101
CLAS 205 Ancient Wisdom Literature (Same as Comparative Literature 217, Jewish Studies 205 and Religion 205) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under REL 205 for full description.) DEKEL
CLAS 207 From Adam to Noah: Literary Imagination and the Primeval History in Genesis (Same as Comparative Literature 250,
Jewish Studies 207, Religion 207) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under REL 207 for full description.) DEKEL
CLAS 210 Reading Jesus, Writing Gospels: Christian Origins in Context (Same as Comparative Literature 213 and Religion 210) (Not
offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under REL 210 for full description.) BUELL
CLAS 213 Greek Art and Myth (Same as ArtH 213) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under ARTH 213 for full description.) MCGOWAN
CLAS 216(S) Body of Evidence: Greek Sculpture and the Human Figure (Same as ArtH 216)
(See under ARTH 216 for full description.) MGOWEN
CLAS 218(S) Gnosis, Gnostics, Gnosticism (Same as Comparative Studies 218, History 331 and Religion 218) (W)
(See under REL 218 for full description.) BUELL
CLAS 222 Greek History (Same as History 222) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under HIST 222 for full description.) CHRISTENSEN
CLAS 223(F) Roman History (Same as History 223)
(See under HIST 223 for full description.) CHRISTENSEN
CLAS 224(S) (formerly 235) Roman Archaeology and Material Culture (Same as Anthropology 235, ArtH 235 and History 224)
This course examines the development of Roman archaeology and material culture from the early Iron Age, ca. 1000 BCE, to the end of the reign of Constantine
in 337 CE. The primary goal of the course is to help students understand the social and historical context in which Roman material culture was created and used.
We will consider a variety of evidence from across the empire, including monumental and domestic architecture, wall painting, mosaics, sculpture, coins and
inscriptions. Special emphasis will be placed on the city of Rome; however, we will also look at other important urban centers, such as Pompeii, Aphrodisias and
Lepcis Magna. Roman art and architecture were not the product of any single people or culture, but rather the hybrid synthesis of complex cultural negotiations
between the Romans and their colonial subjects (i.e., Greeks, Jews, Celts, etc.). Class discussions will focus on issues related to gender, ethnicity and cultural
identity in the Roman Empire. For example, we will explore what it meant to be "Roman" in terms of language, ethnicity and cultural institutions. We will also
discuss how Roman elites used material culture to convey political messages and social status in the imperial hierarchy, as well as the legacy of Roman art and
architecture in the modern world.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on classroom performance, quizzes, one 8- to 10-page paper, a midterm, and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 30). Preference given to majors or prospective majors in Classics, History, Art History, and Anthropology.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR RUBIN
CLAS 226(S) (formerly 105) The Ancient Novel (Same as Comparative Literature 226) (W)
In this course we read and closely analyze long works of fiction composed in the ancient Mediterranean between the first century BCE and the fourth century CE.
To call these ancient works "novels" might be misleading, if our definition depended on the historical conditions that fostered the emergence of the modern novel
(e.g., industrialization and widespread literacy). On another definition, however, the novel is that genre which, more than any other, devours and incorporates
other genres. Judged by this standard, the works we will deal with in this course are quintessentially novels. They afford new perspectives on the diverse, cosmo-
politan culture of the Hellenistic and late antique Mediterranean world in which they were originally written and read. Replete with spectacular tales of true love,
death, danger, miracles, stunts, conversions, triumphant recognitions and happily-ever-after reconciliations, they access other classical genres such as history,
tragedy, and epic by means of parody, allusion, and homage.
Format: discussion, with occasional short lectures. Requirements: vigorous participation in class discussion, about six 2-3 page papers, one revised and expanded
5- to 6-page paper, and a final 10- to 15-page paper.
No prerequisites; not open to students who took this course as CLAS 105/COMP 113. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 10). Preference will be given to sopho-
mores and first-years intending to major in Classics, Comparative Literature, English, or another literature.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF WILCOX
CLAS 239 The Construction of Gender in Ancient Greece and Rome (Same as History 322 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 239)
(Not offered 2011-2012)
The inferior political status and heavily circumscribed lives of women in ancient Greek and Roman societies have received extensive study in recent decades.
Yet it is nearly impossible to understand women's lives without also studying the often stringent cultural norms that governed men's lives as well. This course
seeks to understand these aspects of Greek and Roman societies over time as expectations for the behaviors, priorities, and activities of both women and men
evolved. While the impact of these gendered expectations on the lives of men and women often varied considerably in kind and degree, their interplay was at
the same time often intricate, and many that constructed women's lives could only be articulated with reference to corresponding expectations for men. Others
emerged only during times of crisis and could even involve a reversal of the usual roles of men and women. Some norms gave men and women a shared
experience that is rare in other societies.
We will explore these and related issues by reading widely in such ancient authors as Homer, Sappho, Herodotus, the Greek tragedians, Greek and Roman
philosophers, Vergil and other Latin poets, and Roman didactic writers. We will also read modern scholarship on such subjects as the family, prostitution, the
exposure of unwanted infants, demography, and the anthropology of gender in both Greek and Roman societies.
Format: lecture and discussion. Evaluation will be based on class preparation and participation, two short 5- to 7-page papers, a midterm, and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 15).
CHRISTENSEN
CLAS 248 The Image of God in Greek Art (Same as ArtH 238) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under ARTH 238 for full description.) HEDREEN
CLAS 262 Performing Greece and Rome (Same as Comparative Literature 270 and Theatre 262) (Not offered 2011-2012)
Since their beginnings in fifth-century Athens, tragedy and comedy have always been translations of something else. The tragedies of Aeschylus, Sophocles
and Euripides and the comedies of Aristophanes were hybrids of various poetic, musical and dance genres first developed for a variety of different performance
occasions. This class, which will be team-taught by a classics professor and a stage-director who have collaborated in the past on Williamstheatre productions of
Greek tragedies, will examine selected dramatic texts from ancient Greece and Rome as literary artifacts and as documents intended for translation into perfor-
mance. We hope that our interdisciplinary approach will stimulate a wide-ranging consideration of these enormously influential plays.
In addition to scrutinizing the relation of the texts to what we know of ancient production practice, we will illuminate these archaic stagings by analogy to a
number of surviving performance traditions in such places as contemporary Japan, China, Indonesia and Africa. We will also trace successive translations and
hybridizations of these plays through history to the stages of modern Paris, Berlin, Johannesburg, London, Athens, Kabul, and New York. The class will include
a modest number of workshops in performance in order to begin to develop a kinesthetic sense of the production practices we examine.
Format: discussion and some workshops. Evaluation will be based on contributions to discussion, effort in workshops, and several short papers.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to majors or prospective majors in Classics, Theatre, and Comparative Literature.
HOPPIN and BUCKY
CLAS 320T Enchantment and the Origins of Poetry (Same as Comparative Literature 320T and CLGR 410T) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(W)
Since the earliest period of Greek literature, poems have been intimately bound up in the notion of enchantment, or thelxis. The power of song to alter the
mental and physical states of the audience and the world at large is intertwined with the wide variety of uses to which ancient magic was applied. Similarly, the
idea of divine or supernatural inspiration can be interpreted as a reflexive enchantment that binds the poet to the transformative power of language. This tutorial
102
course will explore the fundamental ways in which ancient Greek and Roman poetry, and its later offspring, are configured and understood as a kind of enchant-
ment or incantation. By examining works that explicitly depict acts of enchantment as well as those that represent themselves as spells, dreams, charms, and
curses, we will attempt to understand the structural and semantic relationships between song and magic across several genres. We will also consider the role of
inspiration, enthusiasm, memory, truth, and falsehood in shaping both the poems themselves and discourses about poetry. Finally, we will investigate the recep-
tion and elaboration of these concepts in later European poetic traditions from the middle ages through modernity. Readings may include selections from
Homer, Hesiod, Sappho, Pindar, Aeschylus, Euripides, Plato'sIonand Phaedrus, Theocritus, Virgil, Horace, Ovid, Roman love elegy, Old English charms, Old
Norse poetry, Marlowe's Dr. Faustus, Shakespeare's A Winter's Tale, Coleridge, Shelley, Mallarm, Valry, T.S. Eliot, and various other poets and critics. All
works will be read in English translation, but students who have studied ancient Greek will be expected to read significant portions of the early material in the
original.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: students will meet with instructor in pairs once a week; one 5- to 7-page paper every other week and critique of partners' papers
in alternate weeks.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to majors in Classics and Comparative Literature.
DEKEL
CLAS 323(S) Leadership, Government, and the Governed in Ancient Greece (Same as History 323 and Leadership Studies 323) (W)
(See under HIST 323 for full description.) CHRISTENSEN
CLAS 330 Plato (Same as Philosophy 330) (Not offered 2011-2012)(W)
(See under PHIL 330 for full description.) MCPARTLAND
CLAS 332 Aristotle (Same as Philosophy 332) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under PHIL 332 for full description.) MCPARTLAND
CLAS 334 Greek and Roman Ethics (Same as Philosophy 334) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under PHIL 334 for full description.) MCPARTLAND
CLAS 340 (formerly 240) Roman Cities in the Near East (Same as Anthropology 240 and History 340) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
The Near East under Roman rule was a zone of intense cultural contact and exchange. Major urban centers like Ephesus and Alexandria were home to a diverse
array of Greeks, Romans, Jews, Egyptians and other Semitic peoples. Out of this cultural crucible emerged new movements in religion, science, and the arts
which changed the face of the Roman Empire. This course examines the history and material culture of Roman cities in the Near East, from Pompey's annex-
ation of Syria in 64 BCE to the Arab conquest in the 7th century CE. We will consider a variety of evidence, including sculpture, architecture and epigraphy, as
well as textual sources, such as Josephus' Jewish War, Acts of the Apostles and Tacitus' Histories. Class discussion will focus on issues related to ethnicity and
identity formation in the eastern Roman provinces. Possible topics include the Romanization of the Near East, the First Jewish Revolt, the formation of early
Christianity, and the Roman wars with Sassanian Persia. This course fulfills the EDI requirement because it explores the interaction between peoples and
cultures in the ancient Near East and their diverse responses to Roman imperialism.
Format: seminar. Requirements: evaluation will be based on classroom performance, one 15-minute oral presentation, one 10- to 12-page paper, a midterm and
a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 10). Preference given to majors or prospective majors in Classics, Anthropology, Art History, and History.
RUBIN
CLAS 341 (formerly 238) Envisioning Empire: Geography in the Graeco-Roman World (Same as ArtH 239 and History 341) (Not offered
2011-2012) (D)
During the first century BCE, successive civil wars divided the Roman Empire along ethnic, geographical and partisan lines. Octavian's victory at battle of
Actium in 31 BCE officially brought an end to the Roman civil wars, but it did not in itself unify the empire. Out of this matrix of social fragmentation and
uncertainty arose the geographical texts of the Augustan age. The genre of universal geography provided a convenient means to reconfigure identity boundaries
in post-Actium world. By delineating stable borders between the peoples and provinces, geographical texts (whether written, sculptural or pictorial) literally
mapped out identity boundaries and power relationships to create a new, unified image of the Roman Empire. This course examines the political and cosmolog-
ical of implications geographical sources produced under the Roman Empire, including the Res Gestae of Augustus, Strabo's Geography and Tacitus' Germa-
nia. We will also look at maps and other visual representations of the Roman world, such as the personification groups depicted on the Roman imperial cult
temples at Aphrodisias and Pisidian Antioch. Discussion will focus on such issues as the relationship between geography and ethnography and the differences
between modern cartography and the geographical mapping techniques used in the ancient world.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on classroom performance, quizzes, one 8- to 10-page paper, a midterm, and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25. Preference given to majors or prospective majors in Classics, Anthropology, and History.
RUBIN
CLAS 394 (formerly 258) Divine Kingship in the Ancient Mediterranean (Same as Anthropology 258, History 394 and Religion 213) (Not
offered 2011-2012)
What is the relationship between politics and religion? How do kings legitimate their rule? Why did the ancient Greeks and Romans worship their emperors as
gods? This course examines the origins and development of divine kingship in the ancient Mediterranean from its earliest beginnings in Pharonic Egypt to the
reign of the Christian Roman Emperors in the fourth century CE. We will address the various symbolic strategies employed by ancient kings to project their
own divinity. These include portraiture, panegyric poetry, ritual processions, royal autobiography and monumental architecture, e.g., the Great Pyramids in
Egypt and the Pantheon in Rome. We will also study the reception of royal art and ideology among the king's subjects. Special attention will be paid to the role
of the Roman emperor-cult in shaping social, political and religious identity in the Roman Empire.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: evaluation will be based on classroom performance, quizzes, one 8- to 10-page paper, a midterm and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 20). Preference given to majors or prospective majors in Classics, Anthropology, Art History, and History.
RUBIN
GREEK
CLGR 101(F)-102(S) Introduction to Greek
This full-year, intensive course presents the fundamentals of Greek grammar, syntax, and vocabulary and introduces students, in the second semester, to works of
the classical period (usually Xenophon and Euripides).
This course is designed for students who are beginning Greek or have studied less than two years of Greek in secondary school. Credit is granted for the first
semester only if the second semester is taken as well. Students with some previous experience in Greek may want to enroll in CLGR 102 only. (Consult the
department.)
No prerequisites. Format: recitation/discussion. Evaluation will be based on frequent quizzes, tests, and a final exam.
Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 8-10).
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF First Semester: CHRISTENSEN
11:00-12:15 MWF Second Semester: CHRISTENSEN
CLGR 201(F) Intermediate Greek
Reading of selections from Hesiod and from Plato, combined with grammar review. The primary goal of this course is to develop fluency in reading Greek. We
will also read the texts closely to explore important continuities and changes in Greek culture between the archaic and classical periods. The emphasis will vary
from year to year, but possible subjects to be explored include: the education and socialization of the community's children and young adults; religion and cult
practices; the performative aspects of epic (and choral) poetry and of prose genres like oratory and the philosophical dialogue; traditional oral poetry and storytell-
ing and the growth of literacy; the construction of woman, of man; the development of the classical polis.
Format: recitation/discussion. Evaluation will be based on classroom participation, quizzes, tests, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Greek 101-102 or two years of Greek in secondary school. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 5-10).
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR HOPPIN
103
CLGR 401 Homer: The Iliad (Not offered 2011-2012)
From the early archaic era through the classical and beyond, Homer's Iliad and Odyssey remained foundational in Greek discourse about community, leader-
ship, war, heroism, family, friendship, loyalty, the gods, justice, and much more. Nearly all of subsequent Greek literature, both poetry and prose, developed out
of a dialogue with these epics. In this course, we will read extensive selections from the Iliad in Greek and the entire epic in translation.
Format: seminar. Requirements: class participation, short written exercises and/or oral reports, midterm and final exams, and a final paper.
Prerequisites: CLGR 201 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 5-6).
Preference given to majors in Classics, Comparative Literature, English and other literatures.
HOPPIN
CLGR 402(F) Homer: The Odyssey
From the early archaic era through the classical and beyond, Homer's Iliad and Odyssey remained foundational in Greek discourse about community, leadership,
war, heroism, family, friendship, loyalty, the gods, justice, and much more. Nearly all of subsequent Greek literature, both poetry and prose, developed out of a
dialogue with these epics. In this course, we will read extensive selections from the Odyssey in Greek and the entire epic in translation.
Format: seminar. Requirements: class participation, short written assignments and/or oral reports, a midterm and final exams, and a final paper.
Prerequisites: CLGR 201 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 5-6). Preference given to majors in Classics, Comparative Literature,
English and other literatures.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR DEKEL
CLGR 403 Poetry and Revolution in Archaic Greece (Not offered 2011-2012)
The age of experiment, lyric poetry, tyranny, migration and discovery, and the personal voice: it takes many images to describe the profound changes in Greek
society, thought, and self-expression that took place during the archaic era (roughly 800 BCE to the Persian invasion of 479 BCE). We will first read selections
from the lyric poets (e.g. Archilochus and Sappho, Tyrtaeus and Solon), whose concise and expressive poems reflected contemporary culture in a way that the
archaic epics did not. Their poems create for modern readers, as they did for the Greeks, a powerful sense of the poet's personal presence and engagement with
his (or her) audience. A similar intimacy characterizes the writings of many of the pre-Socratics, from which we will next read selections. Confident in the
ability of the human mind to understand both the human and the physical world, the pre-Socratics anticipated what came to be known as philosophy and natural
science. We will then turn to other writers who spoke directly about the political upheavals of the archaic age, focussing on the "tyrant narratives" of Herodotus.
Throughout the semester we will also consider such significant material changes in the archaic era as the development of monumental public sculpture, the
evolution of the temple, and the undertaking of vast building programs, all of which transformed the visual scale of the Greek cities and their citizens' sense of
self and community.
Format: recitation/discussion. Evaluation will be based on daily translations and contributions to class discussion, several translation quizzes, an oral presenta-
tion, a final paper, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Greek 201 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 5-6).
CHRISTENSEN
CLGR 404(S) Tragedy
Tragedy was a hybrid genre invented in sixth-fifth century Athens, where tragic performances in the city's festival of the Greater Dionysia played a vital role in the
democratic polis. This course will focus on reading in Greek a complete tragedy of Sophokles or Euripides; we will also read in translation several other tragedies,
a satyr-play, and a comedy of Aristophanes. While focusing on questions of particular importance for the play we are reading in Greek, we will also situate that
play in a larger context by exploring, for instance: aspects of the social and political situations in and for which fifth-century tragedies were first produced; the
several performance genres out of which tragedy was created; developments in the physical characteristics of the theater and in elements of staging and perfor-
mance; problems of representation particularly relevant to theatrical production and performance.
Format: recitation/discussion. Evaluation will be based on contributions to class, several 1- to 2-page papers involving close textual analysis, perhaps a midterm
exam, a final exam, and a final paper.
Prerequisites: Greek 201 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 4-5).
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF HOPPIN
CLGR 405 Greek Lyric Poetry (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course will explore the development of Greek lyric poetry from the eighth to the fifth centuries BCE. Beginning with Archilochus, Sappho, and Alcaeus,
and proceeding through such poets as Solon, Anacreon, Ibycus, and Theognis, we will examine the formal, social, and performative contexts of lyric, the
influence of epic and choral poetry on the evolution of the genre, and the difficulties of evaluating a fragmentary corpus. Finally, we will explore the influence of
political and economic changes in the early fifth century on the work of Simonides. The goal throughout is to investigate the structures, innovations, and
problems of poetic self-expression in early Greek poetry.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class participation, a midterm exam, a final paper, and a final exam. Prerequisites: Greek 201 or permission of the
instructor. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 5).
DEKEL
CLGR 406T Coming of Age in the Polis (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 406T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Studying a society's modes of rearing its young, and especially the ways it prepares and tests adolescents for their "coming of age" into their adult roles,
provides an excellent approach to exploring its fundamental values and institutional practices. Archaic and classical Greek literature not only reflects but active-
ly reflects upon the socialization of boys and girls in the Greek polis. In this course we will read in Greek selections from the Homeric Hymns to Demeter and
Apollo and, in its entirety, a tragedy (e.g., Sophocles' Philoctetes), examining these texts through the lens of "coming of age." We will read in English brief
selections from Homeric epic and from elegiac and lyric poetry (monodic and choral), and several Athenian tragedies and perhaps a comedy. We will also read
critical literature on childrearing, religious cults for boys and girls of different ages, and the role of dance, song and poetry in preparing the young for their adult
roles, particularly in fifth-century Athens.
Students will be divided into tutorial pairs chiefly according to their previous experience in Greek courses. Students will meet with the instructor once a week
either individually or in pairs to present their translations of the Greek assigned for that week, and they will also meet once a week in pairs for the oral presenta-
tion of written 5-page reports. At the latter meeting, each student will alternate between making a formal presentation one week and, in the next week, offering
an oral critique of the other student's presentation.
Format: tutorial. Evaluation will be based on the translations, reports, and critiques presented in the tutorial sessions.
Prerequisites: Greek 201 or permission of instructor. Enrollment: 10 (expected: 6-8).
HOPPIN
CLGR 407 Rhetoric and Democracy: the Greek Orators (Not offered 2011-2012)
The Greek orators of the 4th-century BCE have left us a rich and varied body of work. They were specialists in rhetoric and persuasive discourse, and in the
deployment of the one to produce the other. They wrote forensic oratory intended to sway juries, often with little reference to the facts of the case; political
speeches with which they argued policy before the Athenian Assembly and aspired to be the city's leaders; attack speeches which they hoped would destroy
their rivals; and show pieces intended to dazzle the listener with their rhetorical brilliance. Political careers were launched not by the noble birth and military
success that were so important in the previous century, but by high-profile prosecutions won by oratorical prowess. In their own words, the most influential
orators of 4th-century Athens will instruct us in rhetoric, demonstrate the stylistic versatility of the Greek language, teach us about what Athenians in the 4th
century cared about, reveal theories of human psychology, and persuade us of a thing or two. We will read selected speeches by Lysias, Aeschines, and Demos-
thenes, as well as portions of speeches by other orators such as Isocrates, Antiphon, and Dinarchus.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class translation and discussion, several short exercises, a midterm, a final paper, and a final translation exam.
Prerequisites: Greek 201 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 6-8).
CHRISTENSEN
CLGR 410T Enchantment and the Origins of Poetry (Same as Classics 320T and Comparative Literature 320T) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(W)
(See under CLAS 320T for full description.) DEKEL
LATIN
CLLA 101(F)-102(S) Introduction to Latin
This is a full-year course on the fundamentals of the Latin language. The first semester and part of the second emphasize learning basic grammar; the rest of the
second semester is devoted to reading selections from Latin poetry (e.g., Vergil's Aeneid and some Medieval Latin poetry, e.g., the Carmina Burana) and from
Latin prose (e.g., Pliny's Letters and/or the Vulgate Bible). This course is designed for the student with no previous preparation in Latin or who has had only a little
104
Latin and wishes a refresher. Credit is granted for the first semester only if the second semester is taken as well. Students with some previous experience in Latin
may want to enroll in CLLA 102 only: consult the department.
Format: recitation/discussion. Evaluation will be based on frequent quizzes, tests, classroom exercises, and a final exam.
Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 8-10).
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF First Semester: HOPPIN
11:00-12:15 MWF Second Semester: RUBIN
CLLA 201(F) Intermediate Latin: The Late Republic
Reading of selections from Latin prose and poetry, normally from a speech or letters by Cicero and from the poetry of Catullus. This course includes a compre-
hensive review of Latin grammar and aims primarily at developing fluency in reading Latin. At the same time it acquaints students with one of the most turbulent
and important periods in Roman history and attends to the development of their interpretative and analytic skills.
Format: recitation/discussion. Evaluation will be based on classroom performance, quizzes, a midterm, and a final exam. Occasional oral presentations or short
essays may be required as well.
Prerequisites: Latin 101-102 or 3-4 years of Latin in secondary school: consult the department. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 6-10).
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF WILCOX
CLLA 302(S) Vergil's Aeneid
This course is a comprehensive introduction to Vergil's Aeneid. Students will develop their ability to read and translate the Latin text of the poem, while at the
same time exploring the major interpretive issues surrounding the definitive Roman epic. Through a combination of close reading and large-scale analysis, we
will investigate the poem's literary, social, and political dimensions with special attention to Vergil's consummate poetic craftsmanship.
Format: discussion/recitation. Evaluation will be based on class participation, a midterm exam, a final paper, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Latin 201 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 10).
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR DEKEL
CLLA 401 Plautus' Rome Made Visible (Not offered 2011-2012)
Augustus famously claimed to have found Rome a city of brick and left it a city of marble, but Rome had been a visually impressive city since the sixth century.
Romans in every period and of every status experienced their lives with an intense sense of time and place in this gloriously multiclass, multiethnic, and
multilingual city, filled with public spectacles that often competed with one another to map Rome and its history. We will explore Rome of the Middle Repub-
lic through selected fragments of Livius Andronicus, Naevius, Ennius, and the elder Cato, as well as some remains of much older Latin, but our chief guide will
be Plautus' comedy, the Aulularia (circa 190). This play was produced after more than a century of templebuilding, monumenterecting, cultandfestival
creating, and storypromoting that would shape every subsequent version of Rome, in real space and time and in the imaginary. The Aulularia takes us into the
heart of this loud, crowded and busy Romeeven though it purports to be set in Athens. In using this play as our guide to Rome, we will examine Romans'
selffashioning through a creative appropriation of "the other" which insists on maintaining a distance from that other, be it Greek or Sabine, female or eunuch,
slave or plebeian.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class preparation and participation, several short essays or oral presentations, a longer final paper, and midterm
and final exams.
Prerequisites: Latin 302 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 57). Preference will be given to majors and prospective majors in
Classics and Comparative Literature.
HOPPIN
CLLA 403 The Invention of Love: Catullus and the Roman Elegists (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course will explore the development of Latin love poetry in the first century BCE. Beginning with Catullus, we will examine the influence of Greek lyric
poetry on the evolution of the genre as well as Roman attitudes toward love exhibited in other literature of the Late Republic. We will then turn to the full
development of the elegiac form in the love poems of Propertius, Tibullus, and Sulpicia. Finally, we will explore the transformation of the genre in Ovid's
Amores. The goal throughout is to investigate the conventions, innovations, and problems of expressing personal desire and longing amid the social and politi-
cal upheaval of the transition from Republic to Principate.
Format: discussion/recitation. Evaluation will be based on class participation, a midterm exam, a final paper, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Latin 302 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 10-12). Preference given to Classics majors.
DEKEL
CLLA 405 Livy and Tacitus: Myth, Scandal, and Morality in Ancient Rome (Not offered 2011-2012)
Mythical stories of Rome's founding, which were formulated by many generations of Roman authors and public figures, served as a framework for these very
thinkers to analyze and articulate Roman self-image in rich and creative ways; one who stands out among these figures is the Augustan historian Livy. The
"second founding" of the Republic by Augustus, and the careers of his successors, in turn gave later Roman writers like Tacitus fresh inspiration for Roman
self-imagining and self-analysis.
We will begin the semester in mythical Rome, reading selections from Book 1 of Livy's history which present figures like Aeneas, the Trojan refugee whose
arrival in Italy was conceptually crucial to Rome's development and position in Italy and the Mediterranean; Romulus, by whom Rome was founded in an act
of fratricide; the Sabine women, whose nobility prevented a deadly war between their fathers and their Roman kidnappers; and Lucretia, whose virtue and
self-sacrifice led to the liberation of Rome from a decadent and violent monarchy and to the founding of the Roman Republic. We will examine how Livy
deploys the storyteller's art to excite his readers' pathos, indignation, and sympathy; we will examine as well how Livy often filters his account of mythical
Rome through the lens of his own time, thereby constructing Rome's past through the Augustan present.
Writing more than a century after Livy, Tacitus offers a different view of Augustus, and his account of the rude and dissolute Tiberius, the unscrupulous Livia,
Rome's craven and dispirited senators, and the many scandals attached to the imperial family, figures a Rome once again suffering under a decadent monarchy.
Tacitus's compressed, fastidious, inimitable prose is the vehicle for his stern yet often sardonic psychological insights, which subtly manage to combine moral
judgment with prurient pleasure in the scandals of others.
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on class preparation and participation, an 8- to 10-page paper, a midterm, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Latin 302 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 6).
CHRISTENSEN
CLLA 406 Horace Odes 1-3 (Not offered 2011-2012)
Nietzsche claimed that he never had an artistic delight comparable to his experience of reading a Horatian ode. Through close readings of selected odes in
Books 1-3 we will seek to experience such delight for ourselves and to learn why, as Nietzsche put it, "what is here achieved is in certain languages not even to
be hoped for." We will examine the relation between poetic landscapes, poetic programs and the poetry's exploration of subjects like love, friendship, youth and
old age, death, politics, private morality; the poet's capacity to define himself by offering his own account of poetic traditions and his place in them; the variety
of voices and perspectives within individual poems and throughout the collection; the demands thereby placed on the poet's audience and the power of the
poetry to transform an audience equal to those demands. It is in terms of this transformational power of poetry that we will consider Horace's relationship to his
contemporaries, particularly Vergil, his patron Maecenas, and Augustus.
Evaluation will be based on contributions in the classroom, two 2- to 3-page papers (translation with comments), a short memorization assignment, perhaps a
midterm, a final paper, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Latin 302 or permission of instructor.
HOPPIN
CLLA 407 Caesar and Cicero (Not offered 2011-2012)
The one a brilliant strategist, the other preeminent in the courts, Caesar and Cicero were both master politicians whose ambitions for themselves and for their
country brought them into bitter conflict. Their combined oeuvres provide compelling, detailed accounts of the events and personalities that ended the Roman
republic and ushered in an era of prolonged civil war. Moreover, despite striking differences, their works can justifiably be claimed to be the twin summits of
classical Latin prose. In this course we will read extensive selections from Caesar's commentarii (the Bellum Gallicum and Bellum Civile) and from Cicero's
speeches and letters, aiming throughout at a better understanding of these authors' stylistic achievements as well as the pragmatic persuasive goals that drove
their rhetoric.
Format: recitation/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, several short written assignments (such as article reviews), a midterm exam and
essay of moderate length, plus a final exam and longer paper.
Prerequisites: Latin 302 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit:12 (expected: 6-9).
WILCOX
105
CLLA 408 Roman Comedy (Not offered 2011-2012)
Roman comedy flourished only briefly, between the second and third Punic Wars, but its cultural-historical importance is undeniable. In thesefabulae palliatae,
Latin comedies staged in Greek costume and featuring ostensibly Greek characters, Roman attitudes are questioned and mocked, but ultimately reasserted. We
will read the Menaechmi of Plautus and the Adelphoe of Terence, two plays that burlesque the stereotypical relationships between fathers, brothers, sons, and
slaves. We will also consider selections from Cato the Elder, Cicero's letters, and other primary and secondary texts that shed additional light on Roman familial
relationships and their place in republican society.
Format: discussion/recitation. Evaluation will be based on class participation, several short papers, a midterm and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Latin 302 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 8-10).
WILCOX
CLLA 409(S) Seneca and the Self
Through a close reading of selections from his Dialogues, Epistulae Morales, and a tragedy (probably Medea), this course will consider ethical and literary
dimensions of self-fashioning, self-examination, and the conception of self in the Stoic philosophy of the younger Seneca. The focus of this course lies squarely in
the first century CE, and on the analysis of Seneca's own texts. We will begin, however, with an introduction to the ethics of Roman Stoicism through the perso-
nae theory of Panaetius as recorded in Cicero's De Officiis. Moreover, we will read and discuss selections from some of Seneca's most famous and influential
interpreters, including Montaigne and Foucault, in order to enrich our understanding of contemporary assessments of his work and to gain an appreciation of
Seneca's considerable influence on later theorizations of selfhood.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class participation, several short written and oral assignments, midterm and final exams, and a final paper.
Prerequisites: Latin 302 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 5-10).
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR WILCOX
CLLA 412(F) Roman Ethnography
This course explores the development of Roman ethnography from the Late Republic into the early Empire. We will begin by examining how Greek ethnograph-
ic accounts of the barbarian "Other" influenced Roman writers of the late Republic, and then move on to assess the impact of Roman imperial ideology on the
further development of the genre. Roman ethnographers appealed to popular tropes and ethnic stereotypes that were easily intelligible to their Roman audience.
As a result, their writings tell us far less about the foreign peoples and places they claim to describe than about the cultural and political aspirations of the Romans
themselves. In addition to reading excerpts, in Latin, from Caesar's De Bello Gallico, Ovid's Tristia, and Tacitus' Agricola, we also will read selections from
Catullus, Pliny's Natural History, and the earliest Roman geographer, Pomponius Mela.
Format: seminar. Requirements: class participation, a midterm exam, an 8- to 10-page final paper, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Latin 302 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 6-9).
Preference given to majors or prospective majors in Classics, History, Art History.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF RUBIN
CLASSICS
CLAS 499(F,S) Senior Colloquium
This colloquium is required for all senior Classics majors and normally meets every other week for one hour in both the fall and spring semesters. Although
required for the Classics major, it is a non-credit course and does not count towards the number of semester courses required for the Classics major or for gradua-
tion.
Students must arrange their class schedules so that they can meet on Wednesdays between 12:15 and 1:10.
Hour: 12:00-12:50 W Members of the Department.
CLAS 493(F)-W31, W31-494(S) Senior Thesis
Recommended for all candidates for the degree with honors. This project will normally be of one semester's duration, in addition to a Winter Study.
CLAS 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
Students with permission of the department may enroll for independent study on select topics not covered by current course offerings.
COGNITIVE SCIENCE (Div. II)
Chair, Professor KRIS KIRBY
Advisory Committee: Professors: DANYLUK, KIRBY, H. WILLIAMS***, ZAKI. Associate Professor: CRUZ**. Assistant Professor: KORNELL.
Cognitive science is concerned with how humans, non-human animals, and computers acquire, represent, manipulate, and use information. As an interdisci-
plinary field it combines research and theory from computer science (e.g., artificial intelligence), cognitive psychology, philosophy, linguistics, and neuroscience,
and to some extent evolutionary biology, math, and anthropology. Complex issues of cognition are not easily addressed using traditional intra-disciplinary tools.
Cognitive researchers in any discipline typically employ a collection of analytic and modeling tools from across traditional disciplinary boundaries. Thus, the
methods and research agenda of cognitive science are broader than those of any of the fields that have traditionally contributed to cognitive science. The Cogni-
tive Science Program is designed to provide students with the broad interdisciplinary foundation needed to approach issues of cognition.
THE CONCENTRATION
The concentration in Cognitive Science consists of six courses, including an introductory course, four electives, and a senior seminar.
Minds, Brains, and Intelligent Behavior (COGS 222) is the entry point into the concentration, and provides an interdisciplinary perspective on issues of cogni-
tion. Ideally, it should be taken before the end of the sophomore year. Emphasizing the highly interdisciplinary nature of the field, the four electives must be
distributed over at least three course prefixes. In the fall of the senior year, concentrators will participate in a senior seminar (COGS 493).
REQUIRED COURSES
COGS/PHIL/PSYC 222 Minds, Brains, and Intelligent Behavior: An Introduction to Cognitive Science
COGS 493 Senior Seminar
ELECTIVES
Four electives are required, chosen from at least three prefixes, at most two of which can be at the 100 level.
CSCI 108 Artificial Intelligence: Image and Reality
CSCI 361 Theory of Computation
CSCI 373 Artificial Intelligence
CSCI 374 Machine Learning
NSCI 201/BIOL/PSYC 212 Neuroscience
PHIL 206 Philosophy of Language and Philosophy of Mind
PHIL 331 Epistemology
PHIL 388T Consciousness
PSYC 221 Cognitive Psychology
PSYC 322 Concepts: Mind, Brain, and Culture
PSYC 324T Great Debates in Cognition
PSYC 326 Choice and Decision Making
PSYC 327 Optimizing Learning and Memory
REL/PHIL 288 Embodied Mind: A CrossCultural Exploration
RECOMMENDED
The following courses are recommended for students seeking a richer background in cognitive science. These will not count as electives for the cognitive
science concentration.
BIOL 204 Animal Behavior
BIOL/NSCI 209T Animal Communication
BIOL 305 Evolution
LING 230/PHIL 131 Introduction to Logic and Semantics
MATH 211 Linear Algebra
106
MATH 433 Mathematical Modeling and Control Theory
PHIL 209 Philosophy of Science
PSYC 201 Experimentation and Statistics
REL 307 Thinking Gods: Cognitive Theories of Religion
STAT 101 Elementary Statistics and Data Analysis
STAT 201 Statistics and Data Analysis
STAT 231 Statistical Design of Experiments
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN COGNITIVE SCIENCE
Formal admission to candidacy for honors will occur at the end of the fall semester of the senior year and will be based on promising performance in COGS
493. This program will consist of COGS W31-494(S), and will be supervised by members of the advisory committee from at least two departments. Presentation
of a thesis, however, should not be interpreted as a guarantee of a degree with honors.
STUDY ABROAD
Students who wish to discuss plans for study abroad are invited to meet with any member of the Cognitive Science advisory committee.
COGS 222(F) Minds, Brains, and Intelligent Behavior: An Introduction to Cognitive Science (Same as Philosophy 222 and Psychology 222)
This course will emphasize interdisciplinary approaches to the study of intelligent systems, both natural and artificial. Cognitive science synthesizes research
from cognitive psychology, computer science, linguistics, neuroscience, and contemporary philosophy. Special attention will be given to the philosophical
foundations of cognitive science, representation and computation in symbolic and connectionist architectures, concept acquisition, problem solving, perception,
language, semantics, reasoning, and artificial intelligence.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: midterm and final exams, and self-paced weekly computer lab exercises.
Prerequisites: Psychology 101 or Philosophy 116 or Computer Science 134 or permission of instructor. Background in more than one of these is recommended.
Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Preference given to first-and second-year students.
Satisfies one semester of the Division II requirement.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR KIRBY
COGS 493(F) Senior Seminar
The goal of the cognitive science senior seminar is threefold. Firstly, we will revisit the foundations of cognitive research by reading some of the classics that
established cognitive science as a field in the middle of the 20th century. Secondly, we will engage current research trends in cognitive studies by looking at work
published in the last five years on cognitive neuroscience, embodied cognition, dynamic systems theory, empirical approaches to consciousness, and situated
robotics. In addition to attending to the specific empirical details of this latter work, we will also discuss how current research elaborates, expands, and sharpens
early conceptions of the domain and methodology of cognitive science. Our final goal will be the preparation of individual research papers by members of the
class. These will be on topics determined in collaboration with the instructor.
Students will be responsible for presentations on the assigned readings, and for the development of a final paper involving independent research.
Format: seminar or tutorial, depending on enrollment. Requirements: several short assignments, final paper, attendance and participation.
Prerequisites: required of, and open only to, senior cognitive science concentrators (though in unusual circumstances non-concentrators may take the class with
permission of the cognitive science advisory committee). Enrollment limit: number of senior concentrators.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W KIRBY
COGS W31-494(S) Senior Thesis
The senior concentrator, having completed the senior seminar and with approval from the advisory committee, may devote winter study and the spring semes-
ter to a senior thesis based on the fall research project.
COGS 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
COMPARATIVE LITERATURE (Div. I)
Chair, Associate Professor CHRISTOPHER BOLTON
Professors: BELL-VILLADA, CASSIDAY, DRUXES**, KIEFFER B, NEWMAN***, ROUHI. Associate Professors: C. BOLTON, DE-
KEL, S. FOX, FRENCH, KAGAYA, MARTIN, NUGENT, PIEPRZAK**, RHIE, VAN DE STADT*. Assistant Professors: HOLZAP-
FEL**, NAAMAN, VARGAS. Visiting Assistant Professor: KHATTAB.
Students motivated by a desire to study literary art in the broadest sense of the term will find an intellectual home in the Program in Comparative Literature.
The Program in Comparative Literature gives students the opportunity to develop their critical faculties through the analysis of literature across cultures, and
through the exploration of literary and critical theory. By crossing national, linguistic, historical, and disciplinary boundaries, students of Comparative Literature
learn to read texts for the ways they make meaning, the assumptions that underlie that meaning, and the aesthetic elements evinced in the making. Students of
Comparative Literature are encouraged to examine the widest possible range of literary communication, including the metamorphosis of genres, forms, and
themes.
Whereas specific literature programs allow the student to trace the development of one literature in a particular culture over a period of time, Comparative
Literature juxtaposes the writings of different cultures and epochs in a variety of ways. Because interpretive methods from other disciplines play a crucial role in
investigating literature's larger context, the Program offers courses intended for students in all divisions of the college and of all interests. These include courses
that introduce students to the comparative study of world literature and courses designed to enhance any foreign language major in the Williams curriculum. In
addition, the Program offers courses in literary theory that illuminate the study of texts of all sorts. Note: the English Department allows students to count one
course with a COMP prefix as an elective within the English major.
The Program supports two distinct majors: Comparative Literature and Literary Studies. The major in Comparative Literature requires advanced work in at
least one language other than English and is strongly recommended for students contemplating graduate study in the discipline. Both majors provide a strong
basis for any career demanding analytical, interpretive, and evaluative skills and allow the student, within a framework of general requirements, to create a pro-
gram of study primarily shaped by the student's own interests.
MAJORS
Comparative Literature
The Comparative Literature major combines the focused study of a single nationallanguage literature with a wideranging exploration of literary forms
across national, linguistic, and historical boundaries. Each student declaring the major must select a single foreign language as his or her specialty, although the
serious study of literature in foreign languages other than the student's specialty is strongly encouraged. The languages currently available are French, German,
Ancient Greek, Latin, Russian, and Spanish. Each student should choose a faculty advisor with whom the student will meet each semester to discuss how best to
fulfill the requirements for the major.
Eleven courses are required for the major (at least 1 course needs to be writing intensive):
Comparative Literature 110 Introduction to Comparative Literature OR Comparative Literature 111 The Nature of Narrative
Any three comparative literature core courses. A core course is any course that meets at least one of the following criteria: a) it must be genuinely com-
parative across cultures and/or b) it must primarily treat literary theory The three core courses may be chosen from the offerings of the Program in Com-
parative Literature or from the offerings of other departments and programs, including, but not limited to, the foreign language programs and English,
Religion, Africana Studies, Latino/Latina Studies, and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies. Examples of core courses include the following (please
be aware that this is not an exhaustive list; consult with a major advisor about which courses may count as cores):
COMP 104 Critical Approaches to Theater and Performance
COMP 117 Introduction to Cultural Theory
COMP 205 The Book of Job and Joban Literature
COMP 223 Comparative Middle Eastern and Latin American Cultural Studies
COMP 227 Writing Translation
COMP 237 Gender and Desire 12001600
COMP 243 Modern Women Writers and the City
COMP 249T Philosophy and Narrative Fiction
COMP 313 Gender, Race, Beauty in the Age of Transnational Media
COMP 329 The Contemporary World Novel
107
COMP 340 Literature and Psychoanalysis
COMP 343 Modern Critical Theory
COMP 356 Feeling Queer
Students should complete core course requirements by the end of their junior year
Three literature courses in the student's specialty language, in which texts are read in the original. At least one of the three must be above the 200level.
Students who are considering a major in Comparative Literature should aim to acquire intermediatelevel proficiency in their specialty language by the
end of the sophomore year.
Three courses in which most of the course work concerns literature other than that of the student's specialty language or literary theory. These courses
may be selected from Comparative Literature offerings or from other departments and must be approved by the student's major advisor. Only one may
be in English or American literature.
Comparative Literature 401 Senior Seminar (variable topics)--Students are expected to take the version of 401 offered in their senior year.
Students pursuing the Comparative Literature major are strongly encouraged to study abroad during their junior year and may receive major credit for up to 4
courses taken during study abroad. At least three courses towards the major must be at the 300 level or above. At least one of the courses counted toward the
major must be Writing Intensive.
Literary Studies
The Literary Studies major allows for a wideranging exploration of literary forms across national, linguistic, and historical boundaries. Unlike the major in
Comparative Literature, the Literary Studies major does not require the student to choose a specialty language, although the serious study of literature in one or
more foreign languages is strongly encouraged. Each student should choose a faculty advisor, with whom the student will meet each semester to discuss how best
to fulfill the requirements for the major.
Eleven courses are required for the major:
Comparative Literature 111 The Nature of Narrative OR Comparative Literature 110 Introduction to Comparative Literature
Any four comparative literature core courses. A core course is any course that meets the following criteria: a) it must treat primarily literature and b) it
must be genuinely comparative across cultures and/or primarily theoretical. The three core courses may be chosen from the offerings of the Program in
Comparative Literature or from the offerings of other departments and programs, including the foreign language programs and English, Religion, Africa-
na Studies, and Latino/Latina Studies. See above under "Comparative Literature" for some examples of core courses. This list is not exhaustive, and each
student should consult with a major advisor when choosing cores. Students who are considering a major in Literary Studies should aim to complete core
course requirements by the end of their junior year.
Five courses devoted to literature or literary theory that cover at least three different national/cultural traditions. The courses may be selected from Comparative
Literature offerings or from other departments and must be approved by the student's major advisor. Of the courses taken outside of the Program in Compara-
tive Literature, no more than two may have the same course prefix. Students are strongly encouraged to include courses in a foreign language among these five.
Comparative Literature 401 Senior Seminar (variable topics)--Students are expected to take the version of 401 offered in their senior year.
Students who choose to study abroad during their junior year may receive major credit for up to 4 courses taken during study abroad. At least three courses
towards the major must be at the 300 level or above. At least one of the courses counted toward the major must be Writing Intensive.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN COMPARATIVE LITERATURE OR LITERARY STUDIES
Prerequisites
Honors candidates in Comparative Literature or Literary Studies are required to have maintained a GPA of 3.5 in the major to qualify for submitting a thesis
proposal. In addition, candidates must demonstrate a strong interest in a specific topic for which an appropriate faculty advisor will be available in the senior year.
Timing
Students wishing to pursue a thesis in Comparative Literature or Literary Studies are strongly urged to secure an advisor by the end of the week after Spring
Break in their junior year. By May 15th of their junior year, candidates must submit to the Program Advisory Committee a one- to two-page proposal and a
preliminary bibliography. The Advisory Committee will inform candidates by June 1 whether they may proceed with the thesis and advise them about any
changes that should be made in the focus or scope of the project. The summer before the senior year will be spent compiling a more detailed bibliography and
preparing for the process of writing the thesis.
In their senior year, candidates will devote two semesters and the winter study period to their theses (493-W31-494). By the end of the Fall semester, students
will normally have undertaken substantial research and produced the draft of at least the first half of the project. At this point students should also have a clear
sense of the work remaining for completion of the thesis. In the course of the Fall semester, students will also have chosen and met with a second reader for the
project, who will provide additional guidance and read the final thesis. By the end of Winter Study, students should have completed a draft of the entire project. At
that time, the Comparative Literature Advisory Committee, together with the advisor, will determine whether the project may continue as an Honors Thesis, or
whether its first portions (COMP 493-W) will be graded as Independent Studies.
The second semester of independent thesis work will be spent revising as necessary. The completed thesis in its final form will be due one week before the last
day of classes. At the end of the Spring term, the student will make a public presentation of the final project, to which members of the Advisory Committee will be
specially invited.
Characteristics of the Thesis, Evaluation, and Major Credit
The topic of the thesis must be comparative and/or theoretical. It is also possible to write a thesis that consists of an original translation of a significant text or
texts; in this case, a theoretical apparatus must accompany the translation. The complete thesis must be at least 50 and at most 75 pages in length, excluding the
bibliography.
The advisor will assign the grades for the thesis courses (COMP 493-W-494); the Advisory Committee will determine whether a candidate will receive Hon-
ors, Highest Honors, or no honors.
For students who pursue an honors thesis, the total number of courses required for the major-including the thesis course (COMP 493-W-494)-is 12, i.e., one of
the thesis courses may substitute for one elective.
STUDY ABROAD
The Program in Comparative Literature strongly urges its students to study abroad. Students who have Comparative Literature as a major should seriously
consider study abroad in a country where their specialty language is spoken; they will likely be able to complete some of the specialty language courses required
for the major during study abroad. Literary Studies students can also benefit from study abroad; literature courses from abroad are often candidates for credit as
major electives.
COURSES
COMP 104(S) Critical Approaches to Theatre and Performance (Same as Theatre 104) (D)
(See under THEA 104 for full description.) HOLZAPFEL
COMP 106(S) Happiness (Same as English 104) (W)
(See under ENGL 104 for full description.) I. BELL
COMP 107(S) The Trojan War (Same as Classics 101)
(See under CLAS 101 for full description.) HOPPIN
COMP 108(F) Roman Literature: Foundations and Empires (Same as Classics 102)
(See under CLAS 102 for full description.) WILCOX
COMP 110(S) Introduction to Comparative Literature (Same as English 241)
Comparative literature involves reading and analyzing literature that spans a range of different times, cultures, and media. In this class we will study English
translations of texts that belong to several important literary traditions: Japanese, Chinese, and Greek classics; 19th-century Russian, French, and German fiction;
and visual texts from oil painting to graphic novels, video games, and film. Throughout the course we will consider what it means to think about all these different
108
works as literary texts. To help with this, we will also read some representative works of literary theory that have tried to define literature in abstract or philosophi-
cal terms. Assignments will focus on close reading of relatively short texts by authors like Homer, Sei Shnagon, Wu Cheng'en, Kleist, Tolstoy, Zola, Maupas-
sant, Wilde, Shklovsky, Bakhtin, Borges, Mamet, and Bechdel. All readings will be in English.
Format: lecture with some discussion. Requirements: regular attendance, ungraded creative project, a few 1-page response assignments, and two 5- to 7-page
papers.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 25). Preference given to students considering a major in comparative literature or literary studies.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR C. BOLTON
COMP 111(F) The Nature of Narrative (Same as English 120) (W)
In this course, we will read firstrate fiction by firstrate writers from a wide variety of traditions and eras in an effort to understand the meaning of narrative. How
does narrative technique shape our understanding of a given text? In what ways and for what purposes do authors create different narrators to present a story? Our
texts will include writings from Antiquity, and by Cervantes, Goethe, Kleist, Gogol, Kafka, Nabokov, Woolf, and Mishima. We will accompany these texts with
pertinent theoretical pieces by, among others, Aristotle, Plato, Benjamin, and Foucault. All readings in English.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: active class participation, several short papers, and a final 10page paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to students considering a major in Comparative Literature or Literary Studies and cur-
rently studying a foreign language.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR CASSIDAY
COMP 117(F) Introduction to Cultural Theory (Same as English 117) (W)
(See under ENGL 117 for full description.) THORNE
COMP 134 Myth in Music (Same as Music 134) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under MUS 134 for full description.) M. HIRSCH
COMP 139(S) Metafiction (Same as English 139) (W)
(See under ENGL 139 for full description.) ROSENHEIM
COMP 152(F) Japanese Film (Same as Japanese 152)
An introduction to Japanese film organized around major directors. The course will cover early masters like Ozu, Mizoguchi, and Kurosawa; New Wave directors
of the 1960s and 1970s; and a few contemporary figures like Kitano "Beat" Takeshi. We will also consider popular genres like swordplay films, J-Horror, and
anime, focusing on several directors whose work seems to borrow equally from genre film and the artistic avant-garde. All texts are translated or subtitled in
English.
Format: lecture with some discussion. Requirements: regular attendance in class and at weekly evening screenings, weekly readings in film theory and criticism,
and several short response assignments, plus two short papers and an in-class exam.
No prerequisites. No enrollment limit (expected: 25).
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M and 1:10-2:25 TF C. BOLTON
COMP 200 European Modernism--and Its Discontents (Not offered 2011-2012)
What is/was Modernism? An artistic movement? A new dynamic and sensibility? A transformative response to changed conditions? All these and more? This
course will attempt to deal with such issues via examination of certain key works spanning the years 1850-1930. Topics to be considered: the rise of industrial
capitalism and the literary market, advances in science and technology, urban alienation and social conflict, anti-"bourgeois" stances, the displacement of
religion, the fragmented self, the proliferation of multiple perspectives, the breaks with the past and privileging of the present, and the horrors of war. To be
studied: poetry by Baudelaire, Yeats, and Neruda; prose fiction by Dostoevsky, Kafka, Proust, Joyce, and Woolf; drama by Pirandello; Futurist and Surrealist
manifestoes; German Expressionist films; and theoretical writings by Marx, Freud, Nietzsche, Ortega y Gasset, and Benjamin. In addition, select portions of
Bell-Villada's Art for Art's Sake and Literary Life and Peter Gay's Modernism will serve as general background to the course. All readings in English.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: class participation, brief weekly journals, one class presentation, three 6-page papers, a mid-term, and a final.
No prerequisites; first-year students must consult with the instructor before registering for this course. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). Preference given to
students considering a major in Comparative Literature or Literary Studies.
BELL-VILLADA
COMP 201(F) The Hebrew Bible (Same as Jewish Studies 201 and Religion 201)
(See under REL 201 for full description.) DEKEL
COMP 202(S) Modern Drama (Same as English 202 and Theatre 229)
(See under ENGL 202 for full description.) PETHICA
COMP 203(F) 19th-Century Russian Literature in Translation (Same as Russian 203)
(See under RUSS 203 for full description.) SECKLER
COMP 204 Twentieth-Century Russian Literature: Manuscripts Don't Burn (Same as Russian 204) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under RUSS 204 for full description.) VAN DE STADT
COMP 205(S) The Latin-American Novel in Translation (Same as Spanish 205)
(See under RLSP 205 for full description.) BELL-VILLADA
COMP 206 The Book of Job and Joban Literature (Same as Jewish Studies 206 and Religion 206) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under REL 206 for full description.) DEKEL
COMP 207T(S) Tolstoy: The Major Novels (Same as Russian 210T) (W)
(See under RUSS 210 for full description.) CASSIDAY
COMP 208 The Culture of Carnival (Same as Theatre 205) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under THEA 205 for full description.) BROTHERS
COMP 209 The Legend of the Wandering Jew (Same as Jewish Studies 209 and Religion 209) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under REL 209 for full description.) DEKEL
COMP 210(S) Latina/o Language and Literature: Hybrid Voices (Same as American Studies 240 and Latina/o Studies 240) (D)
(See under LATS 240 for full description.) CEPEDA
COMP 211(S) Terrorism and Literature (W)
Terrorism is distinctly related to literature in that text is often the primary form in which the motives of terrorists are conveyed to the public and the way in which
many people contextualize trauma and create cultural memory. The tenyear anniversary of 9/11 will provide an opportunity for students to revisit the attacks
through literature and read texts pertaining to 9/11 by alQaeda, major news sources, and novels by authors such as Jonathan Safran Foer and Don DeLillo.
Students will also have the opportunity to see how terrorism and the cultural memory of terrorism is approached in different countries with a focus on Germany
and the Red Army Faction (RAF) and texts by former RAF members, by major news sources, and by authors such as Heinrich Bll, Peter Schneider, Stefan Aust,
Erin Cosgrove, and Bernhard Schlink.
Format: seminar. Requirements: frequent short writing assignments, final oral presentation that will be revised into final paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to Comparative Literature and Literary Studies majors and those interested in majoring.
Hour: 11:10-12:25 TR COLLENBERG
109
COMP 212 Nordic Lights: Literary and Cultural Diversity in Modern Scandinavia (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies
200) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
Mythologized as the land of the aurora borealis and the midnight sun, Scandinavia's five distinct nations--Iceland, Norway, Sweden, Denmark, and Finland--
are often mistakenly associated with blond-haired and blue-eyed uniformity. Modern Scandinavia, however, is a place of great social and cultural diversity.
From medieval Viking sagas to contemporary Nordic rap, the Scandinavian literary tradition is rich in tales of global exploration, childhood imagination, sexual
revolution, and multicultural confrontation. Through readings of nineteenth-century drama, twentieth-century novels, and twenty-first century cinema, we will
investigate a wide range of issues on class, ethnicity, and identity, including the indigenous reindeer-herding Sami people, Danish colonialism and the Green-
landic Inuit, Norwegian collaboration and resistance during World War II, and Nordic emigration (to North America) and immigration (from Africa, Asia,
Latin America, and the Middle East). Discussion will also focus on Scandinavia's leadership in gender equality and sexual liberation, Scandinavian political
isolation and integration (into both the UN and the EU), and the global effects of Nordic pop (ABBA to Bjrk), glamour (Greta Garbo to Helena Christensen),
technology (Volvo to Nokia), and design (IKEA to H&M). Readings to include works by Henrik Ibsen, August Strindberg, Hans Christian Andersen, Karen
Blixen, Astrid Lindgren, Halldr Laxness, Reidar Jnsson, and Peter Heg. Films to include works by Ingmar Bergman, Lasse Hallstrm, Bille August, Colin
Nutley, Lukas Moodysson, Josef Fares, and Tomas Vinterberg. All readings and discussions in English.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active participation, two short papers, an oral presentation, and a final paper.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15). Preference given to Comparative Literature and Women's, Gender and Sexu-
ality Studies majors and those with compelling justification for admission.
MARTIN
COMP 213 Reading Jesus, Writing Gospels: Christian Origins in Context (Same as Classics 210 and Religion 210) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(W)
(See under REL 210 for full description.) BUELL
COMP 214(S) Moses: Stranger in a Strange Land (Same as Jewish Studies 202 and Religion 202)
(See under REL 202 for full description.) DEKEL
COMP 215(F) Experimental Asian American Writing (Same as American Studies 215 and English 217)
(See under AMST 215 for full description.) WANG
COMP 216 Protest Literature: Arab Writing Across Three Continents (Same as Arabic 216) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under ARAB 216 for full description.) NAAMAN
COMP 217 Ancient Wisdom Literature (Same as Classics 205, Jewish Studies 205 and Religion 205) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under REL 205 for full description.) DEKEL
COMP 218(S) Gnosis, Gnostics, Gnosticism (Same as Classics 218, History 331 and Religion 218) (W)
(See under REL 218 for full description.) BUELL
COMP 219 Arabs in America: A Survey (Same as American Studies 219 and Arabic 219) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under ARAB 219 for full description.) NAAMAN
COMP 220 Cultural Foundations: The Literature and History of Early China (Same as Chinese 224 and History 315) (Not offered
2011-2012) (D)
(See under CHIN 224 for full description.) NUGENT
COMP 221(F) The Feature Film (Same as English 204)
(See under ENGL 204 for full description.) ROSENHEIM and KLEINER
COMP 222 Introduction to Postwar Japanese Cinema to 1960 (Same as Japanese 222) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under JAPN 222 for full description.) F. STEWART
COMP 223(S) Migrants at the Borders: Comparative Middle Eastern and Latin American Cultural Studies (Same as Arabic 223)
(See under ARAB 223 for full description.) VARGAS
COMP 224 Issues in Contemporary Japan through Literature and Film (Same as Japanese 224) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under JAPN 224 for full description.) KAGAYA
COMP 225 Traditional Chinese Poetry (Same as Chinese 228) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
(See under CHIN 228 for full description.) NUGENT
COMP 226(S) The Ancient Novel (Same as Classics 226) (W)
(See under CLAS 226 for full description.) WILCOX
COMP 228 Modern Arabic Literature in Translation (Same as Arabic 228) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
(See under ARAB 228 for full description.) NAAMAN
COMP 230T Violent States, Violent Subjects: Nation-Building and Atrocity in 19th-Century Latin America (Same as Spanish 230T) (Not
offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
(See under RLSP 230 for full description.) FRENCH
COMP 231T Postmodernism (Same as English 266T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
In one definition, postmodernism in art and literature is what you get when you combine modernism's radical experimentation with pop culture's easy appeal.
This term has been used to describe works from Andy Warhol's paintings of Campbell's soup cans and Jean Baudrillard's critical essays on Disneyland to
Thomas Pynchon's paranoid novel about postal conspiracy, The Crying of Lot 49. Theorists of the postmodern have argued that it represents not only a radical
change in aesthetic sensibilities, but a fundamentally new relationship between art, language, and society. In this tutorial, we will read some of the most impor-
tant theoretical essays defining the postmodern (essays which themselves often embrace this playful and sometimes ironic style), and we will pair them with
artistic texts that are said to illustrate the features of postmodernism. The latter will be mainly novels and short stories from various countries, but one feature of
this theory is a flattening of the distinction between high and low culture as well as between the written and the visual, so we will also examine examples from
film, architecture, visual art, and/or broader pop culture. Along the way will ask whether global theoretical paradigms like postmodernism can help us under-
stand other cultures better (by locating them within a single universal system), or whether this approach conceals important cultural differences. Texts will
include essays by Jean Baudrillard, Fredric Jameson, Jean-Franois Lyotard, and others; novels and short stories by writers like Don DeLillo, Jorge Luis
Borges, Italo Calvino, and Murakami Haruki; painting and sculpture associated with Pop Art and Superflat; the architecture of Williamstown area museums;
etc. Writing assignments will focus on reading the theoretical texts critically and applying their ideas to the artistic texts in creative and interesting ways. Open to
sophomores as well as advanced students.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: After an introductory lecture meeting, students will meet with the instructor in pairs for approximately an hour each week; they
will write a 5-page paper every other week (five in all), and respond to their partners' papers in alternate weeks. Emphasis will be on understanding and engag-
ing the criticism that we read, and comparing the critical and fictional texts creatively in a way that sheds light on both.
Prerequisites: a 100-level literature course (Comparative Literature, English, etc.) and sophomore standing or higher, or permission of the instructor.Enrollment
limit: 10 (expected: 10). Priority will be given to students majoring in a discipline related to critical theory (or considering such a major) and those with a
demonstrated interest in the material.
C. BOLTON
110
COMP 232(F) 20th-Century Korea Through Fiction and Film (Same as Asian Studies 232)
(See under ASST 232 for full description.) FLOYD
COMP 233 Introduction to Classical Arabic Literature (Same as Arabic 233) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under ARAB 233 for full description.) VARGAS
COMP 234 Modern Japanese and Korean Literature in Comparative Perspective (Same as Asian Studies 234) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under ASST 234 for full description.) FLOYD
COMP 235 China on Screen (Same as Chinese 235) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under CHIN 235 for full description.) NUGENT
COMP 237(F) Gender and Desire 1200-1600 (Same as English 237 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 237) (W) (D)
(See under ENGL 237 for full description.) KNOPP
COMP 238(S) Comedy/Tragedy (Same as English 235) (W)
(See under ENGL 235 for full description.) KLEINER
COMP 239(S) The Novel in Theory (Same as English 240) (W)
(See under ENGL 240 for full description.) MCWEENY
COMP 240(S) Introduction to Literary Theory (Same as English 230) (W)
(See under ENGL 230 for full description). DAVIS
COMP 241(F) Performing Race: From Shakespeare to Spike Lee (Same as Africana Studies 241 and Theatre 241) (D)
(See under THEA 241 for full description.) P. ERICKSON
COMP 242T Reading and Writing the Body (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Am I a body, or do I have one? The tradition of favoring thought over physical experience has long informed, and limited, our sense of self as human beings.
While some writers maintain that the creative impulse is a gift of the muse and that it is rooted entirely in the mind or spirit, there are those for whom the human
body, frequently their own, plays a central role, both in the process of creation and as a subject of artistic inquiry or contemplation. In their writing, these authors
tell a very different tale with regard to the literary process, and it is focused on the primacy of the physical experience. This course will consider the work of,
among others, Maupassant, Kafka, Tanizaki, Tolstoy, Dinesen, Babel, Mandelstam, and Atwood in order to examine how writers from different cultural and
aesthetic perspectives either present or use the body as a vehicle of expression. We will also consider other areas of study that are intimately related to the
physical experience, such as asceticism, illness, prostitution, and disability, and occasionally turn our attention to other art forms.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: weekly one-hour sessions with the instructor and a fellow student. Every other week the student will write and present orally a 5
to 6-page paper on the assigned readings for that week. On alternate weeks the student will write and present a 2-page critique of the fellow student's paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference will be given to majors in Comparative Literature.
VAN DE STADT
COMP 243(S) (formerly 252) Modern Women Writers and the City (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 252)
Ambivalence has always been a vital part of literary responses to city life. Whether they praise the city or blame it, women writers react to the urban environment
in a significantly different way from men. While male writers have often emphasized alienation and strangeness, women writers have celebrated the mobility and
public life of the city as liberating. We will look at issues of women's work, class politics, sexual freedom or restriction, rituals of consumption, the conservation of
memory by architecture, and community-building in cities like London, New York, Berlin, Paris. We will examine novels and short stories about the modern city
by writers as diverse as Virginia Woolf, Gertrude Stein, Anzia Yezierska, Ann Petry, Jean Rhys, Marguerite Duras, Margaret Drabble Ntozake Shange, Verena
Stefan, Jhumpa Lahiri and Edwidge Danticat. We will consider theoretical approaches to urban spaces by feminists (Beatriz Colomina, Elizabeth Wilson), archi-
tectural historians (Christine Boyer) and anthropologists and sociologists (Janet Abu-Lughod, David Sibley, Michael Sorkin). Several contemporary films will be
discussed. All readings in English.
Format: lecture and discussion. Requirements: two short papers and one final paper.
Prerequisites: Comparative Literature 111 or a 100-level English course. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 20).
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR DRUXES
COMP 248(S) The Modern Theatre: Plays and Performance (Same as English 234 and Theatre 248)
(See under THEA 248 for full description.) BAKER-WHITE and ERICKSON
COMP 250 From Adam to Noah: Literary Imagination and the Primeval History in Genesis (Same as Classics 207, Jewish Studies 207 and
Religion 207) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under REL 207 for full description.) DEKEL
COMP 252 The Masks of Japanese Literature (Same as Japanese 252) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
From the masks of the noh theater to science fiction fantasies of plastic surgery and cyborg identity, this course examines the device of the mask in modern
Japanese fiction, as well as some of its premodern antecedents. The fictional masks we will look at range from the traditional to the technological, from the
actual to the metaphorical, from the physical to the purely psychological. But all of them are used by the authors to explore the nature of identity, and the
significance of concealing or revealing the self, either in fiction or face to face. This course considers diversity by giving careful thought to the nature of personal
and cultural identity, and to how different individuals express those identities through language. Readings will include modern novels and short stories by Abe
Kb, Enchi Fumiko, End Shsaku, Kurahashi Yumiko, Mishima Yukio, Tanizaki Jun'ichir, and Oscar Wilde. Visual texts will include noh and puppet
theater, avant-garde film by Teshigahara Hiroshi, comics by Tezuka Osamu, and animation by Oshii Mamoru. The class and the readings are in English. No
familiarity with Japanese language or culture is required.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: in-class exam, ungraded creative project, and two short papers (5-7 pages each) emphasizing original, creative, and
convincing readings of the class texts.
No prerequisites. No enrollment limit (expected: 15).
C. BOLTON
COMP 255(S) Love and Death in Modern Japanese Literature (Same as Japanese 255) (D)
The initial thing that surprises many first-time readers of modern Japanese fiction is its striking similarity to Western fiction. But equally surprising are the intrigu-
ing differences that lie concealed within that sameness. This course investigates Japanese culture and compares it with our own by reading Japanese fiction about
two universal human experiences--love and death--and asking what inflections Japanese writers give these ideas in their work. The course begins with tales of
doomed lovers that were popular in the eighteenth century kabuki and puppet theaters, and that still feature prominently in Japanese popular culture, from comics
to TV dramas. From there we move on to novels and films that examine a range of other relationships between love and death, including parental love and
sacrifice, martyrdom and love of country, sex and the occult, and romance at an advanced age. We will read novels and short stories by canonical modern authors
like Tanizaki, Kawabata, and Mishima as well as more contemporary fiction by writers like Murakami Haruki; we will also look at some visual literature, includ-
ing puppet theater, comics, animation, and Japanese New Wave film.
The class and the readings are in English. No familiarity with Japanese language or culture is required.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: In-class exam, ungraded creative project, and two short papers (5-7 pages each) emphasizing original, creative, and
convincing readings of the class texts.
No prerequisites. No enrollment limit (expected: 15).
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF C. BOLTON
COMP 256T Crises and Critiques: The Literature and Intellectual History of Early 20th Century China (Same as Chinese 251T and History
215T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
(See under CHIN 251 for full description.) NUGENT
111
COMP 257 Baghdad (Same as Arabic 257) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under ARAB 257 for full description.) VARGAS
COMP 259T Adultery in the Nineteenth-Century Novel (Same as English 261T and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 259T) (Not
offered 2011-2012) (W)
In this tutorial, we will read five novels written between 1850 and 1899, all of which focus on the figure of the adulteress: Nathaniel Hawthorne's The Scarlet
Letter (1850), Gustave Flaubert's Madame Bovary (1856), Lev Tolstoy's Anna Karenina (1873-77), Theodor Fontane's Effi Briest (1894), and Kate Chopin's
The Awakening (1899). For each week of class, students will read one of these primary texts, as well as a selection of secondary literature that will allow us to
understand, over the course of the semester, how and why the adulteress played a key role in the cultural imagination of Europe and the United States during this
time. Students will meet with the professor in pairs, with one student from each pair writing a 5-page paper for each class session. All works not originally
written in English will be read in English translation.
Format: tutorial. Evaluation will be based on completion of weekly reading and writing assignments, active engagement during tutorial sessions, and comple-
tion of a final synthetic writing assignment.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference will be given to students who have already taken at least one course devoted to literature at
Williams.
CASSIDAY
COMP 260 Reading Reading: An Introduction to the Qur'an and Islam (Same as Religion 230) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under REL 230 for full description.) DARROW
COMP 261 Japanese Theatre and its Contemporary Context (Same as Japanese 260) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under JAPN 260 for full description.) KAGAYA
COMP 262 Outlaws and Underworlds: Arabic Literature of the Margins (Same as Arabic 262) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under ARAB 262 for full description.) NAAMAN
COMP 264 Japanese Literature and the End of the World (Same as Japanese 254) (Not offered 2011-2012)
From the endemic warfare of the medieval era to the atomic bombing and the violent explosion of technology in the last century, the end of the world is an idea
which has occupied a central place in almost every generation of Japanese literature. Paradoxically, the spectacle of destruction has given birth to some of the
most beautiful, most moving, and most powerfully thrilling literature in the Japanese tradition. Texts may be drawn from medieval war narratives like The Tale
of the Heike; World War II fiction and films by Ibuse Masuji, Imamura Shhei, and Ichikawa Kon; fantasy and science fiction novels by Abe Kb, Murakami
Haruki and Murakami Ry; and apocalyptic comics and animation by Oshii Mamoru, tomo Katsuhiro and Takahata Isao. The class and the readings are in
English; no familiarity with Japanese language or culture is required.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: in-class exam, ungraded creative project, and a few short response assignments, plus two 5- to 7-page papers empha-
sizing original, creative readings of the literary texts.
No prerequisites. No enrollment limit (expected: 15).
C. BOLTON
COMP 266 Confession and Deception in Japanese Literature (Same as Japanese 256) (Not offered 2011-2012)
Situated at the origins of Japanese literature are the beautiful and revealing diaries of ladies in waiting of the tenth-century imperial court. Since that time,
Japanese literary tradition has placed great value on confessional writing of many kinds, from Sei Shnagon's classical Pillow Book and the haiku master
Bash's eighteenth-century travel diaries to postwar autobiographical fiction by writers like Mishima and Tanizaki. The source of interest in many of these texts
lies in their combination of self-revelation and concealment or deception. This course asks what it meant for these authors to write from their own experience,
and also what new things we can reveal in their work by writing about it ourselves. The class and the readings are in English; no familiarity with Japanese
language or culture is required.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: in-class exam, ungraded creative project, and a few short response assignments, plus two 5- to 7-page papers empha-
sizing original, creative readings of the literary texts.
No prerequisites. No enrollment limit (expected: 15).
C. BOLTON
COMP 270 Performing Greece and Rome (Same as Classics 262 and Theatre 262) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under CLAS 262 for full description.) HOPPIN and BUCKY
COMP 269 Transitional Japanese Literature into the Twentieth Century (Same as Japanese 271) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under JAPN 271 for full description.) KAGAYA
COMP 271 Religion and the Modern Literary Imagination (Same as English 271 and Religion 271) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under REL 271 for full description.) HAMMERSCHLAG
COMP 272 Literature of the Americas: Transnational Dialogues on Race, Violence and Nation-Building (Same as American Studies 256,
Latina/o Studies 272 and Spanish 272) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
This course will present some of the methodologies and issues involved in studying the literature of the American hemisphere, with particular emphasis on the
dialogue between US and Spanish American writers in the 19th century. Then as now, some of Latin America's most important intellectuals were profoundly
affected by the experience of living in the US, and their influential formulations of Latin American identity reflect their ambivalence towards the northern
neighbor that was both enviously successful and alarmingly imperialistic with regard to the rest of the hemisphere. Reading Domingo F. Sarmiento, Jos Mart,
and other Spanish American authors in dialogue with Emerson, Whitman and the like, we will examine the various and intertwined ways in which American
writers from both North and South of the Ro Grande addressed questions of fundamental importance to the new nations of the Americas, including the legacies
of slavery and colonial violence, the scope of democracy and women's participation in it, the link between geography and national identity, and the nature of
inter-American relations. This course fulfills the EDI requirement by challenging students to engage in a comparative study of the US and Latin American
societies, focusing on the ways that political events and decisions in the US have affected Latin American lives and the ways that Latin American writers (and
their audiences) have viewed the US. Conducted in English.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: regular class attendance and participation, three 5- to 7-pages papers and shorter writing assignments.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). (Cultural Studies)
FRENCH
COMP 275 Russian and Soviet Cinema (Same as Russian 275) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under RUSS 275 for full description.) CASSIDAY
COMP 278 Premodern Japanese Literature and Performance (Same as Japanese 276) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under JAPN 276 for full description.) KAGAYA
COMP 283(S) Great Big Books (Same as English 233) (Gateway) (W)
(See under ENGL 233 for full description.) TIFFT
COMP 294T(S) Philosophy and Narrative Fiction (Same as Philosophy 294) (W)
(See under PHIL 294 for full description.) MLADENOVIC
COMP 300(S) Shakespeare and Freud (Same as English 302)
(See under ENGL 302 for full description.) BUNDTZEN
112
COMP 301 Word Virus: Cultural Theory after the Linguistic Turn (Same as Religion 301) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under REL 301 for full description.) JOSEPHSON
COMP 302T(S) Latino Writing: Literature by U.S. Hispanics (Same as Spanish 306T) (W)
(See under RLSP 306 for full description.) BELL-VILLADA
COMP 303(S) Cities of the Anglophone Chinese Imagination (Same as American Studies 305, Asian Studies 305 and English 374) (D)
(See under AMST 305 for full description.) WANG
COMP 305 Dostoevsky: The Development of his Literature and Ideas (Same as Russian 305) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under RUSS 305 for full description.) CASSIDAY
COMP 306 Tolstoy and His Age (Same as Russian 306) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under RUSS 306 for full description.) VAN DE STADT
COMP 308 Everyday Life in Literature and Film (Not offered 2011-2012)
To bring the all too familiar everyday to our attention, artists and writers have made it strange. What happens when we view everyday life from elsewhere?
While everyday culture has often been experienced as repressive and alienating in modern Western societies, a new importance assigned to everyday life made
it liberating in Japan during the twenties and in contemporary China. The contours of the everyday are delightfully vague, and it always exceeds theorizing. For
instance, is its privileged place the street or the home? Is it lived largely in institutions that regulate our daily lives, or is it lived between and outside them?
Everyday objects and commodities like the potato, the postcard, the car, clothes, housing, etc., will be analyzed. Fiction by Leo Tolstoy, Franz Kafka, Georges
Perec, Manil Suri, Ha Jin, and Banana Yoshimoto. Films by Chantal Akerman, Pedro Almodovar, Benoit Jaquot, and Pierre Jeunet. Art projects that transform
the everyday will also be discussed, including those of Sophie Calle, Mary Kelley, Mierle Laderman Ukeles, and Christine Hill. Short theoretical excerpts from
Freud, Kracauer, Goffman, Lefebvre, de Beauvoir, Friedan, Debord, Foucault, and Bourdieu. All works not originally in English will be read in English transla-
tion.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on two short oral reports on everyday objects and their history, two 3- to 5-page papers, and a 10- to 12-page final
paper or creative project.
Prerequisites: one 200-level literature course. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 10). Preference will be given to students majoring in Comparative Literature and
Literary Studies.
DRUXES
COMP 309T Exile, Homecoming and the Promised Land (Same as Jewish Studies 491T and Religion 289T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(D)
(See under REL 289 for full description.) HAMMERSCHLAG
COMP 310T(S) Storm and Stress and More (Same as German 310) (W)
(See under GERM 310 for full description.) B. KIEFFER
COMP 311(F) New Soviet Man and His Discontents (Same as Russian 309 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 309) (D)
(See under RUSS 309 for full description.) SECKLER
COMP 312(F) Francographic Islands (Same as Africana Studies 312 and French 312) (D)
(See under RLFR 312 for full description.) PIEPRZAK
COMP 313 Gender, Race, Beauty, and Power in the Age of Transnational Media (Same as American Studies 313, Latina/o Studies 313 and
Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 313) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under LATS 313 for full description.) CEPEDA
COMP 315(F) Medieval East and West: Travel, Holy War, Storytelling (Same as Arabic 303 and English 303) (D)
(See under ENGL 303 for full description.) KNOPP
COMP 316(S) Inscrutable Evil, or the Transformative Horror Film (Same as English 318) (W)
(See under ENGL 318 for full description.) J. SHEPARD
COMP 317(S) Dante (Same as English 304)
(See under ENGL 304 for full description.) KLEINER
COMP 318 Twentieth-Century Novel: From Adversity to Modernity (Same as French 318) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under RLFR 318 for full description.) B. MARTIN
COMP 319(S) Black Migrations: African American Performance at Home and Abroad (Same as Africana Studies 317, Dance 317, English
317 and Theatre 317)
(See under AFR 317 for full description.) BRAGGS
COMP 320T Enchantment and the Origins of Poetry (Same as CLGR 410T and Classics 320T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under CLAS 320T for full description.) DEKEL
COMP 321(F) Groovin' the Written Word: The Role of Music in African American Literature (Same as Africana Studies 314, American
Studies 314, English 314 and Music 214)
(See under AFR 314 for full description.) BRAGGS
COMP 333T(F) Narrative Strategies (Same as ArtS 333)
(See under ARTS 333 for full description.) ALI
COMP 335(S) Manners, Modernity, and the Novel (Same as English 335) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under ENGL 335 for full description.) MCWEENY
COMP 338 Popular Culture and the Dynamics of the Everyday (Same as American Studies 339 and Latina/o Studies 338) (Not offered
2011-2012) (W) (D)
(See under LATS 338 for full description.) CEPEDA
COMP 340(F) Literature and Psychoanalysis (Same as English 363) (W)
The British psychoanalyst D. W. Winnicott once wrote: "It is a joy to be hidden, and a disaster not to be found." This course will explore the many ways in which
writing enacts this paradox, examining in the process several main strands of psychoanalytic thought in relation to literature that precedes, accompanies, and
follows it in history. Approximately the first three-fourths of the course will involve close readings of theoretical and literary texts, which will be shared in a
seminar format. In the latter portion of the course, students will work with each other and with the instructor on analyzing the processes of reading and writing as
they produce original psychoanalytic readings of texts of their choice. All readings in English.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: active engagement with the material and with each other; reading journal; two shorter papers, and one final paper that
will first be presented orally in a conference format, then expanded and revised into a longer paper.
Prerequisites: one previous course in either Comparative Literature or English, or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given
to Comparative Literature students.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR NEWMAN
113
COMP 343(S) Modern Critical Theory (Same as English 373)
(See under ENGL 373 for full description) SOKOLSKY
COMP 344 From Hermeneutics to Post-coloniality and Beyond (Same as English 386 and Religion 304) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under REL 304 for full description.) (Literature and Theory) DREYFUS
COMP 346 Questioning the Cultural Self in Literature (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Cultural encounters entail a questioning of identity, values and worldview. As the familiar gives way to the unknown, issues of knowledge and power can begin
to influence the interaction between different groups. In this course we will examine texts dealing with differences in language, religion, race, class, gender and
citizenship that lead to the formation of allegiances and rivalries. What constitutes a cultural group? How is difference determined? What is the nature of the
tension characteristic of many a cross-cultural encounter? How do cultural hybridity and conflicting solidarities influence multi-cultural dialogues? Readings
for this course include Jhumpa Lahiri's The Namesake, Nelida Pinon's The Republic of Dreams, Joseph Conrad's Heart of Darkness, Jamaica Kincaid's A
Small Place, Ghassan Kanafani's Return to Haifa and Victor Martinez's Parrot in the Oven: Mi Vida.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: active class participation, two 3- to 5-page papers and a final 7- to 10-page paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to majors in Comparative Literature or Literary Studies.
VARGAS
COMP 352 Writing after the Disaster: The Literature of Exile (Same as Jewish Studies 352) (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course will consider different kinds of works (poetry, memoirs, fiction, essay) written by authors forced to live in exile as a consequence of political and/or
religious persecution. Our point of departure will be the paradigmatic expulsion and subsequent diaspora of the Jews of Spain and Portugal. Most assignments,
however, will be drawn from twentieth century texts written during, or in the wake of, the massive destruction and displacements brought about by the Spanish
Civil War and World War II. How is the life lost portrayed? How are the concepts of home and the past intertwined? What kind of life or literature are possible
for the deracinated survivor? We will discuss the role of writing and remembrance in relation to political history, as well as in the context of individual survival.
Readings might include works by Nuez de Reinoso, Len, Cernuda, Semprn, Benjamin, Nancy, and Blanchot.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active participation in class discussions, an oral presentation, several short writing assignments, a midterm paper and a final
paper.
Prerequisite: Comparative Literature 111 or an equivalent English course. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). Preference given to majors in Comparative
Literature.
S. FOX
COMP 353 Writing the City: Beirut and Cairo in Contemporary Arabic Literature (Same as Arabic 353) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under ARAB 353 for full description.) NAAMAN
COMP 355 Contemporary Drama and Performance (Same as English 349 and Theatre 345) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under THEA 345 for full description.) HOLZAPFEL
COMP 356T(S) Feeling Queer: Theories of Emotion and Affect in Literary and Cultural Studies (Same as American Studies 356 and English
356, and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 355) (W) (D)
(See under ENGL 356 for full description.) KENT
COMP 359(S) Latinos/as and the Media: From Production to Consumption (Same as American Studies 346 and Latina/o Studies 346) (D)
(W)
(See under LATS 346 for full description.) CEPEDA
COMP 370(S) Displaying, Collecting and Preserving the Other: Museums and French Imperialism (Same as Africana Studies 370 and
French 370)
(See under RLFR 370 for full description.) PIEPRZAK
COMP 375 New Asian American, African American, Native American, and Latina/o Writing (Same as Africana Studies 403, American
Studies 403, English 375 and Latina/o Studies 403) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under AMST 403 for full description.) WANG
COMP 392(F) Wonder (Same as English 392)
(See under ENGL 392 for full description.) PYE
COMP 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
COMP 401(F) Senior Seminar. Sublime Confusion: A Survey of Critical Theory (Same as English 409)
What does it mean to have a theory of literature? Can something as vital, as varied, and as vague as art or fiction ever be reduced to anything like a science? We
will investigate these questions with a survey of art and literary theory that takes up a cross section of texts from classical times to the present. We will focus
particular attention on the aesthetic quality called "the sublime"--a category that has often been constituted in opposition to "beauty" to express the power and the
attraction of art that is not beautiful, but whose frightening, confusing, even threatening aspect is somehow thrilling or appealing. This idea interested early critics
from the classical rhetorician pseudo-Longinus to the German Idealists, as a way to make aesthetics more scientific paradoxically by identifying the doorway
through which art and literature escaped the realm of reason. More recently the notion of literature's thrilling confusion has played a key role in modern art and
literary theory from Russian formalism to New Criticism, deconstruction, and postmodernism. (In fact, poststructuralist criticism itself has a thrillingly confusing
quality that we will not ignore.) The class will focus on careful reading of relatively short texts by Plato, pseudo-Longinus, Burke, Schiller, Shklovsky, Eichen-
baum, I.A. Richards, Barthes, Derrida, Lyotard, Fredric Jameson, and others. We will find and discuss illustrations drawn from literature, visual media, and
contemporary culture.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active class participation, short writing assignments, a polished oral presentation, and a final 15-page paper.
Prerequisites: a course in critical (art or literary) theory or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15). Preference given to seniors majoring in
Comparative Literature, Literary Studies, or a related discipline, and those with a demonstrated interest in critical theory.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR C. BOLTON
COMP 406(F) Twentieth Century Struggle Theatre (Same as Theatre 406)
(See under THEA 406 for full description.) EPPEL
COMP 493(F)-W31-494(S) Senior Thesis--Comparative Literature
COMP 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
LIT 493(F)-W31-494(S) Senior Thesis--Literary Studies
COMPUTER SCIENCE (Div. III)
Chair, Associate Professor STEPHEN N. FREUND
Professors: BAILEY, DANYLUK, LENHART, MURTAGH. Associate Professor: FREUND. Assistant Professors: ALBRECHT*, HEERINGA,
MCGUIRE.
Computers and computation are pervasive in our society. They play enormously important roles in areas as diverse as education, science, business, and the arts.
Understanding the nature of computation and exploring the great potential of computers are the goals of the discipline of computer science. A sample of the areas
of research investigated by the Williams Department of Computer Science alone illustrates the vast range of topics that are of interest to computer scientists and
114
computing professionals today. This includes: the use of computer-generated graphic images in the arts and as a tool for visualization in the sciences and other
areas; the protocols that make transmission of information over the Internet possible, the design of revolutionary new computer languages that simplify the
process of constructing complex programs for computers; the development of machine learning algorithms that can extract useful and even novel information
from data that is too complex for humans to analyze; algorithms that can solve problems that were previously too hard to solve in a reasonable amount of time, just
by giving up a little bit of optimality in the solution; the investigation of machine architectures and specific hardware aimed at making computing fast.
The department recognizes that students' interests in computer science will vary widely. The department attempts to meet these varying interests through: (1)
the major; (2) a selection of courses intended for those who are interested primarily in an introduction to computer science; (3) recommended course sequences
for the non-major who wants a more extensive introduction to computer science in general or who seeks to develop some specific expertise in computing for
application in some other discipline.
MAJOR
The goal of the major is to provide an understanding of algorithmic problem solving as well as the conceptual organization of computers and complex pro-
grams running on them. Emphasis is placed on the fundamental principles of computer science, building upon the mathematical and theoretical ideas underlying
these principles. The introductory and core courses build a broad and solid base for understanding computer science. The more advanced courses allow students
to sample a variety of specialized areas including graphics, artificial intelligence, computer architecture, networks, compiler design, and operating systems. Inde-
pendent study and honors work provide opportunities for students to study and conduct research on topics of special interest.
The major in Computer Science equips students to pursue a wide variety of career opportunities. It can be used as preparation for a career in computing, for
graduate school, or to provide important background and techniques for the student whose future career will extend outside of computer science.
MAJOR REQUIREMENTS
Required Courses in Computer Science
A minimum of 8 courses is required in Computer Science, including the following:
Introductory Courses
Computer Science 134 Introduction to Computer Science
Computer Science 136 Data Structures and Advanced Programming
Core Courses
Computer Science 237 Computer Organization
Computer Science 256 Algorithm Design and Analysis
Computer Science 334 Principles of Programming Languages
Computer Science 361 Theory of Computation
Electives
Two or more electives (bringing the total number of Computer Science courses to at least 8) chosen from 300- or 400-level courses in Computer Science. At
least one of these must be a course designated as a PROJECT COURSE. Computer Science courses with 9 as the middle digit (reading, research, and thesis
courses) will normally not be used to satisfy the elective requirements. Students may petition the department to waive this restriction with good reason.
Required Courses in Mathematics
Mathematics 251 Discrete Mathematics
and any other Mathematics or Statistics course at the 200-level or higher
Students considering pursuing a major in Computer Science are urged to take Computer Science 134 and to begin satisfying their mathematics requirements
early. Note in particular that Discrete Mathematics covers material complementing that in the introductory courses (Computer Science 134 and 136) and is a
prerequisite for many advanced courses.
Students who take Computer Science 107, 108 or 109 may use that course as one of the two electives required for the major in Computer Science. Those who
count Computer Science 109 toward the major must select an elective different from Computer Science 371 (Computer Graphics) for their project course. Simi-
larly, students who count Computer Science 108 as an elective cannot select Computer Science 373 as their project course. Computer Science 107, 108, 109, and
134 are not open to students who have taken a Computer Science course numbered 136 or higher.
To be eligible for admission to the major, a student must normally have completed Computer Science 136 as well as Discrete Mathematics by the end of the
sophomore year. A second Mathematics course at the 200-level or higher must be completed by the end of the junior year. Students are urged to have completed
two of the four core courses (Computer Science 237, 256, 334, and 361) by the end of the sophomore year and must normally have completed at least three out of
the four core courses by the end of the junior year.
Satisfactory participation is required in the Computer Science Colloquium by all senior majors. With the advance permission of the department, two appropri-
ate mathematics courses numbered 240 or above may be substituted for one Computer Science elective. Other variations in the required courses, adapting the
requirements to the special needs and interests of the individual student, may be arranged in consultation with the department.
Potential majors are strongly encouraged to look at the latest copy of the Informal Guide to Computer Science, which can be obtained on the World Wide Web
at http://www.cs.williams.edu. This document contains much more information on the major, including suggested patterns of course selection and advice on
courses relevant to different student goals.
LABORATORY FACILITIES
The Computer Science Department maintains two departmental computer laboratories for students taking Computer Science courses, as well as a lab that can
be configured for teaching specialized topics such as robotics. The workstations in these laboratories also support student and faculty research in computer sci-
ence.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN COMPUTER SCIENCE
The degree with honors in Computer Science is awarded to a student who has demonstrated outstanding intellectual achievement in a program of study which
extends beyond the requirements of the regular major. The principal considerations in recommending a student for the degree with honors will be: mastery of core
material, ability to pursue independent study of computer science, originality in methods of investigation, and creativity in research. Honors study is highly
recommended for those students with strong academic records in computer science who wish to attend graduate school, pursue high-level industrial positions in
computing, or who would simply like to experience research in computer science.
Prospective honors students are urged to consult with their departmental advisor at the time of registration in the spring of the sophomore or at the beginning of
the junior year to arrange a program of study that could lead to the degree with honors. Such a program normally consists of Computer Science 493 and 494 and a
WSP of independent research under the guidance of a Computer Science faculty member, culminating in a thesis which is judged acceptable by the department.
The program produces a significant piece of written work and often includes a major computer program. All honors candidates are required to give an oral
presentation of their research in the Computer Science Colloquium in early spring semester.
Students considering honors work should obtain permission from the department before registering in the fall of the senior year. Formal admission to candida-
cy occurs at the beginning of the spring semester of the senior year and is based on promising performance in the fall semester and winter study units of honors
work. Recommendations for the degree with honors will be made for outstanding performance in the three honors courses. Highest honors will be recommended
for students who have displayed exceptional ability, achievement, or originality.
INTRODUCTORY COURSES
The department offers a choice of four introductory courses--Computer Science 107: Strategy, Interaction, and Design in Board and Video Games, 108:
Artificial Intelligence: Image and Reality, 109: The Art and Science of Computer Graphics, and Computer Science 134: Introduction to Computer Science.
Computer Science 134 provides an introduction to computer science with a focus on developing computer programming skills. These skills are essential to
most upper-level courses in the department. As a result, Computer Science 134 together with Computer Science 136 are required as a prerequisite to most ad-
vanced courses in the department. Those students intending to take several Computer Science courses are urged to take 134 early.
Those students interested in learning more about exciting new ideas in computer science, but not necessarily interested in developing extensive programming
skills, should consider Computer Science 107: Strategy, Interaction, and Design in Board and Video Games, 108: Artificial Intelligence: Image and Reality, or
109: The Art and Science of Computer Graphics.
Students with significant programming experience should consider electing Computer Science 136 (see "Advanced Placement" below). Students are always
welcome to contact a member of the department for guidance in selecting a first course.
STUDY ABROAD
Study abroad can be a wonderful experience. Students who hope to take computer science courses while abroad should discuss their plans in advance with the
chair of the department. Students who plan to study away but do not expect to take courses toward the major should work with the department to create a plan to
ensure that they will be able to complete the major. While study abroad is generally not an impediment to completing the major, students should be aware that
certain computer science courses must be taken in a particular sequence and that not all courses are offered every semester (or every year). Students who wish to
discuss their plans are invited to meet with any of the faculty in Computer Science.
ADVANCED PLACEMENT
Students with an extensive background in computer science are urged to take the Advanced Placement Examination in Computer Science. A score of 4 or
better on the exam is normally required for advanced placement in Computer Science 136.
115
Students who wish to be placed in Computer Science 136 but who have not taken the Advanced Placement Examination should consult with the department.
Such students should have had a good course in computer science using a structured language such as Java.
PLANS OF STUDY FOR NON-MAJORS
The faculty in Computer Science believes that students can substantially enrich their academic experience by completing a coherent plan of study in one or
more disciplines outside of their majors. With this in mind, we have attempted to provide students majoring in other departments with options in our department's
curriculum ranging from two-course sequences to collections of courses equivalent to what would constitute a minor at institutions that recognize such a con-
centration. Students interested in designing such a plan of study are invited to discuss their plans in detail with a member of the faculty.To assiststudents making
such plans, we include some suggestions below.
Students seeking to develop an extensive knowledge of computer science without majoring in the department are encouraged to use the major requirements as
a guide. In particular, the four core courses required of majors are intended to provide a broad knowledge of topics underlying all of computer science. Students
seeking a concentration in Computer Science are urged to complete at least two of these courses followed by one of our upper-level electives. Such a program
would typically require the completion of a total of five Computer Science courses and one course in discrete mathematics.
There are several sequences of courses appropriate for those primarily interested in developing skills in programming for use in other areas. For general pro-
gramming, Computer Science 134 followed by 136 and 237 will provide students with a strong background in algorithm and data structure design together with
an understanding of issues of correctness and efficiency. Students of the Bioinformatics program are encouraged to take Computer Science 134 at a minimum,
and should consider Computer Science 136 and 256. The sequence of courses Computer Science 109 and 134 would provide sufficient competence in computer
graphics for many students interested in applying such knowledge either in the arts or sciences. For students requiring more expertise in the techniques of comput-
er graphics, Computer Science 136 and 371 could be added to form a four-course sequence.
There are,ofcourse,manyotheralternatives.Weencourage interestedstudentstoconsultwiththe department chair or other members ofthedepartment'sfacul-
ty.
GENERAL REMARKS
Divisional Requirements
All Computer Science courses may be used to satisfy the Division III distribution requirement.
Alternate Year Courses
Computer Science 107, 108, 109, 315, 336T, 337T, 339, 356T, 371, 373, 374T, 432, and 434T are each normally offered every other year. All other Computer
Science courses are normally offered every year.
Course Numbering
The increase from 100, through 200 and 300, to 400 indicates in most instances an increasing level of maturity in the subject that is expected of students.
Within a series, numeric order does not indicate the relative level of difficulty of courses. Rather, the middle digit of the course number (particularly in upper-level
courses) generally indicates the area of computer science covered by the course.
Course Descriptions
Brief descriptions of the courses in Computer Science can be found below. More detailed information on the offerings in the department is available in the
Informal Guide to Computer Science.
Courses Open on a Pass-Fail Basis
Students taking a Computer Science course on a pass-fail basis must meet all the requirements set for students taking the course on a graded basis.
With the permission of the department, any course offered by the department may be taken pass-fail, though courses graded with the pass-fail option may not
be used to satisfy any of the major or honors requirements. However, with the permission of the department, courses taken in the department beyond those
requirements may be taken on a pass-fail basis.
CSCI 107(S) Creating Games (Same as ArtS 107)
The game is unique as the only broadly-successful interactive art form. Games communicate the experience of embodying a role by manipulating the player's
own decisions, abstraction, and discrete planning. Those three elements are the essence of computation, which makes computer science theory integral to game
design. Video games also co-opt programming and computer graphics as new tools for the modern artist. As a result, games are collaborative interdisciplinary
constructs that use computation as a medium for creative expression.
Students analyze and extend contemporary video and board games using the methodology of science and the language of the arts. They explore how computa-
tional concepts like recursion, state, and complexity apply to interactive experiences. They then synthesize new game elements using mathematics, programming
and both digital and traditional art tools. Emphasis is on the theory of design in modern European board games. Topics covered include experiment design,
gameplay balance, minimax, color theory, pathfinding, game theory, composition, and computability.
Format: lecture and studio. Requirements: participation, studio work, quizzes.
No prerequisites; not open to students who completed a Computer Science course numbered 136 or above; this course does not count toward the Art Major.
Enrollment limit: 24 (expected: 24).
Preference given to first-year students.
Lab fee of $25 will be added to the student's term bill.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR Lab: 1-4 R MCGUIRE
CSCI 108 Artificial Intelligence: Image and Reality (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
Over 50 years ago, scientists began to envision a world where computers and humans could converse. In 1956 the field of "Artificial Intelligence" was officially
born, and the work on "AI" began in earnest. Walking and talking robots are still mostly the stuff of science fiction, but AI is close to making them reality. In this
course, we will explore the field of Artificial Intelligence. We will try to answer the question "what makes a machine intelligent?" Among the systems we will
explore in lecture will be game-playing systems, systems that learn from their environments, and systems that create plans for complex tasks. Underlying all the
topics addressed in this course will be two fundamental issues: How can information be represented in a computer so that the machine is able to make use of it?
How can the system manipulate that information so that it is able to perform a task that requires intelligence? This course will emphasize hands-on laboratory
experience. Laboratory projects will focus on the building and programming of simple robots.
Format: lecture/laboratory. Evaluation will be based on weekly laboratory assignments, four problem sets, two 2- to 3-page papers, and a final examination
having similar format to the problem sets.
This course does not assume any programming experience. This course is not open to students who have successfully completed a Computer Science course
numbered 136 or above. Enrollment limit: 18 (expected: 18). Preference given to first-year students and sophomores.
DANYLUK
CSCI 109(F) The Art and Science of Computer Graphics (Q)
This course provides an opportunity to develop an understanding of the theoretical and practical concepts underlying 2- and 3-dimensional computer graphics.
The course will emphasize hands-on studio/laboratory experience, with student work focused around completing a series of projects. Students will experiment
with modeling, color, lighting, perspective, and simple animation. As the course progresses, computer programming will be used to control the complexity of the
models and their interactions. Lectures, augmented by guided viewings of state-of-the-art computer generated and enhanced images and animations, will be used
to deepen understanding of the studio experience.
Format: lecture/laboratory. Evaluation will be based on project work.
This course is not open to students who have successfully completed a Computer Science course numbered 136 or above. No enrollment limit (expected: 35-40).
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR Lab: 1-2:30 R,F; 2:30-4 R BAILEY
COURSES INTENDED FOR BOTH NON-MAJORS AND MAJORS
CSCI 134(F,S) Introduction to Computer Science (Q)
This course introduces fundamental ideas in computer science and builds skills in the design, implementation, and testing of computer programs. Students imple-
ment algorithms in the Java programming language with a strong focus on constructing correct, understandable, and efficient programs. Students explore the
material through specific application areas. Topics covered include object-oriented programming, control structures, arrays, recursion, and event-driven program-
ming. This course is appropriate for all students who want to create software and have little or no prior computing experience. More details are available on the
department website, http://www.cs.williams.edu.
Format: lecture/laboratory. Evaluation will be based on weekly programming assignments, written problem sets, a final programming project, and midterm and
final examinations.
116
No prerequisites, except for the standard prerequisites for a (Q) course. Note that previous programming experience is not required. Students with prior experi-
ence with object-oriented programming should discuss appropriate course placement with members of the department. No enrollment limit (expected: 18 per
section).
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF, 11:00-11:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 M,T First Semester: MCGUIRE, MURTAGH
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF, 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 M,T Second Semester: MURTAGH, DANYLUK
CSCI 136(F,S) Data Structures and Advanced Programming (Q)
This course builds on the programming skills acquired in Computer Science 134. It couples work on program design, analysis, and verification with an introduc-
tion to the study of data structures. Data structures capture common ways in which to store and manipulate data, and they are important in the construction of
sophisticated computer programs. Students are introduced to some of the most important and frequently used data structures: lists, stacks, queues, trees, hash
tables, graphs, and files. Students will be expected to write several programs, ranging from very short programs to more elaborate systems. Emphasis will be
placed on the development of clear, modular programs that are easy to read, debug, verify, analyze, and modify.
Format: lecture/laboratory. Evaluation will be based on programming assignments and examinations.
Prerequisites: Computer Science 134 or equivalent. (Discrete Mathematics is recommended, but not required). Enrollment limit: 36 (expected: 20).
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 W, 7-10 p.m. M First Semester: MCGUIRE
10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 W Second Semester: ALBRECHT
CSCI 237(F) Computer Organization (Q)
This course studies the basic instruction set architecture and organization of a modern computer. Over the semester the student learns the fundamentals of translat-
ing higher level languages into assembly language, and the interpretation of machine languages by hardware. At the same time, a model of computer hardware
organization is developed from the gate level upward. Final projects focus on the design of a complex control system in hardware or firmware.
Format: lecture/laboratory. Evaluation will be based primarily on weekly labs, final design project, two exams.
Prerequisites: Computer Science 134, or both experience in programming and permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 25).
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-2:30 T, 2:30-4 T BAILEY
CSCI 256(S) Algorithm Design and Analysis (Q)
This course investigates methods for designing efficient and reliable algorithms. By carefully analyzing the structure of a problem within a mathematical frame-
work, it is often possible to dramatically decrease the computational resources needed to find a solution. In addition, analysis provides a method for verifying the
correctness of an algorithm and accurately estimating its running time and space requirements. We will study several algorithm design strategies that build on data
structures and programming techniques introduced in Computer Science 136. These include induction, divide-and-conquer, dynamic programming, and greedy
algorithms. Particular topics of study include graph theory, hashing, and advanced data structures.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based on problem sets and programming assignments, and midterm and final examinations.
Prerequisites: Computer Science 136 and Discrete Mathematics. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 25).
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF HEERINGA
CSCI 315 Computational Biology (Same as INTR 315 and Physics 315) (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
(See under PHYS 315 for full description.) AALBERTS
CSCI 318T Numerical Problem Solving (Same as Mathematics 318T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
(See under MATH 318 for full description.) STOICIU
CSCI 319(F) Integrative Bioinformatics, Genomics, and Proteomics Lab (Same as Biology 319, Chemistry 319, Mathematics 319 and Physics
319) (Q)
(See under BIOL 319 for full description.) BANTA
CSCI 334(S) Principles of Programming Languages (Q)
This course examines the concepts and structures governing the design and implementation of programming languages. It presents an introduction to the concepts
behind compilers and run-time representations of programming languages; features of programming languages supporting abstraction and polymorphism; and
the procedural, functional, object-oriented, and concurrent programming paradigms. Programs will be required in languages illustrating each of these paradigms.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based on weekly problem sets including programming, one or more midterm examinations and a final examination.
Prerequisites: Computer Science 136. Enrollment limit: 50 (expected: 25).
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR FREUND
CSCI 336T Computer Networks (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
This course explores the principles underlying the design of computer networks. We will examine techniques for transmitting information efficiently and reli-
ably over a variety of communication media. We will look at the addressing and routing problems that must be solved to ensure that transmitted data gets to the
desired destination. We will come to understand the impact that the distributed nature of all network problems has on their difficulty. We will examine the ways
in which these issues are addressed by current networking protocols such as TCP/IP and Ethernet. Students will meet weekly with the instructor in pairs to
present solutions to problem sets and reports evaluating the technical merit of current solutions to various networking problems.
Format: tutorial. Evaluation will be based on problem sets, programming assignments, and midterm and final examinations.
Prerequisites: Computer Science 136 and Computer Science 237. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to seniors, followed by juniors.
MURTAGH
CSCI 337T(S) Digital Design and Modern Architecture (Q)
This tutorial course considers topics in the low-level design of modern architectures. Course meetings will review problems of designing effective architectures
including instruction-level parallelism, branch-prediction, caching strategies, and advanced ALU design. Readings will be taken from recent technical literature.
Labs will focus on the development of custom CMOS circuits to implement projects from gates to bit-sliced ALU's. Final group projects will develop custom
logic demonstrating concepts learned in course meetings.
Format: tutorial. Evaluation will be based on microprocessor design projects, participation in tutorial meetings, and examinations.
Prerequisite: Computer Science 237. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to current or expected Computer Science majors.
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. BAILEY
CSCI 339(S) Distributed Systems (Q)
This course studies the key design principles of distributed systems, which are collections of independent networked computers that function as single coherent
systems. Covered topics include communication protocols, processes and threads, naming, synchronization, consistency and replication, fault tolerance, and
security. Students also examine some specific real-world distributed systems case studies, ranging from the Internet to file systems. Class discussion is based on
readings from the textbook and research papers. The goals of this course are to understand how large-scale computational systems are built, and to provide
students with the tools necessary to evaluate new technologies after the course ends.
Format: lecture/laboratory. Evaluation will be based on homework assignments, programming projects, and exams.
Prerequisites: Computer Science 136 (Data Structures) or equivalent programming experience, and Computer Science 237 (Computer Organization), or permis-
sion of the instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 15).
PROJECT COURSE
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR ALBRECHT
CSCI 356T(F) Advanced Algorithms (Q)
This course explores advances in algorithm design, algorithm analysis and data structures. The primary focus is on randomized and approximation algorithms,
randomized and advanced data structures, and algorithmic complexity. Topics include combinatorial algorithms for cut, packing, and covering problems, linear
programming algorithms, approximation schemes, hardness of approximation, random search trees, and hashing.
Format: tutorial. Evaluation is based on weekly problem sets, several small programming projects, weekly paper summaries, and a small, final project.
Prerequisites: Computer Science 256. Computer Science 361 is recommended but not required. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10) Preference given to Comput-
er Science majors.
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. HEERINGA
117
CSCI 361(F) Theory of Computation (Same as Mathematics 361) (Q)
This course introduces a formal framework for investigating both the computability and complexity of problems. We study several models of computation in-
cluding finite automata, regular languages, context-free grammars, and Turing machines. These models provide a mathematical basis for the study of computabil-
ity theory--the examination of what problems can be solved and what problems cannot be solved--and the study of complexity theory--the examination of how
efficiently problems can be solved. Topics include the halting problem and the P versus NP problem.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based on problem sets, a midterm examination, and a final examination.
Prerequisites: Computer Science 256 or both a 300-level Mathematics course and permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 20).
Hour: 12:00-12:50 MWF MURTAGH
CSCI 371 Computer Graphics (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
PhotoShop, medical MRIs, video games, and movie special effects all programatically create and manipulate digital images. This course teaches the fundamen-
tal techniques behind these applications. We begin by building a mathematical model of the interaction of light with surfaces, lenses, and an imager. We then
study the data structures and processor architectures that allow us to efficiently evaluate that physical model.
Students will complete a series of programming assignments for both photorealistic image creation and real-time 3D rendering using C++, OpenGL, and
GLSL. These assignments cumulate in a multi-week final project. Topics covered in the course include: projective geometry, ray tracing, bidirectional surface
scattering functions, binary space partition trees, matting and compositing, shadow maps, cache management, and parallel processing on GPUs.
Format: lecture, with optics laboratory exercises. Evaluation based on assignments, projects, and exams.
Prerequisites: Computer Science 136 and Computer Science 237 OR permission of the instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 18).
PROJECT COURSE
MCGUIRE
CSCI 373(F) Artificial Intelligence (Q)
This course introduces fundamental techniques in the field of Artificial Intelligence, which is concerned with the ability to create machines that perform tasks
requiring "intelligence." The course covers methods for knowledge representation, search, planning, and reasoning. It then explores those further by surveying
current applications in areas selected from machine learning, game playing, robotics, and natural language processing.
Format: lecture/laboratory. Four programming projects in the first half of the semester and a larger project spanning most of the second half account for 70% of the
student's final grade. A midterm examination and a six-page survey paper account for the remainder of the student's grade.
Prerequisites: Computer Science 136 and Discrete Mathematics. No enrollment limit (expected: 20).
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF DANYLUK
CSCI 374T Machine Learning (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
This tutorial examines the design, implementation, and analysis of machine learning algorithms. Machine Learning is a branch of Artificial Intelligence that has
as its aim the development of algorithms that will improve a system's performance. Improvement might involve acquiring new factual knowledge from data,
learning to perform a new task, or learning to perform an old task more efficiently or effectively. This tutorial will cover instances selected from three general
categories of algorithms: supervised learning algorithms (including decision tree learning, support vector machines, and neural networks), unsupervised learn-
ing algorithms (including k-means and expectation maximization), and reinforcement learning algorithms (such as Q learning and temporal difference learn-
ing). It will also introduce methods for the evaluation of learning algorithms, as well as topics in computational learning theory.
Format: tutorial. Evaluation will be based on presentations, problem sets, short programming exercises, empirical analyses of algorithms, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Computer Science 136 and Mathematics 251. Computer Science 256 is recommended but not required. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10).
Preference given to Computer Science majors.
DANYLUK
CSCI 397(F), 398(S), 497(F), 498(S) Reading
Directed independent reading in Computer Science.
Prerequisites: permission of the department.
Hour: TBA Members of the Department
CSCI 432 Operating Systems (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
This course explores the design and implementation of computer operating systems. Topics include historical aspects of operating systems development, sys-
tems programming, process scheduling, synchronization of concurrent processes, virtual machines, memory management and virtual memory, I/O and file
systems, system security, os/architecture interaction, and distributed operating systems.
Format: lecture/laboratory. Evaluation will be based on several programming projects, exams, and written assessments of selected research papers.
Prerequisites: Computer Science 237 and either Computer Science 256 or Computer Science 334. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 20).
PROJECT COURSE
BAILEY
CSCI 434T(F) Compiler Design (Q)
This tutorial covers the principles and practices for the design and implementation of compilers and interpreters. Topics include all stages of the compilation and
execution process: lexical analysis; parsing; symbol tables; type systems; scope; semantic analysis; intermediate representations; run-time environments and
interpreters; code generation; program analysis and optimization; and garbage collection. The course covers both the theoretical and practical implications of
these topics. As a project course, students will construct a full compiler for a simple object-oriented language.
Format: tutorial. Evaluation will be based on presentations, problem sets, a substantial implementation project, and two exams.
Prerequisites: Computer Science 237 and Computer Science 361 (concurrent enrollment is acceptable). Computer Science 334 is recommended, but not required.
Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to current or expected Computer Science majors.
PROJECT COURSE
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. FREUND
CSCI 493(F) Research in Computer Science
This course provides highly-motivated students an opportunity to work independently with faculty on research topics chosen by individual faculty. Students are
generally expected to perform a literature review, identify areas of potential contribution, and explore extensions to existing results. The course culminates in a
concise, well-written report describing a problem, its background history, any independent results achieved, and directions for future research.
This course (along with Computer Science W31 and Computer Science 494) is required for students pursuing honors, but enrollment is not limited to students
pursuing honors.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, presentations, and the final written report.
Enrollment is limited. Open to senior Computer Science majors with permission of instructor.
Hour: TBA Members of the Department
CSCI W31-494(S) Senior Thesis
Prerequisites: Computer Science 493.
CSCI 499(F,S) Computer Science Colloquium
Required of senior Computer Science majors, and highly recommended for junior Computer Science majors. Meets most weeks for one hour, both fall and
spring.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 F Chair
CONTRACT MAJOR
Contract Major Advisor: CHARLES R. TOOMAJIAN, Jr.
Students with the talent and energy for working independently and with the strong support of two faculty advisors may undertake a Contract Major: a coherent
study of an interdisciplinary subject not covered by a regularly offered major. Such a major must be in an area suitable to the talents of the faculty in residence and
cannot consist of minor modifications to an existing major. A Contract Major also must conform to the structure and have the coherence of a departmental or
118
program major--i.e., it must embody a disciplined cumulative study that moves from an elementary to an advanced level and culminates in a synthesis similar to
a senior major course. Hence, a Contract Major usually consists of a program of existing courses, sometimes supplemented by courses of independent study and
the senior course.
The process of constructing a proposal for a Contract Major is both interesting and demanding. As part of that process, students should consider carefully the
advantage of working within existing majors or programs, taking note of the considerable intellectual pleasures involved in sharing similar educational experi-
ences with other students working within the same field. Students might also consider whether their interests could be met by completing a regular major and
coordinate program, or two majors, or simply by working outside a major field in courses of special interest. Because the Contract Major represents an exception-
al opportunity provided for students whose interests cannot be met through existing departmental and interdepartmental majors and programs, it cannot be pur-
sued in conjunction with another major.
Students who wish to explore or propose a Contract Major should consult with the Contract Major Advisor and with potential faculty sponsors as early as
possible in the fall semester of the sophomore year, and then--during the sophomore year--follow these procedures:
1) The student must initiate discussion with at least two members of the faculty from differing departments who expect to be in residence during the student's
senior year and who are willing to endorse the Contract Major and undertake a central role in supervising its implementation, criticism, evaluation, and ultimate
validation. Since in essence faculty sponsors substitute for the student's major department, they are expected to play an important role in the Contract Major.
The student must develop, in conjunction with the faculty sponsors, a written proposal (forms and guidelines are available in the Registrar's Office) which
should contain:
a) a description of the proposed major area of study and an explanation of the reasons for proposing the Contract Major. A sound and persuasive
rationale for the major is crucial for obtaining approval from the Committee on Educational Policy (C.E.P.).
b) a list of all courses in the proposed major and an explanation for each course choice. A minimum of nine semester courses, one of which must be
designated the senior major course (and taken during the senior year), must be completed for a Contract Major. Normal rules governing course
grades and grade point average apply for entry into and continuation in a Contract Major.
c) a list of other courses taken or anticipated to meet College distribution requirements, including grades received in courses already completed.
2) By mid-January, the student must meet with the Contract Major Advisor to discuss and further develop the proposal.
3) By the first day of spring semester classes, the student must submit a complete draft of the proposal to the Contract Major Advisor for feedback.
4) By the end of the fourth week of the spring semester, the student must submit the final proposal to the Contract Major Advisor. By this date also, the faculty
sponsors must submit their endorsement forms to the Contract Major Advisor. If the student is essentially proposing to transform an existing coordinate program
(e.g., Africana Studies, area studies programs, Environmental Studies), into a Contract Major, the chair of that program should also submit to the Contract Major
Advisor a statement attesting to the validity of the proposal by the end of the fourth week of the spring semester.
5) The Contract Major Advisor then conveys the proposal, a copy of the student's most recent academic progress report, the faculty sponsors' endorsement
forms, and recommendations regarding the feasibility and substance of the proposal, for approval by the Committee on Educational Policy. The C.E.P., after
consultation with departments and programs substantially affected by a proposal, will vote on each proposal individually and will notify students and sponsors
before the spring registration deadline. If the time needed for C.E.P. review demands it, the Contract Major Advisor may permit them to register late without
penalty. In making its decisions, the C.E.P. considers the student's academic record, the coherence and feasibility of the plan of study, and the degree of support
expressed by the faculty sponsors and, if appropriate, program chairs.
Subsequent changes in a Contract Major must be requested in writing by the student and approved by the faculty sponsors as well as by the Contract Major
Advisor. Where there has been substantial alteration of the original program, the Contract Major Advisor will forward the student's written request to the C.E.P.
for reconsideration.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN THE CONTRACT MAJOR
The route to the degree with honors in the Contract Major will normally be a senior thesis requiring two semesters and a winter study of work. In special
circumstances, a student may propose to substitute a one-semester course or a winter study course for one of his or her thesis courses and write a mini-thesis. The
Contract Major with honors shall comprise a minimum of eleven semester courses or ten semester courses plus one winter study. One semester of independent
study undertaken for the thesis may be allowed to fulfill the requirement for a senior major course.
The faculty sponsors shall determine by the end of winter study whether the student is to be admitted to honors candidacy. If not admitted to honors candidacy,
the student may elect not to continue further independent study. If admitted to honors candidacy, the student shall submit a written thesis or minithesis to three
faculty readers, at least one of whom shall be a faculty sponsor and at least one of whom shall not be a faculty sponsor. The outside reader or readers shall be
selected by the Contract Major Advisor in consultation with the faculty sponsors. There will be a one-hour oral exam by the readers, and they shall make a final
decision regarding honors.
CMAJ 493(F)-W31, W31-494(S) Senior Thesis
CMAJ 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
CRITICAL LANGUAGES (Div. I)
Coordinator, JANE CANOVA
The Critical Languages Program enables students to study important foreign languages relevant to their academic interests but not taught in regular courses at
Williams. The program can field a limited number of courses per year*, and it has offered oneyear of elementary Hebrew, Hindi, Korean and Swahili thus far.
Students work independently with standard language textbooks and audio materials for roughly ten hours per week and attend biweekly group review sessions
with tutors who are native speakers. Language faculty from other institutions provide the course syllabus, conduct the exams, and determine the final grades. An
organizational meeting for enrolled students is held the first week of each semester.
Interested students must present an application and have it approved before registering for a course. Applications are available during the first two weeks of
April and can be obtained from the Coordinator at the Center for Foreign Languages, Literatures, and Cultures, Hollander 230.
To be eligible for this 200-level Critical Languages course, the student must:
z
have attained sophomore standing or higher;
z
demonstrate proven capability for independent work and previous success in foreign language study;
z
explain how the study of the language integrates with his/her major or other academic interests;
z
present a letter of support from a Williams faculty member;
z
have at least a 3.0 GPA
z
in some cases, take a placement test.
Note that like other elementary language courses, the Critical Languages courses are hyphenated, meaning no credit is given for the first semester until the
second semester is successfully completed. Students must normally begin a course in the fall semester. It cannot be taken Pass/Fail. An organizational meeting
will be held the first week of each semester.
A consecutive year of intermediate language study will be considered only upon petition of those students completing a full year of elementary study with the
Critical Languages Program and as long as a minimum of two students are enrolled to continue their language study.
*A Critical Languages course will be scheduled only if and when at least two students are accepted for study and provided a native tutor and
outside examiner have been contracted.
CRHE 201(F)-202(S) Hebrew (This course is part of the Jewish Studies concentration.)
CRHI 201(F)-202(S) Hindi
CRKO 201(F)-202(S) Korean
CRSW 201(F)-202(S) Swahili
All courses adhere to the guidelines of the National Association of Self-Instructional Language Programs (NASILP).
119
DANCE (Div I)
Chair, Senior Lecturer SANDRA L. BURTON
Faculty: Senior Lecturer: BURTON. Lecturer: H. SILVA. Visiting Lecturer: DANKMEYER. Ballet Mistress: PARKER. Musical Director/Accompa-
nist: SHAKUR, Musical Director/Accompanist: SAUER.
The purpose of the Dance Department is to educate students in the physical disciplines, cultural traditions and expressive possibilities of dance. We provide the
opportunity to study and experience dance as technique, composition, history, theory and performance. We do not offer a major or a concentration, yet our courses
can offer complementary study in the disciplines of Theater, Visual Art, Africana Studies, Performance Studies and Music. Technique courses currently offered
include ballet, modern, African and Irish traditions and Pilates.
At the beginning of the fall semester, prior to the beginning of classes, the department will offer a placement workshop to evaluate student accomplishment and
determine which course level is appropriate. Notification of placement will be sent to the student within 24 hours. If a student wishes to preregister before the
placement workshop, he/she is advised to contact the instructor of the course for advice.
All students are welcome to audition for membership in the Department's performing companies (CoDa, Kusika, Sankofa, and INISH). Membership is also
possible through invitation by the company directors. Kusika and INISH also accept members as dancers, musicians, singers and storytellers. Members study
with faculty, guest artists and peers. Student choreographers are also supported.
Students may receive PE credit for dance in the following ways: enrolling in a class that is for PE credit only, choosing the PE option in courses offered for
academic credit or PE, successful participation in CoDa, Kusika, Sankofa, or INISH.
The Department belongs to and attends the American College Dance Festival Association New England Regional where students are able to perform, attend
master classes and audition for scholarships for summer study. Our students also participate in area cultural events and provide workshops, lecture demonstrations
and performances for local schools.
DANC 100(F) Foundations for Dance
This course is a primer of basic dance technique and an introduction to the history of dance in several cultures and serves as the foundation for all other courses
taught in the Dance Department. Students will study the fundamentals of ballet, modern, Irish and African dance and the relation between music and movement.
Pilates will be introduced as a technique to develop the strength and stamina necessary for all dance activities. The class will also address the fundamental relation
between music and dance. Regular studio work will be supplemented with readings, recordings of dance, discussion and visiting artist presentations.
Format: studio/ lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on physical understanding of the techniques, participation in discussions and the quality of movement
and research assignments.
No prerequisites. Experienced dancers who wish to enroll in upper level courses may waive the DANC 100 prerequisite by taking the advanced placement class
or by permission of the faculty. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 30). Preference given to beginning dancers and students with no prior experience.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 TF Dance Department Faculty
DANC 201(F) African Dance and Percussion (Same as Africana Studies 201)
Students will learn Lamban, a traditional form of dance and music from Guinea, Senegal, Mali and The Gambia in West Africa. To more fully understand the art
form, students will also study the culture and history of the African regions in which Lamban evolved. This course can be taken for academic and /or PE credit.
Prerequisites. DANC 100 or advanced placement or permission of the instructor.
Instructors: Burton and Shakur
Format: studio/ lecture/discussion. Requirements: Students enrolled for academic credit must attend weekly lectures, submit a journal response and write a final 5
page research paper that is related to his/her final performance. Students enrolled for PE credit have no final paper requirement and do not have to attend the
weekly lectures. All students are evaluated on the quality of their participation and must participate in a midterm and final demonstration of dance and music as
performance and research.
Prerequisites: DANC 100 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). Preference given to students who have taken DANC 100 or advanced
placement.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR and 12:00-12:50 W BURTON and Kusika Musical Director
DANC 204(S) Perceptual Intelligence (Same as ArtS 204)
This course proposes that developing one's sensory and perceptual faculties has the potential to ignite, inform and/or complicate one's aesthetic interests and
creative practice. As such, the class will offer a toolbox of techniques collected from dance, yoga, meditation, therapy and art that are designed to cultivate
mindfulness, bodily presence, and perceptual awareness. Along with these experiential exercises, the class will study art works/performances and read texts on
awareness and perception by scientists and social scientists as well as artists. Topics of engagement include the following: Contact Improvisation, Authentic
Movement, repetitive tasks, acts of physical and mental endurance, blind walks, Situationist drives, free writing, Anne Bogart's Viewpoints, heightening and
interacting with one's sense of hearing, observing quotidian actions, and composing still and moving bodies in a variety of environments. We will work in dance
studios, rooms, hallways and other inbetween spaces, and natural and constructed outdoor settings. Students will have the opportunity to develop individual and
collaborative works, and in the second half of the semester will participate in the development of and rehearsal for an original, movement-based performance
work.
Format: studio/lecture/discussion. Requirements: weekly reading, short papers, creation of participatory events, and final projects.
No prerequisites; no performance or dance experience is necessary. Enrollment limit: 18 (expected: 18). Preference given to first-year students, sophomores,
juniors and then seniors.
This course may be taken as a 200level elective in studio art.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 MR VAN DER KOLK
DANC 207(S) Anatomy for Movers
This course is an introduction to the musculoskeletal system through exploration of the body in motion. Anatomical identification, terminology and physiological
principals will be highlighted through the use of conditioning exercises, strengthening and diverse movement vocabulary. Various dance styles and Pilates mat-
work concepts are discussed and experientially explored. Course work will include reading, physical reviews, tests, final exam and final project.
Format: studio/seminar. Evaluation will be based on quality of participation, quizzes, written and physical reviews and a final exam.
No prerequisites. This course is appropriate for dancers, athletes and others interested in understanding the body as a moving structure. Enrollment limit: 16
(expected: 16).
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF SILVA
DANC 301(S) Creative Process in Dance
This course examines the methods used to make dances. It is intended for the experienced mover who is ready to focus on theory, methods and the history of
composing dance in various traditions. Students will be asked to identify their own methods and engage in research and regular presentations of their composi-
tions for critical feedback. The class will also study innovative professional choreographers such as Pina Bausch, Ping Chong, George Balanchine, Eiko and
Koma, Rennie Harris, Alvin Ailey, Martha Graham, Ronald K. Brown, Lucinda Childs and Merce Cunningham. To more fully understand the context in which
these works were created, the class will read essays by dance scholars such as Louis Horst, Liz Lerman, Deborah Jowitt, Sally Banes, and Susan Leigh Foster.
Format: studio/seminar. Evaluation will be based on the quality of participation, assigned projects and presentations.
Prerequisites: a minimum of 12 years experience as a dancer or choreographer prior to college or 12 years experience in a Williams College dance company, or
permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 12). Preferences given to students who have experience in the process of making dances or using
movement as part of making theater and other kinds of performance.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 TF BURTON
DANC 302(F) "New" Choreography (Same as ArtS 205)
Historically, conceptual and visual artists have often exchanged technique and aesthetics with artists in dance and theater. Today there is a renewed interest in the
body and performance in gallery and museum contexts while at the same time the contemporary dance world is revisiting interdisciplinary sensibilities and
techniques, newly challenging how "dance" can be defined. In this course we will revisit and redefine choreography, calling on compositional techniques from
dance as well as strategies not traditionally applied to choreography. Students with an existing practice in any or multiple artistic disciplines are invited to examine
and adopt unfamiliar approaches to bodybased art making. Weekly compositional assignments and experiential exercises will be complemented with readings
and video documentation of professional performances. Topics for discussion will include the following: interdisciplinary ways of inventing and organizing
movement, how a maker transmits choreography to a performer, and how and for what purpose an artist frames his/her work in a context. We will look at a
number of works categorized within the field of dance, while also considering examples from live/performance art, conceptual practice, music/sound, installation
and sculpture.
120
Format: studio/ lecture/discussion. Requirements: completion of weekly compositional assignments, full participation in all inclass exercises and discussions,
completion of weekly readings and viewings related to that week's topic, 23 page reflection essays about at least four compositional studies as they relate to the
projects we view and read about, and a final presentation of works.
Prerequisites: at least one 200 or 300 level course in Dance, Studio Art, Music, Theater or Creative Writing. Or, 2 years of participation in a Williams College
dance company. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 12). Preferences given to seniors, juniors with experience in creative arts.
This course may be taken as a 200level elective in studio art.
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M and 1:10-3:50 T VAN DER KOLK
DANC 317(S) Black Migrations: African American Performance at Home and Abroad (Same as Africana Studies 317, Comparative
Literature 319, English 317 and Theatre 317)
(See under AFR 317 for full description.) BRAGGS
DANC 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
Dance Department Faculty
COURSES WHICH MAY BE TAKEN FOR PHYSICAL EDUCATION CREDIT ONLY
Intermediate Ballet (Fall)
This course focuses on traditional ballet technique. Students will learn to warmup at the barre and proceed to center work such as adage, pirouettes, jumps and
traveling steps.
Format: studio. Requirements: 23 years of training in ballet or permission of the instructor.
Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 12). Students may seek permission of the instructor or take the placement class.
This course may only be taken for PE credit.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR JANINE PARKER
Beginning Ballet (Spring)
This course will build on the fundamentals of classical technique using the barre and center floor work. Students will learn to work safely and correctly with their
individual abilities. Emphasis is placed on the following: proper alignment of the body, understanding music in relationship to dance and the development of
expression through movement.
Format: studio. Evaluation will be based on quality of participation, understanding and use of technique as well as progress with movement concepts Prerequi-
sites: DANC 100 or permission of the instructor.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 12). Preferences given to students who have completed DANC 100.
This course may only be taken for PE credit.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TR JANINE PARKER
Intermediate /Advanced Ballet (Spring)
This class will continue to build upon the technique of the classical ballet technique and will focus on continued barre and center floor work. Students will
continue to learn to work correctly based on individual abilities. The vocabulary will also include jumps, adage and traveling steps and etudes from the classical
ballet canon.
Format; studio. Requirements: Evaluation will be based on quality of participation, progress in understanding and use of technique and etudes.
Prerequisites: a minimum of 23 years of training in ballet, placement class or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 12).
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR JANINE PARKER
ECONOMICS (Div. II)
Chair, Professor PETER MONTIEL
Professors: BAKIJA***, BRADBURD**, CAPRIO, GENTRY, D. GOLLIN***, KUTTNER, MONTIEL, P. PEDRONI**, S. SHEPPARD,
SHORE-SHEPPARD*, SWAMY, ZIMMERMAN**. Associate Professors: LOVE***, RAI*, SCHMIDT*, WATSON. Assistant Professors:
ASHRAF, GAZZALE, JACOBSON, LALUMIA**, OLNEY, NAFZIGER, ROLLEIGH, SAVASER, WILSON*. Senior Lecturer: SAMSONЁ.
Visiting Professor: TRUMAN. Visiting Associate Professor: HONDERICH.
The primary objectives of the economics major are to develop an understanding of how the economy works and how individuals, organizations and societies
meet their economic needs. The major will equip students to understand and analyze economic issues and related social policies. The introductory courses stress
use of the basic elements of economic analysis for understanding and resolving such issues. The two required intermediate theory courses then provide a more
thorough grounding in economics as a discipline by examining the strengths and weaknesses of the market in allocating economic resources and by examining
the aggregate processes that determine employment, inflation, and growth. A course in statistical methods equips the major to understand and apply the tools of
quantitative empirical analysis in measuring and testing economic theory. In elective courses students apply theoretical tools and empirical techniques to develop
a richer understanding of economic behavior and public policy.
Graduate training in economics requires more mathematical sophistication than does undergraduate economics. We encourage students who are considering
pursuing a Ph.D. in Economics to take Mathematics 105 (or 106), Mathematics 209, Mathematics 211 and Mathematics 301. We also advise students to consider
electives such as Economics 454 and 475 that present an advanced perspective on contemporary economic theory. As graduate schools also look for evidence of
research experience and promise, we strongly encourage interested students to write a senior honors thesis in Economics.
Should I Major in Economics to Prepare for a Career in Business?
Economics is a social science that deals with how individuals and organizations make choices, and with the allocation of scarce resources among competing
ends. An economics major is excellent preparation for a wide variety of careers: public policy, law, teaching, economics research in government or in the private
sector, as well as more general careers in business. Training in economics is similar to training in other sciences. You will learn about economic systems and the
relationships between economic agents and the constraints that determine these relationships. You will learn about economic data and how to test economic
theories and measure economic outcomes. Training in economics is not the same as training in business management. Success in business is achieved by students
from a wide variety of majors, not only economics. We advise students to acquire a broad exposure to the arts, social sciences and natural sciences, and to major in
the subject that most engages their interest, rather than attempt to acquire extensive pre-professional training while undergraduates.
MAJOR
Students who have not yet taken an economics course should begin their sequence with Economics 110 and should follow the following se-
quence:
Economics 110 Principles of Microeconomics
(Note that students may not take any economics courses, including Economics 110 and 120, without having passed the quantitative studies exam or the
equivalent.)
Economics 120 Principles of Macroeconomics (Economics 110 or the equivalent is a prerequisite for 120)
Economics 251 Price and Allocation Theory
Economics 252 Macroeconomics
Economics 255 Empirical Methods
Please note that Statistics 101 or 201 is a prerequisite from Economics 255. Students who are considering majoring in economics are thus
strongly encouraged to take Statistics 101 or 201 early in their college careers. Students may take the combination of Statistics 201 and 346
instead of Economics 255. Economics 253 cannot be substituted for Economics 255, or count as an elective towards the economics major. A
score of 5 on the Statistics AP satisfies the prerequisite for Economics 255.
Note that Economics 251, 252, and the Empirical Methods course can be taken in any order. In most cases all three of these courses are pre-
requisites for Economics Senior Seminars, at least one of which is required for the major. Senior seminars are typically taken during senior
year or during the spring of junior year. Students are thus strongly encouraged to complete these three core courses by the end of junior year
at the latest.
Prospective majors please note that instructors in all sections of Economics 251, 252, and 255 and courses numbered 350 and above feel free to use elementary
calculus in assigned readings, lectures, problem sets, and examinations; therefore, Economics 110 and 120 and Mathematics 103 or its equivalent are required as
121
prerequisites for these courses, with the exception of 251 which has only Economics 110 and Mathematics 103 as prerequisites. By elementary calculus is meant
differentiation of single variable polynomial functions and conditions for a maximum or minimum; it does not include integration. Students are also reminded that
some courses now have specific mathematics requirements; see course descriptions.
Elective Requirements:
Students must complete four Economics electives, of which at least two must be selected from advanced electives numbered 350 to 394 (or from the
CDE courses offered), and one of which must be selected from electives numbered 450-475. (Note: students may substitute an extra 450+ elective for a
350-394 elective. However, in admitting students to these courses, the department will give preference to students who have not yet taken a course
numbered 450-475.)
Credit for Coursework Done Elsewhere
The normal requirement that nine economics courses be taken at Williams will usually be waived only on the basis of transferred credit deemed acceptable by
the department. Credit is granted based on grades consistent with college policy on various examinations:
z
Students who receive a 5 on the Microeconomics AP or Macroeconomics AP exam, or a 5 on each, may place out of Economics 110 or 120, or both,
respectively, but major credit will be given for only one course.
z
The Department will grant major credit for both Economics 110 and 120 to a student who receives a 6 or 7 on the higher-level Economics IB examina-
tion, and that student can place into any 200-level course or intermediate-level micro or macro course.
z
For A levels credit, the Department will grant major credit for both Economics 110 and 120 to a student who receives a grade of A or higher, or the
numeric equivalent.
STUDY ABROAD
Students who are considering study abroad should consult with the Department's Coordinator for Transfers/Study Abroad Credits early in the process of
planning a year or semester abroad. (See the Department website to determine which professor is the Coordinator for this academic year.) Economics majors or
prospective majors who are considering spending all or part of their junior year abroad are strongly advised to choose sophomore courses such that they can
complete their intermediate theory requirements (Economics 251, 252, and 255) prior to the start of their senior year. We recommend as well that students com-
plete at least part of the major's advanced elective requirement prior to the beginning of the senior year. Students who hope to pursue Honors in economics but
who plan to be away for all or part of the junior year are strongly advised to meet with the Department's Director of Research prior to going abroad to discuss
options for pursuing honors. (See the Department website to determine the Director of Research for this academic year.)
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN ECONOMICS
We encourage all majors who have at least a 3.5 GPA in economics courses to consider honors. To be admitted to candidacy for honors in economics a student
must complete a substantial piece of independent research. Two routes to honors are open: the Specialization Route and the Thesis Route.
1) Specialization Route, consisting of these three units:
a. Development of a thesis proposal;
b. An honors winter study project (W30) in January of the senior year;
c. Economics 491 or 492 Honors Seminar. Students may pursue the Specialization Route to honors in their senior year, either in the fall semester plus WSP
or WSP plus the spring semester. After selecting an advisor and discussing the topic with the advisor, the student should submit a thesis proposal to the
department for approval. (A description of what should be included in proposals is listed on the department's website.) Such proposals frequently build on
research papers completed for advanced electives, but this is not a requirement. Students should submit proposals at the end of the spring semester if they
wish to pursue a fall-WSP thesis and by one week after the last day of classes in December if they wish to pursue a WSP-spring thesis. The department
provides a memorandum to majors with more details every spring and fall.
2) Thesis Route (Economics 493-W31-494):
A few students each year will be accepted for year-long thesis research on a subject closely related to the scholarly interests of a faculty member. A student
who hopes to do such independent and advanced research in close association with a faculty member should begin to work out a mutually satisfactory topic
early in the second semester of his or her junior year. Application to the department must be made before the end of the junior year by submitting a detailed
proposal for work under the supervision of the faculty member. The WSP of the senior year is also spent on the thesis.
The College Bulletin states that students who wish to receive honors must take at least one course in addition to the minimum number required for the major.
Students who pursue a year-long thesis and therefore take both Economics 493 and 494 may substitute Economics 493 for an upper-level elective (excluding
those numbered 400-490) if they wish to. Students who pursue the Specialization Route to Honors may not substitute Economics 491 or 492 for an upper-
(or lower-) level elective requirement.
Because economics honors theses frequently make use of empirical economic methods, students considering writing an honors thesis in economics are strong-
ly advised to complete Economics 255 or Statistics 346 before the end of junior year.
AFRICANA STUDIES AND AREA STUDIES
A major in economics who concentrates in Africana Studies or Area Studies may substitute the non-economics courses in the concentration for one lower-lev-
el elective in the Economics major, but not for an advanced elective (350-394).
Note on course numbers: Courses between 201 and 299 are lower-level electives and are open to students who have taken 110 or 120. Courses 350 and
above are advanced electives, have intermediate theory prerequisites, and are primarily designed for Economics and Political Economy majors. Courses
numbered 450-475 are only open to students who have completed Economics 251, Economics 252, and who have satisfied the statistical methods re-
quirement unless the course prerequisite explicitly indicates otherwise.
ECON 110(F,S) Principles of Microeconomics (Q)
This course is an introduction to the study of the forces of supply and demand that determine prices and the allocation of resources in markets for goods and
services, markets for labor, and markets for natural resources. The focus is on how and why markets work, why they may fail to work, and the policy implications
of both their successes and failures. The course focuses on developing the basic tools of microeconomic analysis and then applying those tools to topics of popular
or policy interest such as minimum wage legislation, pollution control, competition policy, international trade policy, discrimination, tax policy, and the role of
government in a market economy. This course is required of Economics and Political Economy majors and highly recommended for those non-majors interested
in Environmental Studies and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies. The department recommends that students follow this course with Principles of Macroe-
conomics or with a lower-level elective that has Economics 110 as its prerequisite. Students may alternatively proceed directly to Intermediate Microeconomics
after taking this introductory course.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: problem sets, quizzes, short essays, midterm, final exam. (Rolleigh's section in the fall will have two midterm exams.)
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 40).
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF, 11:00-12:15 MWF, 8:30-9:45 TR, 8:30-9:45 MWF, 1:10-2:25 MR, 2:35-3:50 MRFirst Semester: NAFZIGER, GOLLIN, GAZZALE, ROL-
LEIGH
8:30-9:45 TR, 9:55-11:10 TR Second Semester: GAZZALE
ECON 111 Introduction to Economics and Its Applications (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
This course is intended for students who do not wish to major in economics but who would like to learn something about the discipline and to develop a greater
understanding of the ways in which economics can be used to explain behavior and to inform policy. Our focus will be on providing some very basic tools of
economic analysis and important institutional background regarding the US and international economies, and then using those tools and institutional knowl-
edge to analyze current policy issues.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: problem sets, several short papers, at least one quiz, and midterm and final exam.
Prerequisites: open only to juniors and seniors who have not taken an economics course. (Note: Economics 111 cannot substitute for Economics 110 or Eco-
nomics 120 as a prerequisite for admission to Economics 251 or Economics 252, respectively.) Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 30).
BRADBURD
ECON 120(F,S) Principles of Macroeconomics (Q)
This course provides an introduction to the study of the aggregate national economy. Develops the basic theories of macroeconomics and applies them to topics of
current interest. Explores issues such as: the causes of inflation, unemployment, recessions, and depressions; the role of government fiscal and monetary policy in
stabilizing the economy; the determinants of long-run economic growth; the long- and short-run effects of taxes, budget deficits, and other government policies on
the national economy; and the workings of exchange rates and international finance.
122
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: problem sets, short essays, midterm(s), final exam. (Samson's section in the spring will have 2 one-hour exams and a
final.)
Prerequisites: Economics 110. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 40).
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR, 9:55-11:10 TR, 11:20-12:35 TR First Semester: OLNEY, LOVE
1:10-2:25 TF, 2:35-3:50 TF, MWF 8:30-9:45 MWF, 1:10-2:25 TF Second Semester: ASHRAF, SAMSON, LALUMIA
ECON 204 Economics of Developing Countries (Same as Environmental Studies 234) (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course is an introduction to the microeconomics of development. The central question is: why are some people and nations poor? And what can govern-
ments (or donors) do to reduce poverty? Topics include agricultural productivity, health, education, microfinance, child labor, corruption, and intellectual prop-
erty rights. We shall also discuss the extent to which market-friendly reforms (such as trade liberalization) can reduce poverty.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: short papers and exams.
Prerequisites: Economics 110. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected 35). If overenrolled, preference to sophomores.
NAFZIGER
ECON 205 Public Economics (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course examines the role of the government in a market economy. Three broad issues are considered: when is government intervention in the economy
appropriate? What is the most effective form of intervention? What effects do government policies have on individual incentives? The course will cover issues
in both taxation and spending. Specific programs will be considered such as Social Security, Medicare, education, and public assistance for the poor. We will
also discuss rationales and strategies for reforming the U.S. tax system.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: problem sets, policy memos, midterm and final exam.
Prerequisites: Economics 110. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 30).
LALUMIA
ECON 211(F) Gender in the Global Economy (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 211)
(See under WGST 211 for full description.) HONDERICH
ECON 213(S) Introduction to Environmental and Natural Resources Economics (Same as Environmental Studies 213) (Q)
Standard economic theory predicts that people and firms, left to their own devices, will often tend to pollute too much, conserve too little, overfish common
waters, and cut down too many trees. These predictions seem to be borne out by the world's environmental problems. Fortunately, economics offers tools to
address these issues, and these tools are increasingly gaining attention in the policy world. In this course, we will survey the fields of environmental and natural
resource economics. We will focus on real-world problems, mostly from a microeconomic perspective. About half of the course will cover environmental eco-
nomics, including pollution, valuation of environmental amenities and of environmental damage, and market-based pollution control policies (like "cap and
trade"). The other half of the course will cover natural resource economics, and here we'll study the harvesting of renewable resources (like trees and fish) and the
extraction of nonrenewable resources (like oil).
Format: lecture. Requirements: problem sets, short papers or essays, one midterm, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Economics 110.
Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 30). Preference to sophomores if course is overenrolled.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF JACOBSON
ECON 215 International Trade, Globalization and Its Effects (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course is an introduction to international trade and finance with an emphasis on issues of current interest. Topics to be discussed may include: the gains
from trade; why nations trade; different theories of the pattern of trade; the effects of tariffs and other trade barriers on national welfare and income distribution;
the balance of payments, the determination of foreign exchange rates, and alternative exchange rate regimes.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements will include problem sets, a midterm, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Economics 110. Students who have completed Economics 251 must have permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 35 (expected: 35).
SAVASER
ECON 219T(S) Global Economic History (W)
Why did Western Europe--and not China, India, or the Middle East--first experience the Industrial Revolution? Why did Latin America fall behind in the 20th
century? Why have the countries of East Asia recently experienced such high rates of economic growth? And why has Africa remained so poor for so long?
These and other questions will guide our exploration of world economic development over the past several millennia. We will draw on micro and macroeconomic
theory to help explain and interpret the historical roots of the modern global economy. Our focus will be broadly comparative across space and time, with an
emphasis on how institutions, resource endowments, cultural and technological revolutions, and market developments have driven economic changes.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: will meet weekly for one hour in groups of two. Evaluation will be based on five 5- to 7-page papers, critiques of fellow students'
papers, a longer revision of a paper, and engagement in discussion.
Prerequisites: Economics 110 and 120 or equivalent. Preference will be given to first-year students and sophomores intending to major in economics. Enrollment
limit: 10 (expected: 10).
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. NAFZIGER
ECON 220 American Economic History (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course examines the growth and development of the American economy from the colonial era to the modern period. The emphasis will be on the use of
economic theory and quantitative evidence to address key questions in U.S. history. Topics may include some or all of the following: the development of
colonial markets, the economic origins of the U.S. Constitution, immigration, agricultural innovation, industrialization, slavery, government regulation and
policymaking, the Great Depression, the changing roles of women in the U.S. economy, post-World War II growth, and the place of the United States in the
modern global economy. Comparisons will be made to European and non-European experiences when appropriate.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: midterm, short problem sets, final, and a research paper.
Prerequisites: Economics 110 and Economics 120. Enrollment limit: 35 (expected: 35).
NAFZIGER
ECON 222 Economics of the Arts and Culture (Not offered 2011-2012)
What economic forces influence the creation, presentation, preservation and ownership of art and culture? Should support for the arts be provided through
private patronage, private philanthropy, or public sector support? How does the mechanism of support for art affect the productivity and creativity of the artist?
Does art make a good investment for an individual? How do art markets function and what determines the price of art? Why do some art museums and
performing arts organizations require donations and public support and operate as non-profit enterprises, while other types of culture production and preserva-
tion operate as for-profit enterprise? What are the impacts on economic vitality and local economic development of cultural and arts organizations? When these
impacts arise, how can (or should) they be used for public policy? This course will use the tools of economic analysis to present a framework for discussion and
analysis of these and related questions.
Format: lecture, discussion. Requirements: midterm and final exam, two policy memoranda.
Prerequisite: Economics 110. Enrollment limit: 35 (expected: 30). Preference given to sophomores and juniors.
S. SHEPPARD
ECON 225T Global Financial Crisis and African Economic Development (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Will the global financial crunch create a development crisis for Africa? Just two years ago the International Monetary Fund published the most optimistic
growth projections for Africa in decades, predicting rapid growth driven by higher commodity prices, stronger agricultural output and the dividends of years of
difficult economic reforms. Today, economic analysts are downgrading African growth forecasts in the face of growing poverty and macroeconomic chal-
lenges. Food prices have more than doubled in some countries--increasing hunger for the most vulnerable groups. Fuel costs--and subsidy policies in some
countries--are creating macroeconomic imbalances, and the global financial crisis is depressing demand for Africa s exports. Private capital flows, which
reached record levels until 2007, are expected to decline by $300-400 billion over the next two years, with bank lending falling, portfolio investment declining,
and foreign direct investment decreasing. This triple-F crisis--food, fuel and financial--is posing renewed challenges to African leaders trying to tackle the
imperatives of economic development and pro-poor and inclusive economic growth. This crisis is raising the costs of reforms in countries reliant on exports and
international capital for growth. Successful strategies must combine policies more efficiently than ever--to balance the necessary reforms with initiatives that
123
offset the costs for the most vulnerable. This tutorial will analyze critical questions posed by the emerging crisis: Which countries will be hit the hardest, and
how deeply and for how long? Through which channels does the contagion afflict national economies? And perhaps most importantly, what coordinated
strategies can African nations develop in order to foster effective responses? This tutorial will explore how policy-makers in Africa are working to build suc-
cessful inclusive growth strategies, with fiscal, monetary, industrial, trade and labor market policies reinforcing each other rather than working at cross purposes.
Format: tutorial, will meet weekly for one hour in groups of two. Evaluation will be based on five short papers and on the quality of the student's oral presenta-
tions and commentary on the work of his/her colleagues.
Prerequisites: Economics 252 (or concurrently) or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected 10).
SAMSON
ECON 228T(S) Water as a Scarce Resource (Same as Environmental Studies 228) (W)
This course satisfies the "Environmental Policy" requirement for the Environmental Studies concentration.
For a variety of reasons including environmental pollution, urbanization, changing agricultural techniques, resource mismanagement, and the consequences of
climate change, water is becoming a scarce resource even in places where it was relatively plentiful in the past, and it is likely to become an increasingly scarce
resource over the coming decades. In this course we will use basic economic models to consider policy issues relating to water: Is access to water a basic human
right, and if so, what market and non-market mechanisms should play a role in water allocation? Does public ownership of water improve the way it is provided
and used? Why do societies differ in their approaches to allocating water and are some systems better than others? What does it mean to have a property right to
water? Could private property rights to water help address the water pollution problem? How can societies change their water-related property rights, regulations
and social institutions when individuals have implicit or explicit rights to the institutional status quo? Who has the right to water that crosses international bound-
aries? How should societies allocate water across generations?
Format: tutorial. Students will meet with the instructor in pairs for an hour each week. Requirements: write a 5- to 7-page paper every other week (five in all),
prepare and present a written critique of their partners' papers in alternate weeks, and revise and re-write one of their five papers. Evaluation will be based on the
quality of the papers and on the quality of the student's oral presentations and commentary on the work of his/her colleagues.
Prerequisites: Economics 110 or equivalent. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference will be given to first year students and sophomores intending to
major in economics and/or to concentrate in Environmental Studies.
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. BRADBURD
ECON 229(S) Law and Economics (Q)
This course applies the tools of microeconomic analysis to both private (i.e., civil) and criminal law. This analysis has both positive and normative aspects. The
positive aspects deal with how individuals respond to the incentives created by the legal system. Examples include: how intellectual property law encourages the
creation of knowledge while simultaneously restricting the dissemination of intellectual property; how tort law motivates doctors to avoid malpractice suits; and
how criminal law deters criminal activity. The normative aspects of the analysis ask whether legal rules enhance economic efficiency (or, more broadly, social
welfare). Examples include: what legal rules are most appropriate for mitigating pollution, ensuring safe driving, and guaranteeing workplace safety? The course
will also cover the economics of legal systems; for example, what are the incentives for plaintiffs to initiate lawsuits and what role do lawyers play in determining
outcomes. The course will also consider potential reforms of the legal system.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, problem sets, short papers based on actual court cases and possible legal reforms, a
midterm exam, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: Economics 110. Enrollment limit: 35 (expected: 25). Preference given to majors and sophomores if overenrolled.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR GENTRY
ECON 230 The Economics of Health and Health Care (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
In recent years, the intersection between health and economics has increased in importance. The costs of health care have been rising, seemingly inexorably. A
substantial fraction of the United States population lacks health insurance, while the rising number of elderly is putting increasing pressure on health spending.
Globally, the HIV/AIDS pandemic is causing severe economic hardship, and many people lack access to basic health care. More positively, advances in health
care have widened the scope of possible treatments. Given the importance of good health for individual well-being, it is not surprising that health care and how
to pay for it are of concern to individuals and policymakers worldwide. In this course we will analyze the economics of health by applying standard microeco-
nomic techniques to the problems of health and health care markets. The course focuses on three broad issues: the inputs to health and the demand for health
care, the structure and consequences of public and private health insurance, and the supply of health care. Special attention will be devoted to topics of current
public policy, including the problems of rising costs and cost containment, health insurance reform, the changing nature of health care provision, changing
public policies in the Medicare and Medicaid programs, hospital competition, and the determinants and consequences of technological change in medicine.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: several short papers and a final research paper and presentation.
Prerequisite: Economics 110. Enrollment limited to 19 (expected: 19).
SHORE-SHEPPARD
ECON 235 Urban Centers and Urban Systems (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
Cities, systems of cities, and the interactions between cities are the outcome of human decisions and reflect their social structure and desire for interaction. The
form of these urban areas is determined by the choices made by the people who reside in, work in, and travel between cities. Economic forces influence and
constrain these choices, and economic models of decision-making can help us to explain and predict the patterns that result. These models help us to compre-
hend the structure of urban areas. This course will introduce the ideas and some of the analytic tools that assist in understanding the economic foundations of
urban centers and urban systems. Topics addressed in the course will include the determinants of land use, location of firms, choice of transportation mode,
flows of capital investment into real estate, housing prices and housing availability and regulation of housing markets, movement of population from one city to
another, and public policies designed to deal with urban problems.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: two "policy memoranda" on assigned topics, midterm, and final exam.
Prerequisites: Economics 110. Enrollment limit: 40.
S. SHEPPARD
ECON 240T Colonialism and Underdevelopment in South Asia (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
How did colonialism shape the evolution of the economies of South Asia? There is much controversy on this issue, beginning with whether the colonial
economy really represented a radical break from the past. With this as our starting point, we will discuss major themes in this literature including the theory of
"drain" (of economic surplus from the colonies),"deindustrialization" due to competition from cheap British manufactured goods, the impact of colonial legal
institutions and land tenure arrangements, and colonial policies with respect to education, infrastructure, trade, and financial markets. The course will conclude
with an assessment of the extent to which the economies of India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh still reflect their colonial past, and the consequences thereof.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: papers.
Prerequisites: Economics 110. Enrollment limit: 10.
SWAMY
ECON 251(F,S) Price and Allocation Theory (Q)
A study of the determination of relative prices and their importance in shaping the allocation of resources and the distribution of income. Subjects include: behav-
ior of households in a variety of settings, such as buying goods and services, saving, and labor supply; behavior of firms in various kinds of markets; results of
competitive and noncompetitive markets in goods, labor, land, and capital; market failure; government policies as sources of and responses to market failure;
welfare criteria; limitations of mainstream analysis.
Format: lecture. Requirements: problem sets, a midterm, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Economics 110 and 120 and Mathematics 103 or its equivalent. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25).
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR, 11:20-12:35 TR, 1:10-2:25 MR First Semester: JACOBSON, GENTRY
1:10-2:25 TF, 2:35-3:50 TF, 2:35-3:50 MR Second Semester: S. SHEPPARD, BRADBURD
ECON 252(F,S) Macroeconomics (Q)
A study of macroeconomic theory and policy: the determinants of aggregate output, employment and prices, and the tools of monetary and fiscal policy used by
the government in attempts to promote growth and limit inflation. The purpose is both to explain macroeconomics theory and to use it as a framework for discuss-
ing the current state of the U.S. economy and for analyzing recent economic policy. Instructors may use elementary calculus in assigned readings, exams, and
lectures.
Format: lecture. Requirements: problem sets, two midterms, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Economics 110 and 120 and Mathematics 103 or its equivalent. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 25).
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR, 9:55-11:10 TR First Semester: SAVASER
8:30-9:45 MWF, 9:55-11:10 TR, 1:10-2:25 MR Second Semester: SAVASER, KUTTNER, P. PEDRONI
124
ECON 253(F) Empirical Methods in Political Economy (Same as Political Economy 253) (Q)
(See under POEC 253 for full description.) SWAMY
Not open to students who have taken Economics 255. Economics 253 cannot be substituted for Economics 255, or count as an elective towards the Economics
major.
ECON 255(F,S) Econometrics (Q)
An introduction to the theory and practice of applied quantitative economic analysis. This course familiarizes students with the strengths and weaknesses of the
basic empirical methods used by economists to evaluate economic theory against economic data. Emphasizes both the statistical foundations of regression tech-
niques and the practical application of those techniques in empirical research. Computer exercises will provide experience in using the empirical methods, but no
previous computer experience is expected. Highly recommended forstudentsconsideringgraduatetrainingineconomics orpublic policy. Students may substitute
the combination of Statistics 201 and 346 for Economics 253 or 255.
Format: lecture. Requirements: problem sets, two midterms, and group presentations and possible additional assignments.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 103 and Statistics 101 or Statistics 201 or equivalent plus one course in Economics. (A score of 5 on the Statistics AP satisfies the
prerequisite for Economics 255.) Enrollment limit: 35 (expected: 35).
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR, 11:20-12:35 TR First Semester: GENTRY, SWAMY
1:10-2:25 MR, 2:35-3:50 MR, 2:35-3:50 TF Second Semester: WATSON, ZIMMERMAN
ECON 299(F) Economic Liberalism and Its Critics (Same as Political Economy 250 and Political Science 238)
(See under POEC 250 for full description.) BAKIJA and MAHON
ADVANCED ELECTIVES
ECON 351 Tax Policy (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q) (W)
The tax system is a major element of public policy. In addition to raising revenue for government expenditure programs, policymakers use the tax system to
redistribute resources and to promote a variety of economic policies. For example, the United States tax system has specific rules to encourage savings, educa-
tion, and investment. Inherently, many tax policy choices involve trade-offs between equity and efficiency. The purpose of this course is to clarify the goals and
possibilities of tax policy, mainly through an examination of U.S. federal tax policy (though the search for possible reforms may lead us to examine policies
from other countries). The course will examine the choice of the tax base (income or consumption), notations of fairness in taxation (e.g., the rate structure), the
choice to tax corporate income separately from personal income, and a variety of specific tax policy issues (e.g., retirement saving, child care, the "marriage"
tax, capital gains taxation, and the taxation of housing).
Format: seminar/discussion. Requirements: several shorter papers, a research paper, and final exam.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 and preferably some familiarity with statistical analysis. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to senior Econom-
ics majors.
LALUMIA
ECON 353 Decision Theory (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
Studies of decision-making suggest that most people substantially violate even undemanding models of rationality. Are people truly irrational, and, if so, can
anything be done about it? This course focuses on normative decision-making (how we should make decisions under general conditions), descriptive decision-
making (how we do make decisions under actual conditions), and the contrast between the two. We proceed to a view of prescriptive decision-making, or how
we might combine normative and descriptive insights to improve decision-making and judgment. Topics include decision-analytic methods for improving
decision-making rigor (e.g., decision trees); microeconomic concepts and tools for optimization problems; game theory as appropriate; insights from cognitive
psychology on heuristics (short cuts) that sometimes help, but often distort, decision-making; integrated models of judgment that call for both analysis and
intuition; insights from the newly-emerging studies of judgment and wisdom. Until a few years ago, this topic was given normative treatment in departments of
engineering, statistics and economics, and was separately taught as a descriptive science in departments of psychology. The apparent value of combining the
two into a single, prescriptive analysis of decision-making and judgment has led to a recent wave of interdisciplinary approaches such as the one adopted in this
course.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: multiple problems and case analyses, one project, final exam.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 and Mathematics 104 or higher or permission of instructor. Statistics 101 or 201 helpful but not required. Enrollment limit: 25
(expected: 25).
FORTUNATO
ECON 357T The Economics of Higher Education (Not offered 2011-2012)
This tutorial will utilize economic theory and econometric methods to understand a variety of issues pertaining to the economics of colleges and universities. In
particular, we'll discuss the logic of non-profit enterprises, the financial structure of a college or university, competition in the market for higher education,
policies impacting tuition and financial aid, the individual and societal returns from investments in higher education, and the distinctive features of academic
labor markets. Particular attention will be paid to selective liberal arts colleges.
Format: tutorial; will meet weekly for one hour in groups of two. Evaluation will be based on six 5- to 7-page papers and on the quality of the student's oral
presentations and commentary on the work of his/her colleagues.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 and 253 or 255 or Statistics 346 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected 10). Preference will be given to
majors if overenrolled.
ZIMMERMAN
ECON 358(S) International Trade and Economic Policy
Advances in transportation and communication have led to an increasingly integrated global economy where goods, services, people, capital, and ideas flow
across borders. In this course we will examine the causes and consequences of globalization, using theoretical models and empirical evidence. Topics discussed in
class will include: models of international trade; immigration; multinational corporations; offshoring; trade policies such as tariffs, quotas, and export subsidies;
international trade agreements and organizations; and the implications of trade for the environment.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: problems sets, short essays, midterm, and final.
Prerequisites: Economics 251, 252, and some familiarity with statistical analysis.
Enrollment limit 20, expected 20
Preference given to senior economics majors.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR OLNEY
ECON 360 International Monetary Economics (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course studies the macroeconomic behavior of economies that trade both goods and assets with other economies: international financial transactions,
especially the buying and selling of foreign money, the role of central banks and private speculators in determining exchange rates and interest rates, and the
effects of international transactions on the overall performance of an open economy. Additional topics may include the "asset market approach" to exchange
rate determination, the nature and purpose of certain international institutions, and important current events.
Format: lecture. Requirements for first semester: two hour tests and a choice between a 10-page paper or a comprehensive final; requirements for second
semester: two exams and a term paper.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 and 252. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25).
ECON 362(S) Global Competitive Strategies
This course examines the ways in which a country's factor endowments, domestic market characteristics, and government policies promote or impede the global
expansion of its industries and corporations. First, actual trade and investment decisions of multinational corporations are analyzed and compared to the predic-
tions of international trade theory. Second, competitive strategies of indigenous and foreign rivals in U.S., Pacific rim, and European markets are explored. Third,
the efficacy of government policies in promoting the competitiveness of industries in global markets is discussed. Case studies of firms, industries, and countries
will be utilized.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: a research paper and exam(s).
Prerequisites: Economics 251. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Preference given to senior Economics majors.
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M FORTUNATO
125
ECON 363(F) Money and Banking
This course first explores the role of the financial system and financial markets, and how they interact with the economy. What does finance do? How are asset
prices determined, and how are these prices related to interest rates? Are financial markets efficient, and what are the implications of their efficiency or lack
thereof? Second, it analyzes the role of the central bank and the conduct of monetary policy. Special attention will be given to the organization and the operation of
the Federal Reserve System, but other monetary policy regimes will also be considered. Students will simulate a meeting of the Federal Reserve Open Market
Committee, either to decide on monetary policy or to debate a current policy issue. Third, it studies the complexities associated with managing and regulating
modern financial instruments. Throughout the impact of incentives on the shape and evolution of the financial system will be stressed.
Format: lecture and discussion. Requirements: problem sets, midterm, a group project culminating in a paper and a presentation, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Economics 252. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Preference given to majors.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF CAPRIO
ECON 371T Economic Justice (Not offered 2011-2012)
This tutorial will examine normative and empirical aspects of economic justice, with a special emphasis on concerns related to income distribution. The course
is loosely structured around three questions: a) How ought income be distributed? b) How is income distributed? c) What policies should be considered when a)
and b) differ? The first question moves us into the area of ethics. We will spend several classes discussing the connections between economic analysis and
ethical theory. The second question moves us into the area of facts and theories surrounding income distribution. The third question moves us to consider policy
responses to any perceived problems. In considering question c) we will focus on issues related to the distribution of income and status in the United States.
Format: tutorial; will meet weekly for one hour in groups of 2. Evaluation will be based on six 5- to 7-page papers and on the quality of the student's oral
presentations and commentary on the work of his/her colleagues.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 and 253 or 255 or Statistics 346 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected 10). Preference will be given to
Economics majors.
ZIMMERMAN
ECON 374T Poverty and Public Policy (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Since 1965, the annual poverty rate in the United States has hovered between 10 and 15 percent, though far more than 15 percent of Americans experience
poverty at some point in their lives. In this course, we will study public policies that, explicitly or implicitly, have as a goal improving the well-being of the poor
in this country. These policies include safety net programs (Aid to Families with Dependent Children/Temporary Assistance to Needy Families, Food Stamps,
Medicaid, and housing assistance), education programs (Head Start and public primary and secondary education), and parts of the tax code (the Earned Income
Tax Credit). We will explore the design and functioning of these programs, focusing on questions economists typically ask when evaluating public policy: Does
the policy achieve its goals? Does the design of the policy lead to unintended effects (either good or bad)? Could it be redesigned to achieve its goals in a more
cost-effective manner? Through in-depth study of these programs, students will learn how economists bring theoretical models and empirical evidence to bear
on important questions of public policy.
Format: tutorial. Evaluation will be based on six 5- to 7-page papers and on the quality of the student's oral presentations and commentary on the work of
his/her colleagues.
Prerequisites: Economics 253 or 255 or Statistics 346 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to majors if overen-
rolled.
SHORE-SHEPPARD
ECON 375T Speculative Attacks and Currency Crises (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
This course will review the causes and consequences of currency crises in industrial countries and emerging economies. Topics to be covered include analytical
models of balance of payments crises, empirical research on the determinants of currency crises, the relationship between currency and banking crises, and the
channels of "contagion" of crises across countries. The evolution of a series of important recent crises with systemic implications will be examined, including
the European crisis of 1992, the Mexican crisis of 1994, the Asian crisis in 1997, and the Russian crisis of 1998. Several more recent currency crises with effects
more restricted to the crisis countries themselves will also be studied.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: a paper every other week.
Prerequisites: Economics 252. Enrollment limit: 10.
MONTIEL
ECON 378(F) Long-Run Perspectives on Economic Growth (Q)
The world today is marred by vast inequities, with about a 30fold difference in per capita incomes between the poorest country and the most affluent. What
explanations do longrun growth economists have to offer for these differences in levels of prosperity? Are the explanations to be found in underlying differences
between countries during the past few decades? The past few centuries? Or the past few millennia? If contemporary differences in living standards have origins
that are hundreds or even thousands of years in the past, what scope exists for policies to reduce global inequality? Can we expect these inequalities to be reduced
gradually over time through natural economic processes, or are they likely to persist unless action is taken to reduce them? This course will present a unified
theory of economic growth for thinking about these and related questions. Examples of issues to be covered include, amongst other topics, Malthusian stagnation
in preindustrial societies, the importance of the demographic transition and human capital formation in the process of industrialization, the role of colonialism,
slavery and ethnic fragmentation in shaping modern institutions, and the longlasting effect of geography through its impact on the emergence of agriculture in
early human societies.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements will include at least one exam, a research paper and a class presentation.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 and 252 or permission of the instructor, familiarity with econometrics (ECON 255) will be helpful but not essential. Enrollment
limit: 25 (expected: 25). Preference given to junior and senior Economics majors.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF ASHRAF
ECON 381T Health in Poor Countries (Same as Economics 508) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)(Q)
Poor health is one of the biggest problems facing poor people in poor countries. Diarrhea, HIV/AIDS, iodine deficiency, intestinal helminthes, malaria, sleeping
sickness, tuberculosis, vitamin A deficiency, and yellow fever are common problems in much of the developing world. These health problems reduce happi-
ness directly, as well as indirectly through decreased cognitive and physical ability in productive activities. This course uses microeconomic and econometric
tools to examine the causes and consequences of a few of these sources of poor health. Unlike a medical or public health approach to these topics, we will focus
on behavioral aspects of these problems. Some of the questions we will explore include: How responsive is demand for health inputs to changes in the price of
health inputs? How does economic activity affect health behavior? How does information affect health behavior?
Format: tutorial. Requirements: students will write and present five papers, revise and resubmit one of these papers, and deliver formal comments on five papers
written by other students.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 and Economics 253/255. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to senior Economics majors and CDE students.
Not available for the Gaudino option.
WILSON
ECON 382 Industrial Organization (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course examines the interaction of firms and consumers in monopoly and imperfectly competitive markets. We begin with an investigation of how firms
acquire market power. Using game theoretic models, we then analyze the strategic interaction between firms to study their ability to protect and exploit market
power. Aspects of strategic decision-making that we shall study include: price discrimination, product selection, firm reputation, bundling and collusion. We
conclude with a discussion of the role of anti-trust policy. Theoretical models will be supplemented with case studies and empirical papers.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: There will be several problem sets as well as a midterm and final examination. A group paper and presentation will
also be required.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 and preferably some familiarity with statistical analysis. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Preference given to senior majors.
GAZZALE
ECON 383(F) Cities, Regions and the Economy
Cities and urbanization can have significant impacts on the economy. In many developed economies, a process of regional decline is associated with older,
industrial cities. In developing countries, the process of economic growth is generally associated with increasing urbanization. Urbanization, with its increasing
concentration of population and production, puts particular pressure on markets to allocate resources for provision of land, housing, transportation, labor and
public goods. Urbanization can alter the productivity of land, labor, and capital in ways that can improve the welfare of residents and the performance of the
126
broader economy. In this course we will examine these conflicting economic forces and examine some recent research that contributes to our understanding of the
difference between regional growth and decline, and the role that the urban structure plays in these processes. We will examine the function of land, housing,
transportation, and labor markets in the urban context, and the scope for public policies to improve the performance of the regional economy.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: two midterms and a research paper.
Prerequisites: Economics 251. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Preference given to seniors and juniors.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF S. SHEPPARD
ECON 384 Corporate Finance (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
This course analyzes the major financial decisions facing firms. The course takes the perspective of a manager making decisions about both what investments to
undertake and how to finance these projects. Topics include capital budgeting, links between real and financial investments, capital structure choices, dividend
policy, and firm valuation. Additional topics may include issues in corporate governance and corporate restructuring, such as mergers and acquisitions. The
course will emphasize the underlying economic models that are relevant for these decisions.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: class participation, problem sets, short quizzes, short projects such as case write ups, a midterm exam, and a final
exam.
Prerequisites: Economics 251, 252, and some familiarity with statistics (e.g., Economics 253 or 255).
Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20) Preference given to senior economics majors.
GENTRY
ECON 385 Games and Information (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
This course is a mathematical introduction to strategic thinking and its applications. Ideas such as Nash equilibrium, commitment, credibility, repeated games,
incentives and signaling are discussed. Examples are drawn from economics, politics, history and everyday campus life. Applications include auctions, labor
contracts, debt relief, and corruption.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: exams, problem sets and a substantial final project that involves modeling a real world situation as a game.
Prerequisites: Economics 251; Mathematics 105 (or permission of the instructor). Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25).
RAI
ECON 386(S) Environmental Policy and Natural Resource Management (Same as Economics 515 and Environmental Studies 386) (Q)
Economics has a rich body of advice for policymakers struggling to manage and preserve environmental assets in developed and developing countries. In this
class, we will survey the microeconomic (and, to a lesser extent, macroeconomic) perspective on environmental policy and natural resource management.
Throughout the class, we will emphasize issues of efficiency and equity, and we will be reminded again and again that the issues at hand are both technical and
ethical. We'll also be careful to distinguish cases in which private actors make efficient choices without any guidance from government from cases in which it is
argued that government has an important role. As another theme, we will look at actual policies in the US and worldwide to learn about policy implementation
and pitfalls. We will start by building a foundation of the concepts undergirding policy, including ideas of welfare within and across generations, sustainability, the
relationship between market failures and property rights, and the meaning and measurement of society's value for environmental assets. We will explore the idea
of efficient pollution, with the understanding that reducing pollution is costly in terms of consumption, jobs, and ultimately growth. There are many policies
(including taxes and "cap and trade") that may be useful in costeffectively fighting pollution, and we'll study them. We will study both localized air and water
pollution and larger global problems, with a focus on climate change. We will explore the management of both nonrenewable and renewable resources, including
global energy issues. We will also study the relationship between trade and the environment, touching on controversial topics such as the "natural resources curse"
and the relationship between economic growth and the demand for environmental quality. Student interest will drive some of the selection of specific topics.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: problem sets, short papers, brief presentation, a midterm, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Economics 251, familiarity with statistics.
Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 20). Preference given to senior majors and CDE masters.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF JACOBSON
ECON 388 Urbanization and Development (Same as Economics 521 and Environmental Studies 388) (Not offered 2010-2011)
(See under ECON 521 for full description.) S. SHEPPARD
ECON 389(S) Tax Policy in Emerging Markets (Same as Economics 517) (Q)
(See under ECON 517 for full description.) BAKIJA
ECON 390T Financial Crises: Causes and Cures (Same as Economics 523T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Financial crises have been with us for as long as banking has existed. Why are crises such a regular fixture of societies, and what can be done to prevent them, or
at least reduce their cost? Topics examined include bubbles and swindles, especially when these spillover to the broader macroeconomy; the role of information
in banking in normal times and in bank runs; boom-bust cycles in asset markets; international contagion; crisis resolution techniques; and the extensive history
of attempts to improve regulation so as to reduce the frequency and cost of crises. Crises in developing and developed economies in the 19th, 20th and 21st
centuries will be examined, and the role of political economy factors in their run-up and resolution will be featured.
Format: tutorial. Students will write 5-6 papers during the term, and will prepare and deliver formal comments on 5-6 papers written by other students.
Prerequisites: Economics 251, 252, and 253/255. Permission of the Instructor required. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Not available for the Gaudino
option.
CAPRIO
ECON 391T(F) Economic Analysis of Housing Markets (W)
Housing is one of the most basic of human needs and the housing market is one of the largest, most important and most heavily regulated markets in national
economies around the world. At various times economists, policy makers and the general public have regarded the housing market as irrational and malfunction-
ing in a variety of ways. Why? In this tutorial we will explore and analyze the workings of the housing market. In what ways do housing markets differ from other
markets? Why (and how often) do house price "bubbles" occur? How do mortgage markets function and influence housing markets in countries around the
world? In what ways can housing and housing conditions serve as an indicator of quality of life? How do housing markets affect the sustainability of cities? These
and other questions will be the focus of reading and discussion for the course.
Format: tutorial. Each student will write a paper every other week, and comment on his/her partner's work in the other weeks.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 and 255 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to senior majors.
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. S. SHEPPARD
ECON 392(S) Finance and Capital Markets (Q)
This course gives a survey of financial markets and currency trading. We begin by exploring the role of capital markets in the flow-of-funds between savers and
investors, their role in risk redistribution and continue with the analysis of exchange-rate markets. Topics include: risk and return tradeoffs, models of stock and
bond prices, the capital asset pricing model, financial derivatives (options, futures, currency swaps), hedging, "efficient markets" theories of financial markets and
order flow analysis in currency markets.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on problem sets, midterm, final, a project and class participation.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 and either Statistics 101 or 201 or Economics 253 or Economics 255. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Preference to Economics
majors.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF SAVASER
ECON 393 International Macroeconomics (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course examines the workings and interactions among national economies in the global arena and the implications for macroeconomic policy analysis.
Topics include analysis of international financial asset markets, international capital flows and the transmission of business cycles internationally. A series of
both factual and counterfactual case studies are developed in class and used to study the implications for central bank exchange rate policies, monetary policies,
trade policies, currency and trade unions such as the EEC and NAFTA, and international policy coordination issues among the G7 and members of the Interna-
tional Monetary Fund more broadly.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: two midterm exams and one final term paper focused on an international macro policy topic of the student's choice.
Prerequisites: Economics 252 (Intermediate Macro). Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 15). Preference given to Economics majors, and particularly to those
wishing to write an honors thesis in related areas of interest.
P. PEDRONI
127
ECON 394 European Economic History (Not offered 2011-2012)
Why did modern economic growth first occur in Europe, and not in China or the Middle East? Why did the Industrial Revolution occur in Britain and not
France? Why did the economy of the Soviet Union collapse in the 1980s? What drove European economic integration? This course will explore these and other
questions related to the economic development of Europe from the early modern period until today. We will investigate how institutional change, technology,
industrialization, social welfare policies, trade and globalization, and government intervention have affected the process of economic growth. Drawing on a
wide variety of empirical and theoretical readings, the perspective of the course will be comparative, both across Europe and to the experiences of developing
countries today.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: midterm, short problem sets, final, and a research paper.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 or 252 AND either 253, 255, or equivalent. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25).
NAFZIGER
ECON 395T Growth and Sustainability (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
The question to be addressed in this class is whether material living standards can continue to rise indefinitely: is "sustainable growth" possible, or is the world
doomed to stagnation--or eventual collapse--by limited resources, population pressures and pollution? The readings will include the views of pessimists, such
as Malthus and Diamond, as well as those of optimists, such as Simon and Nordhaus. Because growth and the allocation of resources are central to the study of
economics, we will confront the question of sustainability with the tools of microeconomics and growth theory, extending standard economic models to address
the challenges posed by population growth, resource use, and pollution.
Format: tutorial; will meet weekly for one hour in groups of two. The requirements are five 5- to 7-page papers, written commentary on fellow students' papers,
an expanded version of one of the short papers and consistent contributions to tutorial discussions.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 and 252. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference will be given to Economics majors.
KUTTNER
ECON 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
Students are invited to apply to undertake independent study on subjects of their own choosing. Interested students should consult with a faculty member about
designing an appropriate project well in advance of spring registration.
With permission of the department, an approved project may count as one of the two advanced electives required for the major.
Prerequisites: consent of an instructor and of the department chair.
Hour: TBA Members of the Department
ECON 451(F) Topics in Macroeconomics
This seminar explores some of the central topics in macroeconomics, including economic growth, saving and investment, business cycle fluctuations, monetary
policy, and financial crises. The first part of the course focuses on longrun economic growth. Using economic theory and evidence, we will attempt to answer
some of the most important questions in all of economics: Why are some countries poor and other countries rich? What can governments do to achieve faster and
environmentally sustainable rates of growth? What are the growth consequences of sustained budget deficits? Understanding the behavior of the economy in the
long run is one of the key tasks of macroeconomics. But as we have seen during the 20082009 financial crisis, the short run matters as well. In the second part of
the class, we will turn our attention to economic downturns and financial crises. Using historical work on past crises and the accumulating evidence on the current
one, we will study a host of shortrun topics, including financial markets, the effectiveness of fiscal and monetary policies, consumer expectations, asset prices,
employment, and productivity. Because this is an advanced class in macroeconomics, we will approach these issues as practicing economists working with the
best possible models and empirical techniques. Students will have an opportunity to apply these methods in a required endofterm research paper.
Format: seminar. Requirements: midterm, final, class participation and research paper.
Prerequisites: Economics 251, 252, and 255.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR LOVE
ECON 452T Economics of Community Development (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
This course focuses attention on the economic issues that arise in understanding community development. Students will address such questions as: why do
some cities grow, while others lose population? Why are some communities successful in attracting new firms and getting existing ones to expand? Why are
some communities regarded as offering better `quality of life' than others? Why do employees of local governments join unions in higher proportions than any
other sector of the economy? How do decisions made in local governments affect the overall economy, and how does the economy and competition between
communities affect local decisions? Thinking about such questions helps to develop skills in economic analysis and understanding of communities, the chal-
lenges they confront, and how to improve them. Students will be expected to read, discuss, and synthesize a variety of analytic approaches into their own
analysis of particular community development questions. Students will be expected to work with and analyze data and to present the results of their analysis.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: students will meet with the instructor in pairs for an hour each week; they will write a paper every other week, and comment on
their partner's papers every other week.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 and Economics 253 or 255 or the equivalent. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected:10). Preference will be given to senior Economics
majors.
S. SHEPPARD
ECON 454 Topics in Macroeconomics (Not offered 2011-2012)
This seminar explores some of the central topics in macroeconomics, including economic growth, saving and investment, business cycle fluctuations, monetary
policy, and financial crises. The first part of the course focuses on long-run economic growth. Using economic theory and evidence, we will attempt to answer
some of the most important questions in all of economics: Why are some countries poor and other countries rich? What can governments do to achieve faster
and environmentally sustainable rates of growth? What are the growth consequences of sustained budget deficits? Understanding the behavior of the economy
in the long run is one of the key tasks of macroeconomics. But as we have seen during the 2008-2009 financial crisis, the short run matters as well. In the second
part of the class, we will turn our attention to economic downturns and financial crises. Using historical work on past crises and the accumulating evidence on
the current one, we will study a host of short-run topics, including financial markets, the effectiveness of fiscal and monetary policies, consumer expectations,
asset prices, employment, and productivity. Because this is an advanced class in macroeconomics, we will approach these issues as practicing economists
working with the best possible models and empirical techniques. Students will have an opportunity to apply these methods in a required end-of-term research
paper.
Format: seminar. Requirements: midterm, final, class participation and research paper.
Prerequisites: Economics 251, 252, and 255. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference will be given to senior Economics majors.
LOVE
ECON 456 Income Distribution (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course examines the distribution of income in the U.S., with particular emphasis on how it is affected by taxes, transfers, and other government programs.
Most of the course will focus on the bottom of the income distribution, where the role for policy is greatest. Questions to be addressed may include the follow-
ing: What are the causes and consequences of poverty? How do welfare, the minimum wage, and the EITC affect those in poverty? How does discrimination
affect the incomes of various demographic groups? What are the effects of affirmative action? How much mobility is there across the income distribution?
What explains the recent growth in income at the top of the distribution, and the resulting increase in inequality?
Format: seminar/discussion. Requirements: short writing assignments, computer lab exercises, oral presentations, and a final research paper.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 and 253 or 255 or equivalent. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference: senior Economics majors.
LALUMIA
ECON 457 Public Economics Research Seminar (Not offered 2011-2012)
In this class, students will learn how to read, critically evaluate, and begin to produce empirical research on important and interesting public policy questions.
Topics will be selected from across the spectrum of public economics issues and may vary from year to year. Examples of specific topics that may be covered
include education, environmental policy, taxation, income inequality, anti-poverty policy, health care policy, the economics of crime and corruption, and the
implications of behavioral economics and psychology for public policy (we will typically only cover a subset of these topics). Applications will be drawn
mostly from the United States but we will also consider someissues and evidence from other industrialized and developing countries. The course will especially
emphasize the critical analysis of empirical evidence on public policy questions.
Format: a mix of lecture, seminar discussion, and time in a computer lab learning to work with data and estimate econometric models . Requirements will
128
include a15- to 20-page research paper (written in stages) that is a combination of a research proposal and an original empirical analysis of data, a series of short
papers and empirical exercises, and regular constructive contributions to class discussion.
Prerequisites: Economics 255, Economics 251, and Economics 120. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference will be given to senior Economics majors.
BAKIJA
ECON 458T Economics of Risk (Not offered 2011-2012)
Risk and uncertainty are pervasive features of economic decisions and outcomes. Individuals face risk about health status and future job prospects. For a firm,
developing new products is risky; furthermore, once a product has been developed, the firm faces product liability risk if it turns out to be unsafe. Investment
decisions --from managing a portfolio to starting a business--are also fraught with uncertainty. Some risks are environmental--both manmade problems and
natural disasters; other risks include the possibility of terrorist attack and, more locally, issues of campus safety. This tutorial explores both the private market
responses to risk (e.g., financial markets, insurance markets, private contracting, and precautionary investments and saving) and government policies towards
risk (e.g., regulation, taxation, and the legal system). From a theoretical standpoint, the course will build on expected utility theory, diversification, options
valuation, principal-agent models, contract theory, and cost-benefit analysis. We will apply these tools to a wide variety of economic issues such as the ones
listed above. One goal of the course is to discover common themes across the disparate topics. Students will be expected to read and synthesize a variety of
approaches to risk and uncertainty and apply them to various issues.
Format: tutorial; will meet with the instructor in pairs in each week. Requirements: each student will write a paper (or do a short project) every other week, and
comment on his or her partner's work in the other weeks. The final two weeks will be reserved for applied projects of the student's choice. One of the papers
during the term will be revised to reflect feedback from the instructor and the student's partner.
Prerequisites: Economics 251, 252, and Economics 253 or 255. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference to senior majors.
GENTRY
ECON 459 Economics of Institutions (Not offered 2011-2012)
Why are some countries rich and others poor? There are numerous candidate explanations emphasizing factors ranging from demography to technological
innovation to unequal international relations. However, some economists like Douglass North and Mancur Olson have argued that beneath the profusion of
proximate causes the quality of a country's "institutions" fundamentally determines its economic prospects. The word "institutions" is used broadly; it can refer
to micro-structures like households or macro-structures like the state. The course will survey the literature on institutions and economic development, discuss-
ing both developed and developing countries. Readings will largely consist of published journal articles and unpublished work of similar quality. Students
should expect to use microeconomic theory and econometrics learned in previous courses.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on four short papers of 7-10 pages each.
Prerequisites: Economics 251, Economics 253 or 255 or the equivalent;students who have already taken Economics 502 will not be admitted.Enrollment limit:
19 (expected: 19). Preference will be given to senior Economics majors.
SWAMY
ECON 461(S) Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) Modeling (Same as Economics 504)
(See under ECON 504 for full description.) ROLLEIGH
ECON 463(F) Financial History
This course opens with a brief survey of some of the major characteristics, issues, and challenges of financial systems today, and then examines earlier experience
with these phenomena. Topics to be examined include: the role of finance in economic development historically; the relationship between finance and govern-
ment, and the extent to which it has changed over time; the lessons from early asset bubbles for modern financial systems; the effect of institutions (laws, norms,
and culture) and political systems in shaping the impact of finance, as illustrated by comparisons between Mexico and the U.S., among other cases; and lessons
from U.S. financial history for policies today. The course also examines the tools that were developed in earlier epochs to deal with different risks, evaluate their
efficacy, and consider lessons for modern financial regulation.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will consist either of 6 short papers or 3 short papers and one longer research paper (student choice), at least one oral presentation,
and contributions to class discussions.
Prerequisites: Economics 363, 384, 390, 392, or 505 (that is, any one of those courses), or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference
will be given to senior Economics majors.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR CAPRIO
ECON 464(S) Empirical Methods in Macroeconomics (Same as Economics 514) (Q)
Macroeconomics and related fields in international finance and development have evolved specialized empirical techniques, known generally as macroecono-
metrics, which are designed to meet the practical challenges that the data and the empirical questions pose in these fields. The course will introduce the theory and
application of these techniques, and students will learn how to implement these techniques using real world data to address practical questions drawn from the
fields of macro, international finance and development. Topics to which these techniques will be applied include business cycle analysis and forecasting, sources
of exchange rate volatility and determinants of long run economic growth. Computer work and programming will be an important and integral part of the course,
but no previous training is expected. Economics majors who are considering writing an honors thesis on related topics are encouraged to enroll in this course
during the spring semester of their junior year. Students studying abroad during their junior year may nonetheless take this course during their senior year.
Format: seminar. Requirements: short empirical projects, midterm, term paper.
Prerequisites: Economics 252, Economics 255 or equivalent, and Economics 393 (360 may substitute for Economics 393). Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19).
Preference will be given to senior Economics majors.
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M P. PEDRONI
ECON 465(F) Behavioral and Experimental Economics
Ample empirical and experimental evidence suggests significant departures from classical assumptions of economics such as perfect rationality and self-inter-
ested behavior. In this course, we review this evidence with an eye towards identifying systematic ways in which behavior deviates from our classical assump-
tions and generating new, and hopefully more realistic, assumptions of behavior. We explore the empirical, theoretical and policy implications of these findings.
Format: seminar. Requirements: one long paper, and a series of critiques.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 and 253 or 255 or the equivalent. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference will be given to senior Economics majors. (Stu-
dents who have not taken econometrics may apply to be admitted to the course after meeting with Prof. Gazzale).
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF GAZZALE
ECON 466 Economic Growth: Theories and Evidence (Not offered 2011-2012)
This seminar will examine recent advances in the study of economic growth. Why are some countries richer than other countries? What accounts for differ-
ences in growth rates across countries and over time? What are the respective roles of factor accumulation and productivity growth? The answers to these
questions have important implications for policy, both in rich and poor countries, and for development assistance from rich to poor. We will review literature,
including both technical papers and more popular writing, that offer explanations linked to capital investment, human capital accumulation, policy distortions
and poor institutions, geography, agricultural technology, and other sources. Not only will we seek to learn the main policy messages of these papers, but also
we will try to understand why different models lead to different conclusions and how economic research progresses over time.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on either five 5- to 6-page papers or one long paper and a series of critiques, as well as class participation.
Prerequisites: Economics 251, 252, 253 or 255 or the equivalent. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference will be given to senior Economics majors.
Admission requires permission of the Instructor.
D. GOLLIN
ECON 467T(S) Development Successes (Same as Economics 518T) (W)
Although living standards in most of the worlds poor countries have increasingly fallen behind those of the rich industrial countries, a relatively small number of
countries that were quite poor in the middle of the last century have achieved dramatic improvements in their incomes since then. These development successes
include countries such as Japan, the four dragons (Hong Kong, Korea, Singapore, and Taiwan), the MIT economies (Malaysia, Indonesia, and Thailand), the
Asian giants of China and India, as well as non-Asian economies as diverse as Botswana, Chile, and Turkey. This tutorial will explore why these countries have
apparently succeeded where many other poor countries have failed. A particular focus of the course will be on extracting insights from the experiences of these
success cases about the broad development strategies that have been advocated over the past 50 years by scholars as well as by the international financial institu-
tions.
129
Format: tutorial. Methods of evaluation; students will write five papers during the term, and will prepare and deliver formal comments on five papers written by
other students.
Prerequisites: Economics 204 or 501. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to senior Economics majors. Admission requires permission of the
Instructor.
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. MONTIEL
ECON 468(F) Your Money or Your Life: Health Disparities in the United States
A 25 year-old man living in a high-income household can expect to live 10 years longer than his low-income counterpart. There are also stark differences in
mortality and health by education, employment status, race, immigrant status, region, and gender. This course will explore many of the potential explanations for
health disparities, including access to insurance and health care, health behaviors, stress, environmental exposure, and intergenerational transmission of health.
We will emphasize causal inference and focus on assessing the quality of evidence. We will also investigate how government policies contribute to or ameliorate
health disparities in the U.S.
Format: seminar. Course will include frequent small group meetings, a computer lab, and a poverty simulation. Evaluation includes class discussion, oral presen-
tations, 4 short response papers, two 5-page critiques of published articles, and one 15-page original empirical research paper.
Prerequisites: Econ 251 and Econ 255 or equivalent, or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to senior Economics
majors.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF WATSON
ECON 470(S) The Indian Economy: Development and Social Justice (D)
The Indian economy today is described in two competing narratives. India is, on the one hand, a fast-growing "emerging economy:" it is producing a range of
information technology services, threatening white-collar jobs in the United States; its growing consumption of fossil fuels is stressing world energy supplies and
contributing to global warming; along with China, it is changing the balance of international economic and political relations. In another narrative Indian econom-
ic growth is lop-sided and unsustainable: poverty and malnutrition remain widespread; Maoist insurgencies threaten a swath of eastern districts; and conflicts rage
over threatened ecological resources. In one prominent academic work India has been described as an "Emerging Giant;" in another, it is a "Republic of Hunger."
This course will introduce the student to these narratives in the words of participants, ranging from books by CEO's of major corporations to pamphlets produced
by left-wing critics of present economic policies.
We will then use the traditional theoretical and quantitative methods of an economist to evaluate these perspectives, and, consistent with the goals of the Exploring
Diversity Initiative, consider how they are shaped by power, privilege, and the social location of the narrator.
Format: seminar. Requirements: five short response papers (5 pages), and longer final paper (15 pages).
Prerequisites: Economics 253, Economics 255, or equivalent, or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15). Preference: to junior and senior
Economics majors
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR SWAMY
ECON 475 Advanced Microeconomic Theory (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
This course examines the mathematical underpinnings of advanced economics. This includes proofs of the following: existence and uniqueness of competitive
equilibrium in a variety of environments, first and second fundamental welfare theorems, existence of Nash equilibrium, and others. The focus of this class is
primarily on the mathematical proofs. These proofs are essential components of any graduate program in economics. Students who wish to see pure math
theorems applied to other fields may also be interested.
Format: lecture. Requirements: problem sets, a midterm, class participation, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 105 or equivalent, Economics 251. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to senior Economics majors.
ROLLEIGH
ECON 491(F)-W30 or ECON W30-492(S) Honors Seminar
This course is a research seminar for candidates for honors in economics. Each candidate prepares an honors thesis. Candidates will meet as a group to discuss
problems common to all of them (such as empirical methods, data sources, and theoretical approaches) and each one will report on his/her work at various
stages for criticism by the group as a whole. Some work is required during the preceding semester.
Prerequisites: admission by the department. Required for honors in Economics unless a student writes a year-long thesis.
ECON 493(F)-W31-494(S) Honors Thesis
A year-long research project for those honors candidates admitted to this route to honors. Prerequisites: admission by the department in the spring of the junior
year.
GRADUATE COURSES IN DEVELOPMENT ECONOMICS
Juniors and seniors majoring in Economics or Political Economy may, with the permission of the instructor, enroll in graduate courses given by the Center for
Development Economics (described below). Many of these courses are already cross-listed as undergraduate courses, and will count as an undergraduate elective
indicated by the cross-listed course number. Other courses might substitute for an elective in the major, but only with the permission of the chair of the department.
ECON 501(F) Development Economics I
The course examines concepts, tools, and models in contemporary economic theory that have proved relevant to development problems, and their application in
economic policymaking. Topics include growth processes and structural change; investment and sources of saving; capital, labor, and technological progress;
policies for public, private, and foreign enterprises; policymaking and negotiation in governments; and policies for reducing poverty and inequality.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: short papers, two midterms, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 and 252. Undergraduate enrollment limited and requires instructor's permission.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR ASHRAF
ECON 502(S) Institutions and Governance
Over the last two decades economists have become increasingly aware of the importance of the "social infrastructure" at various levels of economic activity:
capable and honest government officials must be available to formulate and implement policies, markets must be supported by suitable institutional frameworks,
property rights must be secure, and contracts reliably enforced. Even the structure of the household, the smallest institution analyzed by economists, has been
shown to have an important influence on economic development. This course will survey the growing literature on institutions and governance.
Format: lecture and discussion. Evaluation will be based on several short assignments, and a longer final paper.
Prerequisites: at least one among Economics 253, Economics 255, Economics 510, Economics 511, Statistics 346; requires permission of instructor; students
who have previously taken Economics 459 will not be enrolled. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19).
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR SWAMY
ECON 503(F) Public Economics
This class is about microeconomic and empirical analysis of government expenditure programs in developing and transitional countries. It provides tools for
understanding the effects of government policies, as well as a useful conceptual framework for analyzing normative questions such as "what role should govern-
ment play in the economy" and "what is a good policy?" The course begins by considering the efficiency of market economies, and rationales for government
intervention in the market, such as public goods, externalities, information-based market failures, imperfect competition, and equity. We also consider ways that
human behavior might deviate from perfect rationality, and what that might imply for policy. Along the way, we apply these concepts to various examples of
policy issues, including, among other things, the environment, education, health, infrastructure, security, social insurance, microfinance, and aid to the poor. We
then turn to the general question of how to make the government work better, addressing questions such as the following. When is it better to have the government
own and produce things, and when is it better to privatize? What are the incentives of politicians and government employees, and how does the design of political
and budgetary institutions affect the degree to which they serve the public interest? How should responsibilities be divided up between the central government and
local governments, and what are the advantages and disadvantages of "decentralization?" What can be done to improve the delivery of basic services? For
example, how might one address problems of corruption and absenteeism? Throughout the course, we consider examples of empirical research, and to facilitate
this, we will occasionally introduce econometric tools that are particularly useful for microeconomic policy evaluation.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: problem sets, one 3- to 5-page paper, one 8- to 10-page paper, midterm, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Economics 110; in addition, an empirical methods course (Economics 253, 255, 510 or 511, or Statistics 346) must be taken before or concurrently
with this class; undergraduate enrollment limited and requires instructor's permission. Students who have previously taken Econ 205 will not be enrolled. Enroll-
ment limit: 30 (expected: 25-30). Undergraduate enrollment limited and requires instructor's permission.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF BAKIJA
130
ECON 504(S) Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) Modeling (Same as Economics 461)
The Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) model is an important tool for applied policy work. CGE models are the primary tool for many government organi-
zations when evaluating policy alternatives and are also used extensively by various NGO's when deciding aid and policy recommendations. The great advantage
of these models is that they capture the general equilibrium feedback effects of policy proposals on various sectors of the economy. This is of great importance to
applied work, as this allows the identification of the winners and losers from potential policies. The class will begin with a general overview of CGE models. This
overview will be rigorous and mathematical. This course will use the free programming packages GAMS and MPSGE to implement various CGE models using
real world data. While no previous computer experience is required, some familiarity with Excel is recommended. During the latter part of the course, students
will create a CGE model for a country of their choice and conduct policy experiments using their model. Interested students could continue this project as a
potential thesis topic.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on problem sets, two midterms, final project and presentation.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 105, Economics 251. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference will be given to senior Economics majors.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR ROLLEIGH
ECON 505(S) Finance and Development
This course focuses on the financial system and its role in economic development. The first part explores the functions of finance, how it contributes to growth,
and reviews different models of financial sector development and their influence on how governments viewed the sector. It will examine experiences with finan-
cial sector repression and subsequent liberalization, and investigate the causes and impact of financial crises. Then it will study how to make finance effective and
how to prevent or minimize crises, analyzing government's role as regulator, supervisor, standard setter, contract enforcer, and owner. In this final part, attention
will be devoted to the role of institutions (laws, norms, culture) and incentives in financial sector development.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: midterm, group presentation, policy paper, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 and 252. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 25-30). Undergraduate enrollment limited and requires instructor's permission.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF CAPRIO
ECON 507(S) International Trade and Development
This course will examine the causes and consequences of international trade and its implications for less developed countries. We will discuss various models of
international trade and the empirical relevance of these theories. The course will provide analytic tools that will be useful in answering important questions such
as: Why do countries trade? Who benefits from trade? How does trade affect economic growth and development?
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: problems sets, short essays, midterm, and final.
Prerequisites: Economics 251, 252, and familiarity with econometrics.
Undergraduate enrollment limited and requires instructor's permission.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR OLNEY
ECON 508T Health in Poor Countries (Same as Economics 381 (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)(Q)
(See under ECON 381 for full desciption.) WILSON
ECON 509(F) Developing Country Macroeconomics
This course focuses on the relationship between macroeconomic policies and economic growth in developing countries. After examining the links between
macroeconomic stability and long-run growth, the rest of the course is divided into three parts. The first part is devoted to the construction of an analytical model
that is suitable for analyzing a wide variety of macroeconomic issues in developing countries. This model provides the general framework for a more specific
analysis of fiscal and monetary policies in the two remaining parts. In analyzing fiscal policy, the course will consider in particular the requirements of fiscal
solvency and the contribution that fiscal policy can make to macroeconomic stability. It will also examine alternative methods for achieving fiscal credibility,
including the design of fiscal institutions. The final part of the course will turn to an analysis of central banking, focusing on central bank independence, time
consistency of monetary policy, and the design of monetary policy rules in small open economies.
Format: lecture. Requirements: two hour tests and a comprehensive final exam.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 and 252. Expected enrollment: 25-30. Undergraduate enrollment limited and requires instructor's permission.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF MONTIEL
ECON 510(F) Statistics/Econometrics
This course focuses on basic methods of bringing economic theory and data together to provide empirical guidance for policy formulation, including use of
computers in econometric analysis. This course covers techniques of econometric analysis using a moderate level of mathematical exposition.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: problem sets, two hour exams, and a final.
Admission to 510 depends on previous background in statistics and mathematics. Enrollment limited to CDE students.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR WATSON
ECON 511(F) Statistics/Econometrics: Advanced Section
This course focuses on basic methods of bringing economic theory and data together to provide empirical guidance for policy formulation, including use of
computers in econometric analysis. This course covers techniques of econometric analysis using a more mathematical exposition.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: problem sets, two hour exams, and a final.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 and 252; admission to 511 depends on previous background in statistics and mathematics. Expected enrollment: 30. Undergradu-
ate enrollment limited and requires instructor's permission.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR KUTTNER
ECON 513(S) Developing Country Macroeconomics II
This lecture course is a continuation of Economics 509. The first part of the course extends the analysis of the first semester to several open-economy issues that
arise in developing countries, especially with respect to the interactions among exchange rate regimes, monetary policy regimes, and policies directed at the
financial account of the balance of payments. The second part of the course will apply these analytical tools, as well as those developed in Economics 509, to an
examination of the various types of crises that have afflicted developing countries over the past three decades, considering in particular the implications of such
crises for growth and development.
Format: lecture. Requirements: two hour tests and a comprehensive final exam.
Prerequisites: Economics 509. Expected enrollment: 25-30. Undergraduate enrollment limited and requires instructor's permission.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR KUTTNER
ECON 514(S) Empirical Methods in Macroeconomics (Same as Economics 464) (Q)
(See under ECON 464 for full description.) P. PEDRONI
ECON 515(S) Environmental Policy and Natural Resource Management (Same as Economics 386 and Environmental Studies 386) (Q)
(See under ECON 386 for full description.) JACOBSON
ECON 516T(S) International Financial Institutions
This tutorial will explore issues in economic development and finance with a focus on writing short papers that lay out the critical dimensions of these issues and
the appropriate policy measures to deal with them. Topics will include: the lessons of the 1990s for developing economies; speeding up growth in slow-growing
economies; handling capital inflows, foreign investment and foreign portfolio investment; successes and failures in developing countries in dealing with the
recent international economic crisis; dealing with financial and banking crises; the growth and risks of domestic government debt; and country interactions with
the IMF and the World Bank.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: students will write five papers and deliver formal comments on 5 papers written by other students.
Open to CDE students and, with the permission of the instructor, undergraduates. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10).
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. TRUMAN
ECON 517(S) Tax Policy in Emerging Markets (Same as Economics 389) (Q)
Taxes are half of what government does. So if you are interested in what government policy can do to promote efficiency, equity, and economic development, you
should be interested in tax policy. Governments must raise tax revenue to finance critical public goods, address other market failures and distributional issues, and
to avoid problems with debt and inflation. Taxes typically take up anywhere from ten to fifty percent of a country's income, they profoundly affect the incentives
131
to undertake all varieties of economic activity, and the government expenditures that they finance have potentially large consequences for human welfare. So the
stakes involved in improving tax policy are quite large. All of these issues are of great importance in developing and transitional countries (also known as "emerg-
ing markets"), but in these nations taxation is especially challenging because of serious problems with tax evasion and administration, among other things. This
class provides an in-depth exploration of tax policy, with an emphasis on the challenges and issues most relevant in emerging markets. Topics addressed in this
class include: how basic economic principles can be applied to help one think about the efficiency and equity consequences of tax policies; how personal income
taxes, corporate income taxes, and value-added taxes are designed and administered and how they influence the economy; ideas for fundamental reforms of these
taxes; theory and evidence in the debate over progressive taxes versus "flat" taxes; how various elements of tax design affect incentives to save and invest; how
market failures may influence the optimality of different tax policies; the implications of global capital flows and corporate tax avoidance for the design of tax
policy; tax holidays and other special tax incentives for investment; empirical evidence on the influence of taxes on economic growth, foreign direct investment,
labor supply, and tax evasion; case studies of efforts to reform tax administration and reduce tax evasion and corruption; taxes on land and property; presumptive
taxation; the "unofficial" economy and its implications for tax policy; tax policy towards natural resources such as minerals and oil; taxes on imports and exports;
non-tax methods of raising revenue; and political economy considerations in tax policy.
Format: seminar. Requirements: midterm exam, problem sets, two short essays and a final 10- to 15-page research paper.
Prerequisites: one public economics course or microeconomics course (ECON 503 or ECON 110), and one empirical methods course (ECON 253, 255, 510, or
511); students who have previously taken Economics 351 will not be enrolled.) Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15-19). Preference given to CDE students, but
undergraduates with the prerequisites are welcome.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR GENTRY
ECON 518T(S) Development Successes (Same as Economics 467T) (W)
(See under ECON 467 for full description.) MONTIEL
ECON 520T(S) Inclusive Growth: The Role of Social Safety Nets
Designing and implementing effective national strategies to promote inclusive economic growth can require difficult policy reforms, sometimes with adverse
short-term impacts for vulnerable groups within society. Social safety nets provide a pro-poor policy instrument that can balance trade and labor market reform,
fiscal adjustments (such as reduced general subsidies) and other economic policies aimed at enabling better market performance. In addition, social safety nets
help the poor to cope with shocks to their livelihoods, promoting resilience, human capital development and sometimes high-return risk-taking. This tutorial will
offer students the opportunity to explore the role of social safety nets in promoting inclusive economic growth, drawing on case studies from Africa, Asia, Latin
America and Eastern Europe. The first part of the tutorial will define social safety nets within the broader context of social protection, examining the diversity of
instruments and their linkages to economic growth. The second part will delve more deeply into the design and implementation of effective interventions, assess-
ing program choice, affordability, targeting, incentives and other issues. The third part will analyze the role of social safety nets in supporting economic growth
strategies, drawing on international lessons of experience.
Format: tutorial. Methods of evaluation: students will write five papers during the term, and will prepare and deliver formal comments on five papers written by
other students.
Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10).
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. SAMSON
ECON 521 Urbanization and Development (Same as Economics 388 and Environmental Studies 388) (Not offered 2011-2012)
At current rates of growth, the combined population of urban areas in developing countries will double in the next 30 years. The land area devoted to urban use
is expected to double even more quickly. The costs of providing housing and infrastructure to accommodate this growth are enormous, but the costs of failing to
accommodate urban development may be even larger. The decisions made in response to these challenges will affect the economic performance of these
countries and the health and welfare of the urban residents. By affecting global patterns of energy use, these decisions will have broader impacts on the entire
planet. This course will focus on these challenges. What are the economic forces that drive the process of urbanization, and how does the level of urbanization
affect economic development? How are policies towards housing, transportation, public finance and development affected by urbanization? What policy
choices are available, and which are most likely to succeed in dealing with the challenges of urban growth?
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: a midterm and a final exam, plus a paper that evaluates specific problems, policy alternatives, and provides some
analysis of relevant data.
Prerequisites: Economics 251 plus 253, 255, 510 or 511. Expected enrollment: 20. Undergraduate enrollment limited and requires instructor's permission.
S. SHEPPARD
ECON 523T Financial Crises: Causes and Cures (Same as Economics 390T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under ECON 390T for full description.) CAPRIO
ECON 530(S) Research Studies
In this course, each Fellow carries out an individual research study on a topic in which he or she has particular interest, usually related to one of the three
seminars. The approach and results of the study are reported in a major paper. Research studies are analytical rather than descriptive and in nearly all cases
include quantitative analyses. Often the topic is a specific policy problem in a Fellow's own country.
ENGLISH (Div. I)
Chair, Professor JOHN K. LIMON
Professors: I. BELL, R. BELL, BUNDTZEN***, CASE, FIX, KLEINER, KENT, KNOPP, MURPHY*, PYE***, RAAB**, ROSENHEIM, J.
SHEPARD, D. L. SMITH, SOKOLSKY, SWANN*, TIFFT. Associate Professors: MCWEENY, RHIE, DAVIS**, THORNE***. Assistant Pro-
fessor: SCHLEITWILER*.
Senior Lecturers:BARRETT, CLEGHORN, PETHICA. Lecturers: DE GOOYER, K. SHEPARD. Bernhard Emeritus Faculty Fellow: GRAV-
ER. Margaret Bundy Scott Visiting Professors: FILKINS, UM.
The study of English allows students to explore the critical role language and literature play in the shaping of human culture and social experience. Depart-
ment courses cover a variety of national, regional, and diasporic literary traditions; acquaint students with a range of genres and cultural practices, including
poetry, prose, drama, film, and mixed or emerging media; and employ a range of critical and methodological approaches. All foster skills of critical analysis,
interpretation, and written argument and expression. By cultivating a sophisticated awareness of linguistic and literary representation, and by encouraging the
ability to read critically and write persuasively, the English major provides students with an intellectual foundation and analytical skills that they can draw upon
to follow a wide range of paths.
COURSES AND COURSE-NUMBERING
100-LEVEL COURSES
At the introductory level, the department offers a range of writing-intensive 100-level courses which focus on interpretive skills as well as skills in writing
and argumentation. The department also offers English 150, Expository Writing, a course focusing on analytic writing skills. All 100-level courses are designed
primarily for first-year students, although they are open to interested sophomores, juniors, and seniors. A 100-level course is required for admission to most
upper-level English courses, except in the case of students who have placed out of the introductory courses by receiving a score of 5 on the Advanced Place-
ment examination in English Literature or of 6 or 7 on the International Baccalaureate.
200-LEVEL COURSES
Most 200-level courses are designed primarily for qualified first-year students, sophomores, and junior and senior non-majors, but they are open to junior
and senior majors and count as major courses. Several 200-level courses have no prerequisites; see individual descriptions for details. 200-level Gateway
courses are designed for first- and second-year students who are considering becoming English Majors, or who are interested in pursuing upper-level course
work in the department. All Gateway courses are writing-intensive. First-year students who have placed out of the 100-level courses are encouraged to take a
Gateway course as their introduction to the department.
300-LEVEL COURSES
The majority of English Department courses are designed primarily for students who have some experience with textual analysis, and are open to sopho-
mores, juniors, and seniors. First-year students who wish to enroll in a 300-level course are advised to consult the instructor.
400-LEVEL COURSES
400-level courses are intensive, discussion-oriented classes that place a premium on independent, student-initiated work. Limited to 15 students, 400-level
courses are open to students who have completed at least one 300-level English course; they should be attractive to any student interested in a course that
132
emphasizes intensive discussion and independent work. Majors considering Honors work and who wish to prepare for it are urged to take a 400-level course
before senior year.
ADVISING
All students who wish to discuss English Department offerings are invited to see any faculty member or the department chair.
Prospective majors are particularly encouraged to discuss their interest with faculty as early as possible. In the spring of the sophomore year, newly declared
majors must meet with a faculty member to discuss the Major Plan (see under Requirements for the Class of 2013 and after). Declared majors will be assigned a
permanent advisor shortly after they declare the major.
MAJOR
Requirements for the Class of 2012
The nine courses required for the major must include the following:
1) Any 100-level English class. Students exempted by the department from 100-level courses will substitute an elective course.
2) At least one 200-level Gateway course (grouped at the end of the 200-level course descriptions). Gateway courses are designed for first- and second-
year students contemplating the major or intending to pursue more advanced work in the department; these courses focus on analytical writing skills
while introducing students to critical methods and historical approaches that will prove fruitful as they pursue the major. (Note: a Gateway course can
fulfill a Period or Criticism requirement as well as a Gateway requirement.)
3) At least one "criticism" course (identified in parentheses at the end of the course description). A course fulfilling the criticism requirement entails a
sustained and explicit reflection on problems of critical method, whether by engaging a range of critical approaches and their implications or by explor-
ing a particular method, theorist, or critic in depth. Please note that when a criticism course also deals with literature satisfying a historical distribution
requirement (pre-1700, 1700-1900, etc.), the course may be used to satisfy either the criticism or the chronological requirement, but not both.
4) At least two courses dealing primarily with literature written before 1700 (identified in parentheses at the end of the course description). 5) At least
two courses dealing primarily with literature written between 1700 and 1900 (identified in parentheses at the end of the course description).6) At least
one course dealing primarily with literature written after 1900 (identified in parentheses at the end of the course description).
The department will give one elective course credit toward the major for a course taken in literature of a foreign language, whether the course is taught
in the original language or in translation. Such a course may not be used to satisfy the department's historical distribution, criticism, or Gateway require-
ments.
Requirements for the Class of 2013 and after
1) Major Plan. Shortly after declaring the major, all English majors must complete a short written plan for how they intend to complete the major. In
this plan, students should actively consider how they can most fruitfully explore the broad range of genres, historical periods, and national and cultural
traditions that literature in English encompasses, and how they wish to focus upon a particular intellectual interest within English. Students are encour-
aged to begin discussing the Major Plan with a faculty member as soon as they become interested in the major; junior majors must meet with faculty
adviors to revisit Major Plans as they register for courses. There will also be informational meetings and web resources available to assist new majors in
developing the Major Plan.
Each major must consist of at least nine courses, including the following:
2) Any 100-level English class. Students exempted by the department from 100-level courses will substitute an elective course.
3) At least one 200-level Gateway course (grouped at the end of the 200-level course descriptions). Gateway courses are designed for first- and second-
year students contemplating the major or intending to pursue more advanced work in the department; these courses focus on analytical writing skills
while introducing students to critical methods and historical approaches that will prove fruitful as they pursue the major. (Note: a Gateway course can
fulfill a Literary Histories or Criticism requirement as well as a Gateway requirement.)
4) At least one Criticism course (identified in parentheses at the end of the course description). A course fulfilling the criticism requirement entails a
sustained and explicit reflection on problems of critical method, whether by engaging a range of critical approaches and their implications or by explor-
ing a particular method, theorist, or critic in depth. Please note that when a Criticism course is also listed as satisfying the Literary Histories requirement,
the course may be used to satisfy either requirement, but not both.
5) At least three courses at the 300-level or above.
6) At least three courses designated as Literary Histories. Literary Histories courses concern the emergence or development of a specific literary tradi-
tion or problem and/or its transformation across multiple historical periods. Literary Histories are identified by LH-A, LH-B, or LH-C in parentheses at
the end of the course description.
LH-A: courses dealing primarily with literature written before 1800.
LH-B: courses dealing primarily with literature written before 1900 but not included in LH-A (courses on literature from 1800-1900 and some surveys).
LH-C: courses dealing primarily with literature written after 1900.
Of the three Literary History courses required for the major, at least two must focus on literature before 1900 (LH-A or LH-B), with at least one of these
focusing primarily on literature before 1800 (LH-A).
For further clarification, please see the English Department webpage at http://web.williams.edu/English/.
Courses outside the department
The department will give one elective course credit toward the major for a course taken in literature of a foreign language, whether the course is taught
in the original language or in translation. Such a course may not be used to satisfy the department's Literary Histories, criticism, or Gateway require-
ments.
STUDY AWAY
Majors who plan to study abroad should be proactive in understanding how this will affect their plans for completing major requirements. Such plans should
be discussed in advance with the student's advisor as well as the department's administrative assistant. Approval of departmental credit for courses taken
off-campus must be obtained in advance from the department chair.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN ENGLISH
The English Department offers three routes toward honors: a creative writing thesis, a critical thesis, and a critical specialization. Candidates for the program
should have at least a 3.5 average in courses taken in English, but admission will not depend solely on course grades. Formal application to pursue honors must be
made to the director of honors (Chris Pye) by April of the junior year.
All routes require students to take a minimum of ten regular-semester courses (rather than the nine otherwise required for the major), and to devote their senior
year winter study course to their honors projects. All students writing a critical thesis or pursuing a critical specialization will be required to take the Honors
Colloquium in the fall semester. Students doing a creative writing thesis must, by graduation, take at least nine regular semester courses, and, in addition, take
English 497 (Honors Independent Study) and English W31 (Honors Thesis, winter study) during senior year. Students writing a critical thesis must, by gradua-
tion, take at least eight regular-semester courses, and, in addition, take English 493 and English 494 (fall Honors Colloquium and spring Honors Independent
Study) and English W31 (Senior Thesis, winter study) during senior year. Students pursuing a critical specialization must, by graduation, take at least eight
133
regular-semester courses, and in addition, take English 493 and English 494 (fall Honors Colloquium and spring Honors Independent Study) and English W30
(Senior Thesis: Specialization Route, winter study) during senior year.
Creative Writing Thesis
The creative writing thesis is a significant body of fiction or poetry completed during the fall semester and winter study of the senior year, and usually including
revised writing done in earlier semesters. (With permission of the honors committee, the thesis may be undertaken during the winter study period and the spring
semester of the senior year.) Requirements for admission include outstanding work in an introductory and an advanced workshop, a recommendation from one of
the creative writing teachers (who will then act as thesis advisor), and the approval of the departmental honors committee. A creative thesis begun in the fall is due
on the last day of winter study; one begun in winter study is due the third Monday after spring break. The methods of evaluation are identical to those for critical
projects (but their page limits do not apply).
Critical Thesis
The critical thesis is a substantial critical essay written during both semesters as well as the winter study period of the senior year. It must consider critical
and/or theoretical as well as literary texts. The thesis should be 15,000 words (45 pages); in no case should it be longer than 25,000 words. The proposal, a 3-page
description of the thesis project, should indicate the subject to be investigated and the arguments to be considered, along with a bibliography. The finished thesis is
due on the third Monday following spring break. After the critical thesis has been completed, the student publicly presents his or her work.
Critical Specialization
The critical specialization route is a series of forays into a broad area of interest related to work undertaken in at least two courses. At least one of these courses
must be in the English Department, and both need to have been taken by the end of fall term in senior year. The specialization route entails: (1) a set of three
10-page essays which together advance a flexibly related set of arguments; (2) an annotated bibliography (5 pages) of secondary sources, explaining their impor-
tance to the area of specialization; (3) a meeting with the three faculty evaluators (one of whom is the advisor) during the last two weeks in February to discuss the
trio of essays and the annotated bibliography; (4) a fourth essay of 12 pages, considering matters that arose during the faculty-student meeting and reflecting on
the outcome of the specialization. The 3-page proposal for the specialization should specify the area and range of the study, the issues likely to be explored, and the
methods to be used for their investigation. It should also describe the relation between previous course work and the specialization, and include a brief bibliogra-
phy of secondary works. The first two papers are due by the end of fall semester; the third paper is due at the end of winter study; the bibliography is due mid-Feb-
ruary; and the final paper is due the third Monday after spring break.
Applying to the Honors Program
All students who wish to apply to the honors program are required to consult with a prospective faculty advisor and the director of honors before April of the
junior year. Prior to preregistration in April, candidates for critical theses and specializations submit a 3-page proposal that includes an account of the proposed
project and a bibliography. Students applying to creative writing honors submit a brief proposal describing the project they wish to pursue. Decisions regarding
admission to the honors program will be made by the end of May. Admission to the honors program depends on the department's assessment of the qualifications
of the student, the feasibility of the project, and the availability of an appropriate advisor.
When pre-registering for Fall 2011, students who are applying to critical honors should register for the Honors Colloquium as one of their four courses.
Progress and Evaluation of Honors
While grades for the fall and winter study terms are deferred until both the honors project and review process are completed, students must do satisfactory work
to continue in the program. Should the student's work in the fall semester not meet this standard, the course will convert to a standard independent study (English
397), and the student will register for a regular winter study project. A student engaged in a year-long project must likewise perform satisfactorily in winter study
(English W30 or W31) to enroll in English 494 in the spring semester. When such is not the case, the winter study course will be converted to an independent
study "99."
Students are required to submit three final copies of their written work to the department on the dates applicable to the type of project pursued (see the above
descriptions of each type of project for the due dates). All honors projects are evaluated by the advisor and two other faculty members. The advisor determines the
student's semester grades in honors, while the two external readers recommend to the department that the project receive Highest Honors, Honors, or no Honors.
Honors of any kind are contingent upon satisfactory completion of courses in the major during the senior year. Highest Honors are normally awarded only to
students whose performance in both the honors program and regular courses in the major has been exceptional.
COURSES
100-LEVEL COURSES
At the introductory level, the department offers a range of writing-intensive 100-level courses which focus on interpretive skills--tech-
niques of reading--as well as skills in writing and argumentation. English 150 and 152 will focus more directly on basic expository writing
skills than the other 100-level classes. All 100-level courses are designed primarily for first-year students, although they are open to inter-
ested sophomores, juniors, and seniors. A 100-level course is required for admission to most upper-level English courses, except in the case
of students who have placed out of the introductory courses by receiving a score of 5 on the Advanced Placement examination in English
Literature.
ENGL 103(F,S) Imagining Hell (W)
Poets and artists have had an inordinate interest in Hell. It is darkly intriguing in a way that Heaven in not. In fact, Hell is the largest shared construction project in
imaginative history, and can count among its chief architects many of western culture's major figures--Homer, Virgil, Plato, Augustine, Dante, Bosch, Michelan-
gelo, Milton, Goethe, Blake, among others.
We will explore this fantastic underground kingdom of cruelty both as a place and as a state of mind; also, we will examine how visions of Hell have influenced
our understanding of actual history and informed visions of a dystopian future. We may also consider our own perverse pleasure in contemplating the damned.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based upon class participation; three 5- to 10-page essays, plus shorter writing assignments.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to first-year students who have not taken or placed out of a 100-level English course.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF First Semester: DE GOOYER
8:30-9:45 MWF Second Semester: DE GOOYER
ENGL 104(S) Happiness (Same as Comparative Literature 106) (W)
The Declaration of Independence grants Americans life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. How worthy a pursuit is happiness? What is happiness, a moment of
ecstasy or a life well lived, a feeling of pleasure or a sense of accomplishment? How can we predict what will or won't make us happy? What do philosophy,
psychology, neuroscience, and journalism teach us about happiness?
How can models of happiness inform our literary understanding and appreciation?
This introduction to literature will explore the special pleasures--and frustrations--of reading and writing. Along with commentaries on happiness from Aristotle
to Daniel Gilbert, we will study such works as: William Shakespeare's As You Like It; Michel de Montaigne's Essays; Voltaire's Candide and Leonard Bernstein's
musical; Jane Austen's Pride and Prejudice; Ian McEwan's Saturday; Mike Leigh's film Happy Go Lucky and Solondz's Happiness; short stories and novellas
by Leo Tolstoy, James Joyce, Flannery O'Connor, Eudora Welty, Alice Munro, and Woody Allen; poems by John Donne, George Herbert, Alexander Pope, John
Keats, William Wordsworth, Emily Dickinson, Robert Frost, Elizabeth Bishop, Billy Collins, and Li- Young Lee.
Format: seminar. Requirements: four short formal essays, informal journal entries, oral presentations, and active contributions to class discussion.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to first-year students who have not taken or placed out of a 100-level English course.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR I. BELL
ENGL 105(S) Poetry and Magic (W)
Ancient Celtic texts-Irish and Welsh--associate the poet with powerful magic--shape-shifting, access to the other-world, and visions of transcendent authority
and truth. Plato, in his famous condemnation of poetry in The Republic, also associates poetry with magic, but with magic as con game or sleight-of-hand trick.
This course will use Plato and the Celtic texts to establish a theoretical framework for reading and interpreting the representation of poetry and magic in a variety
of literary works from the Middle Ages to the twentieth century. The goal of the course is to develop effective reading and writing strategies for works of different
genres and time periods. Reading will include Chaucer's Friar's Tale (where the poet-figure is a devil); Marlowe's Doctor Faustus (where the poet-figure sells his
soul to the devil for magical power); Shakespeare's Midsummer Night's Dream and The Tempest (where fairies and magic represent the positive power of the
imagination); and short poems by Coleridge, Keats, Tennyson, and Yeats.
Format: seminar. Requirements: a mix of writing assignments, formal and informal, totaling about 25 pages. Students will be evaluated on writing and class
participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19. Preference given to first-year students who have not taken or placed out of a 100-level English course.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR KNOPP
134
ENGL 111(S) Poetry and Politics (W)
"Poets are the unacknowledged legislators of the world" wrote Shelley in his 1821 "Defence of Poetry," countering the widely held view of poetry's airy irrele-
vance to the material progress of humanity. His claims are echoed a century and a half later in Audre Lorde's "Poetry is Not a Luxury," in which she argues that
poetry is a vital and essential part of her own political struggle as a Black lesbian feminist. But when W.B. Yeats--himself a very politically involved poet--
writes in 1917 that "from the quarrel with others comes rhetoric; from the quarrel with ourselves comes poetry," he implies that poetry would suffer from too
much involvement with the "quarrel with others" that is politics, becoming, perhaps, something more like advertising jingles for political dogma. And when W.
H. Auden writes in 1939 that "poetry makes nothing happen" he appears to locate poetry's value precisely in its irrelevance to politics as such. This course will
focus on the vexed relationship between poetry and political struggle, reading predominantly poetry and poetics (writings about poetry) of the last two centuries in
an effort to answer the questions: what can poetry do for politics? what does politics do for (or to) poetry? Is poetry essential to political struggle, or do poetry and
politics mix only to the detriment of both, producing, on the one hand, bad poetry, and on the other, mere distractions from the "real" work of politics? The
primary goal of the course is to make students better readers of poetry, and better readers and writers of argumentative prose.
Format: discussion/seminar. Requirements: active class participation and 20 pages of writing in the form of frequent short papers.
No prerequisites; no prior experience with poetry (or politics!) is expected.. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to first-year students who have
not taken or placed out of a 100-level English course.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR CASE
ENGL 113(F) Modernist British Fiction (W)
In the first three decades of the twentieth century, writers in Britain, Europe, and America--participating in the creative explosion of revolutionary aesthetic
movements known collectively as modernism--transformed our understanding of the art of fiction. Modernist writers boldly diverged from the norms and con-
ventions of classical realist fiction, in an array of exciting, if sometimes bewildering, formal innovations. They upended the stability of realist narration through
the use of shifting, unorthodox points of view, unreliable narrators, disorienting time-shifts, and ostentatious authorial self-consciousness, and through the scrutiny
of problems of memory and representation; they reconceived the nature of subjectivity; they re-defined what counts as an "event"; and they made fiction operate
more like poetry, by shifting the reader's attention from a linear, character-oriented unfolding of plot to what has been called a "spatial" organization of metaphoric
and conceptual patterns. In this course we will explore this sweeping revision of the nature of fiction by studying several great, often challenging modernist works
of short fiction: stories, novellas, and short novels by such British writers as Joseph Conrad, James Joyce, E. M. Forster, Virginia Woolf, and Ford Madox Ford,
and perhaps by one or two Continental writers such as Marcel Proust and Franz Kafka. Our principal aim will be to develop students' skills as readers and
interpreters of fiction. A secondary benefit of the course will be to introduce students to literary modernism through a survey of some of its greatest exponents.
Format: dicussion/seminar. Requirements: active participation in class discussions, and frequent, rigorous writing in the form of short papers and brief written
exercises (totalling about 20 pages).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to first-year students who have not taken or placed out of a 100-level English course.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR TIFFT
ENGL 114(F) Literary Speakers (W)
The general purpose of this course is to develop students' skills as interpreters of poetry and short fiction. Its particular focus is on how--and with what effects--
poets create the voices of their poems, and fiction writers create their narrators. We'll consider the ways in which literary speakers inform and entice, persuade and
sometimes deceive, their audiences. Readings will include texts from various historical periods, with particular emphasis on the twentieth century (including
works by James Joyce, Henry James, Vladimir Nabokov, Robert Frost, Toni Cade Bambara, Raymond Carver, and Seamus Heaney).
Format: seminar. Requirements: six papers, ranging from 1-2 pages to 4-5 pages.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to first-year students who have not taken or placed out of a 100-level English course.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF FIX
ENGL 116(F) The Ethics of Fiction (W)
Can made up stories actually be bad for you? (Plato seems to have thought so.) Conversely, can they do you any good, even transform your vision of what it
means to be good? Can reading fiction, that is, shape your moral character? Or is literature really just entertainment, however sophisticated and intellectually
challenging? In this course, we will explore questions like these about the ethics of fiction, questions that have inspired some practitioners of the art to make
claims such as: "Surely one of the novel's habitual aims is to articulate morality, to sharpen the reader's sense of vice and virtue" (John Updike); "You write in
order to change the world...and if you alter, even by a millimeter, the way a person looks at reality, then you can change it" (James Baldwin); "...a writer [is] as an
architect of the soul" (Doris Lessing); "Naturally you're aware that bad art can finally cripple a man" (Saul Bellow). If you are curious about the subject of ethics,
enjoy reading narrative fictions, and are interested in thinking about the connection between the two, this may be the class for you. We will read a varied selection
of fiction along with a fair amount of scholarship on the links between moral philosophy and narrative forms in order to refine the critical language we have at our
disposal. Writers we will read include: Elizabeth Anscombe, J.M. Coetzee, Cora Diamond, Richard Eldridge, Kazuo Ishiguro, Henry James, Immanuel Kant,
Toni Morrison, Iris Murdoch, Tim O'Brien, Robert Pippin, and Jean-Paul Sartre.
Format: discussion/seminar. Requirements: active class participation and five papers totaling 20 pages.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to first-year students who have not taken or placed out of a
100-level English course.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR, 2:35-3:50 TF RHIE
ENGL 117(F) Introduction to Cultural Theory (Same as Comparative Literature 117) (W)
This course has a clear purpose. If you had signed up for a course in biology, you would know that you were about to embark on the systematic study of living
organisms. If you were registered for a course on the American Civil War, you would know that there had been an armed conflict between the northern and
southern states in the 1860s. But if you decide you want to study "culture," what exactly is it that you are studying? The aim of this course is not to come up with
handy and reassuring definitions for this word, but to show you why it is so hard to come up with such definitions. People fight about what the word "culture"
means, and our main business will be to get an overview of that conceptual brawl. We will pay special attention to the conflict between those thinkers who see
culture as a realm of freedom or equality or independence or critical thought and those thinkers who see culture as a special form of bondage, a prison without
walls. The course will be organized around short theoretical readings by authors ranging from Matthew Arnold to Constance Penley, but we will also, in order to
put our new ideas to the test, watch several films (Ferris Bueller's Day Off, Silence of the Lambs, The Lord of the Rings) and listen to a lot of rock & roll. Why do
you think culture matters? Once you stop to pose that question, there's no turning back.
Format: discussion/seminar. Requirements: five short papers totaling about 20 pages, class attendance and participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to first-year students who have not taken or placed out of a 100-level English course.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF THORNE
ENGL 120(F) The Nature of Narrative (Same as Comparative Literature 111) (W)
(See under COMP 111 for full description.) CASSIDAY
ENGL 121(S) Precocity (W)
Precocity--knowing too much too early and without understanding the implications of what you know--is often the subject of literary texts, perhaps because it
dramatizes the stakes of interpreting. Precocity can emerge in a character, as a narrative posture or in the very texture of the writing. It can produce highly charged
dramatic situations, comic or ruinous; it can precipitate crises of character and of narrative; and it can transform the terms within which an historical moment is
conceived. Readings will include works by Borges, Nabokov, James, and Stoppard; approximately half of the course will be devoted to reading a range of poems
from the seventeenth century to the present.
Format: discussion/seminar. Requirements: students will write five short papers totaling 20 pages.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to first-year students who have not taken or placed out of a 100-level English course.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR SOKOLSKY
ENGL 123(F) Borrowing and Stealing: Originality in Literature and Culture (W)
Someone once said that bad poets borrow and good poets steal, suggesting that acts of theft, as well as their subsequent cover-ups, may lie behind some of the best
and seemingly most original works of art in history. And it's not just the poets. More recently, an exhibition of artworks using copyrighted material, called "Illegal
Art," has challenged current U.S. copyright law. Given the ubiquity of visual, electronic, and audio borrowing and sampling in contemporary art, one might
wonder if anyone even bothers to create alibis for today's artistic thefts. This course will investigate ideas about artistic and intellectual influence, inspiration,
borrowing, revision, appropriation, and outright stealing. We will ask a series of questions as we look at a variety of material, mostly literary, but also visual and
musical, that troubles ideas about novel and derivative art. Where does influence stop and plagiarism begin? What must be forgotten, or remembered, about
earlier works of art for a new one to appear to be just that--new? Do aesthetic techniques of reframing and recontextualization have a history? The course will
135
consider these questions mostly by engaging artworks that raise such questions, but also will read work in critical theory about authorship and copyright. We'll
spend time thinking about uncreative art and boring art, and consider what aesthetic categories are mobilized in conceptual art by visiting Sol Lewitt's installation
at MassMOCA. Throughout, we will refine our sense of the relations among fiction, art, originality, and imitation by studying some of the best acts of artistic and
intellectual theft of the recent past. Readings: Roland Barthes, T.S. Eliot, Wordsworth and Coleridge, Borges, Oscar Wilde (lots), Sigmund Freud, Vladimir
Nabokov, Andy Warhol, Christian Bk.
Format: discussion/seminar. Requirements: intense reading; 20 pages of writing in the form of frequent short papers; active, substantial class participation; weekly
online reading responses.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to first-year students who have not taken or placed out of a 100-level English course.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR MCWEENY
ENGL 129(F) Twentieth-Century Black Poets (Same as Africana Studies 129) (W)
From Langston Hughes to contemporary poets such as Amiri Baraka and Angela Jackson, African American poets have been preoccupied with the relations of
poetry to other traditions. Vernacular speech, English poetry, jazz and other musical forms, folk humor and African mythology have all been seen as essential
sources for black poetry. This course will survey major poets such as Hughes, James Weldon Johnson, Countee Cullen, Robert Hayden, Gwendolyn Brooks,
Baraka, Jackson, and Yusef Komunyakaa, reading their poems and their essays and interviews about poetic craft. We will ask how black poetry has been defined
and whether there is a single black poetic tradition or several.
Format: discussion/seminar. Requirements: 20 pages of writing in the form of a journal on the readings and several short papers.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to first-year students who have not taken or placed out of a 100-level English course.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF D. L. SMITH
ENGL 132(F) "Feminaissance": Contemporary Poetry by Women (W)
VIDA, a non-profit organization for women in the literary arts, recently released a statistical analysis of the number of men and women writing for, reviewed in,
and editing major publications in the United States in 2010. The report revealed that male writers and editors appear significantly more often than female writers
in journals, such as Atlantic, Granta, Poetry, The New Yorker, and Tin House, among others. The discrepancy between the number of men and women appearing
in contemporary mainstream publications raises provocative questions about the role of women's work in contemporary culture. This introductory class engages
experimental collections of poetry by a diverse set of women currently writing in English: Mei-mei Berssenbrugge, Andrea Brady, Laynie Brown, Bhanu Kapil,
Myung Mi Kim, Harryette Mullen, Alice Notley, Vanessa Place, Sina Queras, Claudia Rankine, and Lisa Robertson. Their works challenge accepted notions of
poetry through daring formal investigations that press the limits of thought. These writers' collections thus startle, confound, delight, bore, outrage, and engage
readers, and we will discuss how their poems complicate our notions of what poetry is or can do. We will also address how these works are in dialogue with
questions facing women writers today: how does the group identification "women writers" offer a position to embrace, refuse, accept, rebel against, and/or open
out? And how do experimental forms conceived by women reach an audience when women are underrepresented in publications? Each student's work will
culminate in a review of a collection of poems by a woman to be submitted to a publication.
Format: seminar/discussion. Requirements: class participation, email responses to readings, 4-5 essays totaling 20 pages.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR JOOSTEN
ENGL 136(F) Shakespeare--Again (W)
In this course, we will consider several plays by Shakespeare, along with responses--some cinematic, some theatrical--that they have provoked. Pairings will
include: The Tempest and Forbidden Planet, Romeo and Juliet and Shakespeare in Love, Hamlet and "The Skinhead Hamlet."
Format: seminar. Requirements: active class participation, and five papers totaling 20 pages.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19. Preference given to first-year students.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF KLEINER
ENGL 139(S) Metafiction (Same as Comparative Literature 139) (W)
This course will examine some of the ways in which literary works reflect on their status as texts. We'll look at the formal pleasures and puzzles generated by
techniques including frame narratives, recursion, self-reference and readerly address, in texts ranging from the Book of Genesis to films by Spike Jonze, to novels
by Vladimir Nabokov. Ultimately, we will use our study of metafiction to focus a larger inquiry into the socializing force of language in human development.
Note that students will be required to use, as well as interpret, metafictional techniques in much of their assigned writing.
Format: discussion/seminar. Requirements: five papers of increasingly complexity, totaling 24 pages; consistent attendance and participation; a willingness to
reread.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to first-year students who have not taken or placed out of a 100-level English course.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF ROSENHEIM
ENGL 144(S) American Ethnic Detective Fictions and Variations (Same as American Studies 144) (W)
The many variations of the detective novel--from the British "cozy" to American "hardboiled" thrillers--have long been staples of popular culture. While the
intricate plot may play a large role in attracting readers, other formal elements of detective fiction have attracted many writers, some who would transgress the
genre itself. In this class, we will read and discuss works by various American ethnic writers and their use of the forms and conventions of the mystery novel to
ask: how do we understand the relationship between racial/ethnic identities, histories, experiences and the genres, conventions, and other elements of detective
fictions? What is the relationship of form, genre, narrative to cultural politics and history? How do the different writers use conventions of detective fictions, and
to what effects and purposes? To this end, we will be readings works that are recognizable "detective fictions" as well as works that complicate and push the
boundaries of the genre, to the extent that they become nearly unrecognizable. This is not to suggest that these boundaries are strict or stable. As we will see, the
question of what does or does not constitute "detective fiction" will become less central as we investigate multiple ways in which the novels/authors stretch,
disrupt, and play with the forms and elements of detective fictions.
Format: discussion/seminar. Requirements: active in-class participation (including short presentations), short response assignments, and a final paper (6-8 pages)
on a detective novel of your choice (can be chosen from or beyond the course readings).
No prerequisites; open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected 19). Preference given to first-year students who have not taken or placed out of a
100-level English course.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF UM
ENGL 150(S) Expository Writing (W)
This course is for students who want to learn how to write a clear, well-argued, intelligible paper based on close, critical analysis of texts. Readings will include
political essays, works of creative nonfiction, short stories and the occasional poem.
Format: workshop. Requirements: evaluation will be based on substantial, weekly writing assignments of graduated length and active participation in classroom
discussion and the peer-editing process regular class meetings will be supplemented by individual conferences.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 12). Preference given to first-year students who have not taken or placed out of a 100-level English course.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF P. PARK
ENGL 152(F) Other People's Lives: Contemporary American Memoir (W)
The goal of this course is to teach you how to write a clear, well-argued, intelligible and interesting analytical paper. We will spend most of our class time actively
engaged in a variety of techniques to improve your critical reasoning and analytical skills, both written and oral. Though the skills you learn will be applicable to
other disciplines, and a central purpose of the course is to improve all aspects of your writing, this is a literature class, designed partly to prepare you for upper
level courses in the English Department, so we will, therefore, spend equal time on the interpretation of literature, in this case, contemporary American memoir,
examining the ways in which recent American memoirists represent themselves through prose and the choices they make in shaping their life stories. Given the
techniques shared by novelists and memoirists, how firm is the line between fiction and non-fiction? What are the sources of a memoirist's authority? What are
the ethics of memoir-writing? What kind of relationships do memoirists seek with their readers, and how do they go about achieving them?
Format: seminar. Requirements: several short essays, with drafts and revisions, in-class presentations, written comments on published and student work, active
participation in discussions. No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 12). Preference given to first-year students who have not taken or placed out of a
100-level English course, and to students with a history of difficulty with written expression.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR K. SHEPARD
200-LEVEL COURSES
ENGL 201(F) What Shakespeare's Heroes Learn
We've come to expect that the heroes of Shakespeare's tragedies learn something. Othello, Lear, Hamlet, MacBeth, and all the others, are supposed to achieve
some kind of clarifying self-knowledge as a reward for their terrible suffering. After all, the heroes' flaws are revealed and their delusions are exposed so that they
can eventually understand what has happened to them and why. They are meant to learn from their suffering. Or so we'd like to think. But the plays don't always
136
cooperate with our desire for some compensating enlightenment. We don't always come away with a clear sense that Shakespeare's tragic heroes have arrived at a
true self-recognition; in other words, they don't always fully grasp how their fate is implicated in their character. Nor can we say that we are granted an obvious,
edifying moral to compensate for the misery we witness. What, then, do we discover at the end of a Shakespeare tragedy?
Format: lecture. Requirements: class participation, two 5- to 7-page papers, several short writing assignments, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: a 100-level English course or advanced standing in English. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 35). No preference.
(Pre-1700, LH-A)
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF DE GOOYER
ENGL 202(S) Modern Drama (Same as Comparative Literature 202 and Theatre 229)
An introduction to some of the major plays written between 1885 and 2000, and to key movements and developments in drama of the period. We will chart the
rise of late-nineteenth century Realism and Naturalism, the sometimes revolutionary shifts in theatrical practice which occurred with the advent of Modernism,
and the ways theatre has evolved more recently to assert its continuing artistic, social and political relevance. We will attend closely throughout both to historical
and literary contexts, and to the changing conceptions of artistic function operative for the writers we consider. Readings will include plays by Ibsen, Wilde,
Chekhov, Shaw, Pirandello, Brecht, Beckett, Miller, Pinter, Churchill, Stoppard and McDonagh.
Format: lecture. Requirements: two 5-page papers, regular journal entries or postings, a final exam, and active participation in class discussions.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 35 (expected: 35). Preference given to English and Theatre majors.
(Post-1900, LH-C)
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR PETHICA
ENGL 204(F) The Feature Film (Same as Comparative Literature 221)
An introduction to film narrative. Emphasis will be on the formal properties of film as a medium for telling stories, but attention will also be given to theoretical
accounts of the nature of cinema, to genre, and to film history. Students will view films by directors such as Keaton, Kurosawa, Hitchcock, and Jonze. Critical
readings will be assigned.
Format: lecture with smaller discussion sections.
Requirements: one or two short written exercises; one six-page paper; a midterm and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 70 (expected: 70). Preference given as follows: (1) English and Comparative Literature majors; (2) sophomores; (3) junior
non-majors; (4) senior non-majors; (5) first-year students.
(Post-1900, LH-C)
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Conference: TBA ROSENHEIM and KLEINER
ENGL 211(S) British Literature Middle Ages through Renaissance
A survey of the major figures and movements of English literature through the first part of the seventeenth century: Beowulf, Chaucer, Marlowe, Spenser, Shake-
speare, Donne, and others. The goal of the course is a critical and historical understanding of the English literary tradition, with practice in close reading and
critical writing.
Format: seminar. Requirements: class participation, two 5- to 7-page papers, several short writing assignments, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: a 100-level English course. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 10-15). No preference.
(Pre-1700, LH-A)
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR KNOPP
ENGL 214 Playwriting (Same as Theatre 214) (Not offered 2010-2011) (W)
(See under THEA 214 for full description.) HOLZAPFEL
ENGL 216(S) Introduction to the Novel
A team-taught lecture course on the development of the novel as a literary form. Texts include: Henry Fielding's Tom Jones; Jane Austen's Emma; Charles
Dickens' Great Expectations; James Joyce's A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man; William Faulkner's The Sound and the Fury; Vladimir Nabokov's Lolita;
and Toni Morrison's Beloved. Occasional sessions will be scheduled during the term for informal discussions and questions.
Format: lecture. Requirements: midterm and final exams, one critical essay, and one quiz.
Prerequisites: any 100-level English course. Enrollment limit: 100 (expected: 100). Preference given to students who have pre-registered for the course. Thereaf-
ter, seniors, then juniors, sophomores, and first-years.
(Post-1900, LH-C)
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF FIX and RHIE
ENGL 217(F) Experimental Asian American Writing (Same as American Studies 215 and Comparative Literature 215)
(See under AMST 215 for full description.) WANG
ENGL 231(F,S) Literature of the Sea (Same as Maritime Studies 231) (W) (Offered only at Mystic Seaport.)
(See under MAST 231 for full description.) First Semester: BERCAW-EDWARDS
Second Semester: KING
ENGL 234(S) The Modern Theatre: Plays and Performance (Same as Comparative Literature 248 and Theatre 248)
(See under THEA 248 for full description.) BAKER-WHITE and ERICKSON
(Post-1900)
ENGL 236 Visible Culture: Documentary and Nonfiction (Same as Anthropology 225) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under ANTH 225 for full description.) D. EDWARDS
ENGL 238(S) Racial Formations and Transformations in America: 1945-Present (Same as American Studies 238) (D)
(See under AMST 238 for full description.) UM
ENGL 241(S) Introduction to Comparative Literature (Same as Comparative Literature 110)
(See under COMP 110 for full description.) C. BOLTON
ENGL 244 First-Hand America (Same as American Studies 108) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under AMST 108 for full description.) CLEGHORN
ENGL 253(S) Gender, Sexuality and the Modern Stage (Same as Theatre 250 and Women and Gender Studies 250) (W) (D)
(See under THEA 250 for full description.) HOLZAPFEL
ENGL 255(F) Race(ing) Sports: Issues, Themes and Representations of Black Athletes (Same as Africana Studies 217) (D)
(See under AFR 217 for full description.) BRAGGS
ENGL 261T Adultery in the Nineteenth-Century Novel (Same as Comparative Literature 259T and Women's, Gender and Sexuality
Studies 259T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under COMP 259 for full description.) CASSIDAY
(1700-1900)
ENGL 266T Postmodernism (Same as Comparative Literature 231T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
(See under COMP 231 for full description.) C. BOLTON
(Criticism)
137
ENGL 269(F) Introduction to African Literature: Witness Literature (Same as Africana Studies 205)
(See under AFR 205 for full description.) FORMA
ENGL 271 Religion and the Modern Literary Imagination (Same as Comparative Literature 271 and Religion 271) (Not offered
2011-2012) (W)
(See under REL 271 for full description.) HAMMERSCHLAG
ENGL 286(S) After Nature (Same as Environmental Studies 285) (W)
(See under ENVI 285 for full description.) KOLBERT
ENGL 287 Topics in Asian American Literature (Same as American Studies 283) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under AMST 283 for full description.) WANG
GATEWAY COURSES
200-level "Gateway" courses are designed for first- and second-year students contemplating the major or intending to pursue more advanced
work in the department; these courses focus on analytical writing skills while introducing students to critical and historical approaches that
will prove fruitful in later courses. (Note: a Gateway course can fulfill a Period or Criticism requirement as well as a Gateway require-
ment. Students contemplating the English major are strongly urged to take a Gateway course by the end of Sophomore year.)
ENGL 215(F) Imagining Immigrants (Gateway) (D) (W)
The goal of this course is two--fold: to become more responsive readers of literature and more empathetic readers of cultural differences. As Othello and Antony
and Cleopatra demonstrate, the conflicts, anxieties, and vulnerabilities faced by today's immigrants have a long history. Moving physically from one culture to
another but remaining imaginatively torn between their adopted country and their country of origin, feeling at times like a stranger to both, immigrants face
questions that concern us all in our increasingly global society, questions of identity, liminality, alienation, empathy, and language. Bombarded by a language that
is not their own, immigrants are constantly thinking about what words mean both literally and symbolically. Why this word rather than another? How do humor
and irony work in a foreign culture? How do writers reconcile the pressures of the present moment with the stream of memories from the old country? How is one
person's point of view, or one society's point of view, different from another's? How can metaphors convey the experience of constantly seeing an object, or an
entire world, in terms of another? In addition to Shakespeare's Othello and Antony and Cleopatra, we will read imaginative non-fiction, short stories, novels,
poems, and films such as Vladimir Nabokov's Pnin, Cristina Garcia's Dreaming in Cuban, Nicole Krauss's The History of Love, Li-Young Lee's Rose, selections
from Maxine Hong Kingston's The Woman Warrior and Jhumpa Lahiri's The Interpreter of Maladies, and Stephen Frear's Dirty Pretty Things. This course
explores differences and similarities between cultures and societies in the modern world, and between the modern world and the past.
Format: seminar/discussion. Requirements: four short formal essays plus informal journal entries.
Prerequisites: a 100-level English course. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected:19 ). Preference given to first-year students who have taken a prior English course, or
who have a 5 on the AP exam, sophomores, and English majors who have yet to take a Gateway; open to first-year students.
(Post-1900)
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR I. BELL
ENGL 222T(F) Lyric Poetry (Gateway) (W)
What do poems do? How do poems work and play? How do poems challenge and reward attentive scrutiny? What does close, sustained reading enable us to
think, feel, and say about a poem? This tutorial considers works by Frost, Yeats, Keats, Bishop, Tennyson, Donne, Milton, and Shakespeare. The course is writing
intensive, requiring six analytic papers, to be discussed and critiqued in weekly tutorial sessions. Students will also memorize passages and read aloud, to hear as
well as see what is happening. The goals are to encourage subtler, richer responses to poetry, to expand appreciation and enjoyment, and to develop analytic and
interpretive capacity. Format: tutorial. Requirements: six short essays and weekly tutorial meetings.
Prerequisites: a 100-level English course or advanced standing in English. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). No preference given.
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. R. BELL
ENGL 226(F) Irish Revivals (W) (Gateway)
This course will focus on Irish literature between about 1800 and 1940 as a case study in the way history, culture and politics interact in the formation of a
distinctive literary tradition. We will begin with an overview of the literature of the Gaelic and early colonial periods, and briefly consider texts from the Irish
Revival of c.1800-1830, during which the problems of Irish cultural self-definition in a colonial context-the effort to assert "Irishness" as an identity distinct from
Englishness--became sharply outlined. Our principal focus, though, will be on the Irish Renaissance of c.1890-1925, during which Irish writing in the English
language became firmly established as a canon clearly separate from the English tradition, and writers such as Yeats and Joyce achieved international renown.
Readings will include drama, poetry, fiction and non-fiction prose by Yeats, Synge, Joyce, George Moore, George Bernard Shaw, Lady Gregory, Sean O'Casey
and others. We will foreground key fault-lines of the period--competing visions of "authentic" Irish identity; debate over the propriety of writing in English,
drawing on English literary traditions, or seeking a non-Irish audience; the work of "self-exiles" such as Shaw and Joyce, versus that of writers who stayed in
Ireland; and the long-entrenched ideological and political tensions between Catholics and Protestants, and landowners and tenants--all the while considering the
functions and efficacy of literature itself in promoting cultural and/or political change. The course will conclude by considering the extraordinary vitality of
current Irish literary culture, with readings of work by Seamus Heaney and discussion of Neil Jordan's film The Crying Game. Key considerations here will be the
ways traditional notions of Irish Nationalism and national identity have been revised or abandoned under the impact of independence, economic prosperity,
contemporary sexual politics and other forms of recent cultural change.
Format: seminar. Requirements: four papers (3-4 pages for the first, rising to 6-8 pages for the last), several short journal-style writing assignments; active partici-
pation in discussions.
Prerequisites: a 100-level English course. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to first-year students, sophomores, and English majors who have
not yet taken a Gateway course.
(Post-1900, LH-C)
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR PETHICA
ENGL 230(S) Introduction to Literary Theory (Same as Comparative Literature 240) (Gateway) (W)
In this course we will debate the nature of literary meaning and explore the engagement of literature, theory, and culture. In thefirst half of the course we read Paul
De Man, Stanley Fish, and other critics as we ask questions such as, What determines the meaning of a text? Can an interpretation of a literary work be deemed
true or false? In the second half of the course, we will read major books of criticism and theory by authors including Frantz Fanon, Michel Foucault, and Judith
Butlerand as we investigate therole of art in the construction and transformation of political subjectivities. The emphasis will be on exploring anddefending
arguments on the issues in productive discussion and frequent short papers.
Format: discussion/seminar. Requirements: several short papers amounting to 20 pages of writing and an in-class presentation.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course; open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to first-year students, sophomores,
English majors who have yet to take a Gateway, and potential Comparative Literature majors.
majors.
(Criticism) CRAAS
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR DAVIS
ENGL 233(S) Great Big Books (Same as Comparative Literature 283) (Gateway) (W)
Some of the greatest novels are really, really long-so long that they are too seldom read and taught. This course takes time to enjoy the special pleasures of novels
of epic scope: the opportunity to immerse oneself in a wide and teeming fictional world; to focus sustained attention on the changeable fortunes of characters and
societies over a long span of time; to appreciate the detailed grounding of lives in their social environment and historical moment; to experience the leisurely and
urgent rhythms, with their elaborate patterning of build-ups and climaxes, that are possible in such works. We will read but two novels, both preoccupied with the
disruption and evolution of lives and loves at moments of historic upheaval: War and Peace (1869), Leo Tolstoy's epic of the Napoleonic Wars, and Parade's End
(1924-28), Ford Madox Ford's modernist masterpiece about World War I and its traumatic impact on English social life. Set a century apart, the novels are
distinguished by vivid and scrupulous representation of their respective wars, by their shrewd accounts of political and social pressures informing the crises, and
by their insight into the struggles of those whose lives are engulfed in global crisis. Tolstoy's and Ford's approaches to fictional representation, however, provide
intriguing contrasts: one favors the lucidity of classic realism, the other the challenges of modernist innovation; one deploys a single multiplot novel, the other a
tetralogy of shorter novels developing a single plot. We will discuss the differing strategies and effects of these two approaches, as well as the more general
difficulties of reading and interpreting long fiction.
138
Format: discussion/seminar. Requirements: four short essays, as well as a revision and extension of one of these.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected 19). Preference to first- and second-year students and majors who have yet to
take a Gateway.
(1700-1900 or Post-1900, LH-B)
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF TIFFT
ENGL 235(S) Comedy/Tragedy (Same as Comparative Literature 238) (Gateway) (W)
"Tragedy is when I cut my finger. Comedy is when you fall down an open manhole cover and die." Critics have long sought to define comedy and tragedy against
each other, yet, as Mel Brooks' joke suggests, the relationship between the two is complicated, even disturbing. In this course we will read tragedies by Sophocles
and Racine, comedies by Shakespeare and Molire, and works that do not easily fit either classification by Chekhov, Beckett and Stoppard. We will consider how
in different periods the distinction between the two forms has been understood and their antithetical effects accounted for. We will discuss the essential if also
problematic link between suffering and pleasure, and ask why it is that comedy persists while tragedy, at least in its classical expression, no longer seems possible.
Critical readings will include Aristotle's Poetics, Nietzsche's The Birth of Tragedy, and Bergson's Laughter.
Format: seminar. Requirements: four or five short essays, including at least one revision; there will also be periodic film screenings.
Prerequisites: a 100-level English course. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19. Preference given to first-year students, sophomores, and English majors who have
yet to take a Gateway.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF KLEINER
ENGL 237(F) Gender and Desire 1200-1600 (Same as Comparative Literature 237 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 237)
(Gateway) (W) (D)
The celebration of "courtly love" by medieval and Renaissance writers institutionalized the notion of the desiring male subject and the desired female object that
continues to reverberate in contemporary culture. But early writers do not always, or even usually, endorse these positions uncritically, and even works that
elevate heterosexual love devote surprisingly large spaces to other kinds of desire. What does it mean, for example, that the fountain of Narcissus occupies the
center of the garden of courtly love in the Romance of the Rose? That despite the Lover's proclaimed desire to "possess" the Rose, it is the male God of Love he
kisses on the mouth? Shakespeare's comedies end famously with triple and quadruple marriages, but how should we read the cross-dressing and gender confu-
sion that occupy so much of the plots beforehand? As we explore these and other issues, we will supplement our literary readings with theoretical texts drawn
from medieval and Renaissance treatises as well as contemporary feminist, psychoanalytic, and queer theory. The goal of the course is to sharpen critical reading
and writing skills across a broad range of literary forms and historical, cultural and aesthetic values. As part of the Exploring Diversity Initiative, this course
focuses on relationships between same-sex and heterosexual desire in a variety of major pre- and early modern works, and in the analyses of contemporary critics
who undertake to explain (or explain away) the same-sex desire in them. In doing that, of course, we explore our own values and assumptions in a much longer
historical context than usual.
Format: seminar. Requirements: class participation, four or five papers of varying lengths involving a total of 20-25 pages of writing.
Prerequisites: a 100-level English course. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to (in order): first-year students, sophomores who have not taken
a Gateway course, upper-class majors who have not taken a Gateway, prospective Comparative Literature majors.
(Pre-1700, LH-A)
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF KNOPP
ENGL 240(S) The Novel in Theory (Same as Comparative Literature 239) (W) (Gateway)
In spite of its title, this is not a course about merely theoretical novels, novels unwritten or dreamily imagined works of fiction that never see the page. Rather, this
course will be an introduction to the different ways that literary critics have attempted to give a literary genre as loose, baggy, miscellaneous, and altogether
hard-to-pin down as the novel a theoretical framework to understand how the genre developed and how it functions. For the first couple of centuries of its exis-
tence in Britain and America, the novel was considered too popular, too commercial and unserious, and not sufficiently stylistically accomplished to merit any-
thing like its own dedicated criticism or theory, and even now, critics can have a hard time even agreeing upon what a novel is, much less what constitutes a theory
of the novel. Henry James, for example, said a novel's only duty was "to be interesting," which, when you think about it, really casts a pretty broad and abstract
generic net. Today, novel theory is legion. To only name a few, one can find theories of the novel that identify themselves as formalist, psychoanalytic, post-struc-
turalist, Marxist, historical, and post-colonial, as well as accounts that emphasize sexuality and gender, for example, or the novel's trans-national development.
Rather than try to for an encyclopedic survey of either the novel or its theories, this course will use two or three novels as a means of test driving a range of
representative works of novel theory. We will move back and forth from the theory of the novel to its practice in order to see how novel theory has developed over
the past century, as well to see how the novel's own academic and popular fortunes relate to its theoretical accounts. Theorists are likely to include James, Shklov-
sky, Benjamin, Lukacs, Barthes, Watt, McKeon, Jameson, D.A. Miller, Sedgwick, and Said.
(Criticism)
Format: seminar. Requirements: 4-5 papers; regular and considered participation.
Prerequisites: 100-level course, or 5 on the English AP. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to English majors.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF MCWEENY
ENGL 258(F) Poetry and the City (Gateway) (W)
In this course we will consider poems generated out of the experiences of urban life. The city provides for poets a vivid mental and imaginative landscape in
which to consider the relation of vice and squalor to glamour; the nature of anonymity and distinction; and the pressure of myriad bodies on individual conscious-
ness. We will explore ways in which the poet's role in the body politic emerges in representations of the city as a site both of civilized values and/or struggles for
power marked by guile and betrayal. Taking into account the ways in which cities have been transformed over time by changing social and economic conditions,
we will consider such issues as what the New York of the 1950s has to do with the London of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, and why poetry as
a genre might be particularly suited to representing the shifting aspects of urban life. Poets will include Dante, Pope, Swift, Blake, Wordsworth, Whitman,
Baudelaire, Arnold, Yeats, Crane, Moore, Auden, Hughes, Bishop, Ginsberg, Baraka, and Ashbery. We will also draw on essays by Simmel, Benjamin, Williams,
and Canetti, photographs by Hines, Weegee, and Abbott; the blues, as sung by Holliday and Vaughan; and films such as Man with a Movie Camera, Rear
Window, and Breathless.
Format: discussion/ seminar. Requirements: four or five short essays, including at least one revision.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to sophomores and English majors who have yet to take a Gate-
way.
(1700-1900 or Post-1900, LH-B)
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR SOKOLSKY
ENGL 262(S) (formerly 356) Confession and Catharsis in the Poetry of Sylvia Plath and Ted Hughes (Same as Women's, Gender and
Sexuality Studies 262) (Gateway) (W)
Ted Hughes's publication of Birthday Letters in January, 1998, was portrayed in the press and reviews as breaking a 35-year silence on his wife Sylvia Plath's
suicide in 1963. What made this volume of poems a bestseller was its confessional and biographical drama. Hughes addresses his dead spouse and returns to all of
the major events in their shared life, simultaneously exposing his feelings and intuitions about what went wrong in their marriage and why Plath was driven to
take her life. Less evident to the general reading public was that Birthday Letters extends a dialogue between Plath and Hughes on the nature of poetry and poetic
identity that began in their courtship. Plath felt that Hughes initiated her into a strong feminine voice, and she, in turn, was responsible for introducing Hughes's
poems, perceived as infused with violence and virility, to an American audience. The poems that made Plath famous posthumously, however, were written in
response to her separation from Hughes and to his extramarital affair, and were collected in a volume titled Ariel that was altered by Hughes and published after
her death. This course will explore the Plath-Hughes marriage, both biographically and poetically. Topics may include: the conflict between Plath's confessional
sensibility and Hughes's sense of her intrusion on their private life; the role of biography generally in literary interpretation; the vilification of Hughes by feminists
and the impact they had on both his poetry and the way he published Plath's poems, journals, and novel; and the extent to which some of Hughes's final publica-
tions constitute "having the last word" on both personal and poetic disagreements with his dead wife.
Format: discussion/seminar. Requirements: class participation, four or five papers of varying lengths including one revision, and occasional oral reports..
Prerequisites: a 100-level English course. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference to sophomores who have not taken a gateway.
(Post-1900 or Criticism)
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR BUNDTZEN
ENGL 265(S) Topics in American Literature: Reason and Feeling in the American Eighteenth Century (Gateway) (W)
Of course the eighteenth century was the Age of Reason, dominated by careful and abstract thinking. But it's also an era riven by the untrammeled energy of the
emotions, from the romantic passions and violent rages represented in the era's fiction to the religious ecstasies of the Great Awakening. What do we mean by
reason and feeling? How can their mutual inflections, even collisions, be reckoned with? How are commitments to the universal lived out in the sway of daily
139
life's emotions? We will examine such concerns through considerations of how eighteenth century Americans negotiated (with varying success) their commit-
ment to a public sphere of civic debate and the instability of personal life in a time marked by increasing geographic mobility, sexual permissiveness, and the
revolution's daunting rejection of established authority. Among our readings will be consideration of the intertwining of theology and religious feeling in Jonathan
Edwards; the republicanism and also the cunning of Benjamin Franklin; the tormented ratiocinations in Charles Brockden Brown's psychologically lurid novels;
Susannah Rowson's landmark novel of seduction; and the disintegration of agrarian republicanism into violence and fear in John Hector St. John de Crvecouer.
Format: seminar/discussion. Requirements: 4 papers.
Prerequisites: a 100-level English course. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to sophomores considering the English major.
(1700-1900, LH-A)
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR DAVIS
ENGL 267(S) The Art of Satire (W) (Gateway)
Satire became especially prominent as an art form in the late seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, in the writings of John Dryden, Alexander Pope, Jonathan
Swift, Henry Fielding, and Jane Austen. In our own time, there has been a resurgence of satire, in films such as "Monty Python and the Holy Grail," "Dr. Strange-
love," and recent practitioners of the art, such as Stephen Colbert, Jon Stewart, Sasha Baron Cohen as "Borat," Ricky Gervais, The Onion.
This Gateway course will study in detail select satires, with emphasis on language and style, values and attitudes, humor and offensiveness.
Format: seminar. Requirements: six short essays and participation in discussions.
Prerequisites: a 100-level English course or Advanced Placement in English. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to potential English majors
who have not yet had a Gateway.
(1700-1900, LH-B)
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF Conference: R. BELL
300-LEVEL COURSES
ENGL 301T(F) Four American Poets (Same as American Studies 303) (W)
This course offers an in-depth study of four poets: 19th century poet Walt Whitman; modernist William Carlos Williams; and Robert Creeley (b. 1926), a poet
often associated with the Black Mountain poets; and Amiri Baraka (b. 1934), one of the founders of the Black Arts movement of the 1960s. Insofar as these poets
share an absorption with the challenge of poetically representing real people, everyday speech, physical place and political imperative, we will consider the
questions of influence and inheritance, especially in respect to formal innovation. Our inquiry into the work of these poets will grow out of the consideration of
two problems: first, what Whitman called the problem of "contact" with the world and, second, what poet Charles Olsen described as the primacy of the ear and
the breath. For example: How do Whitman's unprecedented long lines anticipate and give rise to the stair-stepping units of Williams, the fragmented phrases of
Creeley, and the staccato fire of Baraka? While our primary focus will be poetry, the course will also consider representative, extra-poetical work of each writer:
Whitman's prose in Specimen Days, Williams's multi-volume prose/poetry collage, Paterson; Creeley's letters and his collaborative work with visual artists; and
Baraka's plays. If students are interested and time allows we may explore the further influence of these poets in contemporary spoken word poetry and hip hop.
Format: ttutorial. Evaluation based on the writing of and critical response to weekly 5-page papers..
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course, except 150. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to English majors.
(Post-1900, LH-C)
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. CLEGHORN
ENGL 302(S) Shakespeare and Freud (Same as Comparative Literature 300)
Although Freud's commentary on Shakespeare takes the form of scattered insights rather than systematic analysis, his influence on both critics and performers of
Shakespeare's plays has been wide-reaching. In the opinion of critic Harold Bloom, "What we think of as Freudian psychology is really a Shakespearean inven-
tion, and, for the most part, Freud is merely codifying it." Freud himself famously claimed, "Not I, but the poets discovered the unconscious," and perhaps his
most controversial theory, the Oedipus complex, was based first on Sophocles' play and then extended to illuminate the character of Hamlet. We will use several
readings from Freud--not only his comments on Shakespeare--to explore characters, plots, and their psychological impact on the spectator. Readings will in-
clude such topics as fetishism, jealousy, incestuous desire, dream interpretation, sadism and masochism, the superego and guilt, the repetition compulsion,
mourning and melancholia, and the Madonna-whore complex. This seminar is intended for upperclass students that are already confident readers of Shakespeare.
No prior knowledge of Freud is necessary. We will be reading six plays: Hamlet, Othello, King Lear, Macbeth, Measure for Measure, and either The Merchant of
Venice or A Midsummer Night's Dream. There will be two short papers (3-5 pages) on specific assignments, and one longer essay (8-10 pages) on a topic of the
student's creation in consultation with me.
Format: discussion/seminar. Requirements: active participation in class with occasional responsibility for leading discussion; three papers varying in length from
3-10 pages.
Prerequisites: a 100-level English class; not open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 15-20). Preference given to none.
(Pre-1700 or Criticism, LH-A)
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR BUNDTZEN
ENGL 303(F) Medieval East and West: Travel, Holy War, Storytelling (Same as Arabic 303 and Comparative Literature 315) (D)
It is frequently noted that the contemporary divide between the European West and the Arab East began as far back as the Crusades. At the same time, however,
the intellectual traditions of the European West are unimaginable without the influences of Arab learning. While the largest Christian library in the 10th century
contained a mere 400 volumes, the largest library (of 70) in Cordoba contained 600,000 volumes, and the library in Cairo contained 2 million. European scholars
traveled not only to Sicily and al-Andalus, but to Baghdad and Cairo as well, to study science, medicine, philosophy, and literature. This course will explore the
ways in which medieval Muslims, Christians, and Jews depicted one another-sometimes in images of intractable otherness and sometimes in surprising negoti-
ations of otherness. Readings will include contemporary theoretical and critical texts by Edward Said and others; travel narratives by Marco Polo, John Mande-
ville, and Ibn Battuta; European epics about Christian-Muslim conflict (the Chanson de Roland and the Cantar de Mio Cid), Arab Crusade accounts by Ibn
Munqidh and the biographers of Saladin; and of course and especially storytelling traditions as exemplified in Nizami's Haft Pakayr, the Thousand and One
Nights, the Canterbury Tales, and the Decameron.
As part of the Exploring Diversity Initiative, this course involves sustained critical and theoretical explorations of the ways medieval Arabs, Chrsitians, and Jews
imagined the cultural "other" and in the course of doing so invented their own identities in terms that still linger powerfully today.
Format: seminar. Requirements: class participation, three short position papers, one long research paper of 12-15 pages.
Prerequisites: a 100-level English course; not open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 15). Preference given to junior and senior English and
Comparative Literature majors, and Middle East Studies concentrators.
(Pre-1700, LH-A)
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR KNOPP
ENGL 304(S) Dante (Same as Comparative Literature 317)
In the spring of 1300, Dante Alighieri entered Hell. The Divine Comedy is the record of the journey that followed. It is organized around a series of encounters
with figures from the poet's past--for example, a former teacher damned for violating nature--as well as historical and literary characters: Ulysses, Thomas
Aquinas, Plato, Virgil, Adam. Though the Comedy is probably now best known for its savagery--the bodies split open, the Popes turned upside down and lit on
fire--it is also, as Dante claims, a love story and a work of high imaginative daring. Among its final images is a vision of paradise rendered through the precise if
also mind-bending language of non-Euclidean geometry. In this course we will read the three books of the Comedy (Inferno, Purgatorio, Paradiso), the Vita
Nuova, and a few brief selections from Dante's other works. All readings will be in translation.
Format: seminar. Requirements: four written exercises, three exams, and a 10-page final paper.
Prerequisites: 100-level English course. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 20). Preference given to English majors.
(Pre-1700, LH-A)
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR KLEINER
ENGL 314(F) Groovin' the Written Word: The Role of Music in African American Literature (Same as Africana Studies 314, American
Studies 314, Comparative Literature 321, and Music 214)
(See under AFR 314 for full description.) BRAGGS
ENGL 315(S) Milton
The premise of this course is that Milton is the greatest of the English poets and Paradise Lost the greatest of English poems. The purpose of the course is to
persuade you that the premise is correct, by immersing students in his densely organized language, his imagined worlds of an earthly paradise, heaven, hell, and
the dark world after the fall, and the philosophical and theological problems that challenge the best readers. To prepare for our 6 weeks on Paradise Lost, we will
140
read some of Milton's early poems and prose, including Areopagitica, his ringing defense of freedom of expression, some of his political writings (to situate him
in the strenuous politics of church and state during the English Civil War), and his tract defending divorce (which reflects not only on his own life, but also on the
"marriage" of Adam and Eve). And we will conclude the course with three weeks on his other two great long poems, the magnificent and austere Paradise
Regained and Samson Agonistes, which continue Milton's radical redefinition of the classical ideas of heroism and constitute his parting words on the apparent
failure of the Puritan Revolution.
Format: discussion. Requirements: several 1-page assignments, a shorter paper and a longer paper; regular attendance and class participation.
Prerequisites: an English 100-level course; not open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 15).
(Pre-1700, LH-A)
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF DE GOOYER
ENGL 317(S) Black Migrations: African American Performance at Home and Abroad (Same as Africana Studies 317, Comparative
Literature 319, Dance 317 and Theatre 317)
(See under AFR 317 for full description.) BRAGGS
ENGL 318(S) Inscrutable Evil, or the Transformative Horror Film (Same as Comparative Literature 316) (W)
"Monsters are meaning machines," the critic Judith Halberstam has pointed out, and any number of scholars have noted the etymological connection between the
noun monster and the verb demonstrate: to show, to reveal.
Horror has been the most durable of film genres partially because it has continually pushed the limits of what's permissible in commercial filmmaking, and its
transgressive nature has insured its impact on such cultural conversations as the nature of evil or the measure of normality.
This course will consider a common type of horror film, in which the unspeakable is seen as at least temporarily invisible beneath the quotidian, as a way of
conceptualizing an instability of increasing social interest:
how the rational gives way to--and perhaps might always have masked--the monstrous; how, as Freud famously noted, the familiar and the shockingly unfamil-
iar can be seen to somehow coincide; and how a monster's inscrutability might speak to a culture's deep-seated anxieties concerning its own blind spots. To a
secondary extent, the course will also be a consideration of the features and formal properties of the genre itself.
Films to be studied will include John Robertson's Doctor Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, Alfred Hitchcock's Psycho, David Lynch's Eraserhead, David Cronenberg's The
Fly, George Sluizer's The Vanishing, Juan Carlos Fresnadillo's 28 Weeks Later, David Fincher's Zodiac, Jee-Woon Kim's A Tale of Two Sisters, and Tomas
Alfredson's Let the Right One In.
Format: seminar. Requirements: four short papers totaling more than twenty pages and in-class presentations.
Prerequisites: English 203 or 204 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19. Preference given to seniors and juniors.
(Post-1900)
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF J. SHEPARD
ENGL 319(S) Sensational Poetry
"If I feel physically as if the top of my head were taken off, I know that is poetry," writes Emily Dickinson. Lyric poems turn the most evanescent sensory
experiences into words, giving them a seductive materiality that we can hear, see, touch, taste, and smell. Lyric poems are personal and communal, immediate and
eternal, conversational and incantatory. "A poem begins with a lump in the throat," Robert Frost remarks, for "a complete poem is one where an emotion has
found its thought, and the thought has found the words." This course explores shifts in poetic conventions and material culture from Neoplatonic idealization to
sexual seduction, from manuscript transmission to print and internet. We will read reflections on poetry and the senses from Plato and Aristotle to Julia Kristeva
and Susan Stewart, and lots of sensational poetry by Renaissance, modern, and contemporary poets such as Philip Sidney, William Shakespeare, John Donne,
Ben Jonson, George Herbert, T. S. Eliot, Robert Frost, William Yeats, Richard Wilbur, Mark Strand, Louise Glck, Billy Collins, and Li-Young Lee.
Format: seminar. Requirements: final 10- to 12-page paper, journal entries, oral presentations, and active contributions to class discussion.
Prerequisites: 100-level English course or 5 on the AP exam. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 19). Preference given to English majors (and aspiring poets).
(Post-1900, LH-C)
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR I. BELL
ENGL 321(S) Samuel Johnson and the Literary Tradition
Johnson has been exceptionally influential not only because he was a distinguished writer of poems, essays, criticism, and biographies, but also because he was
the first true historian of English literature, the first who sought to define its "tradition." We will read Johnson's own works and Boswell's Life of Johnson to
discover Johnson's talents, tastes, and standards as an artist, as a moral and literary critic, and as a man. We next will use Johnson's Preface to Shakespeare and
Lives of the Poets to examine how this great intelligence assessed writers from the Renaissance through the eighteenth century. While reading his commentary on
Shakespeare and his critical biographies of Milton, Dryden, Pope, Swift, and Gray, we will analyze selected works by these writers so as to evaluate Johnson's
views and to sharpen our understanding of the relationships between his standards and our own.
Format: seminar. Requirements: midterm and final papers, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: any 100-level English course. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 22). Preference given to English majors.
(1700-1900, LH-A)
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF FIX
ENGL 328(F) Jane Austen and George Eliot (Same as Women's and Gender Studies 328)
Austen and Eliot profoundly influenced the course of the novel by making internal consciousness crucial to narrative form. In this course we will explore Austen's
innovative aesthetic strategies and the ways in which Eliot assimilated and transformed them. By placing each writer's work in its political and philosophical
context--in Austen's case, reactions to the aftermath of the French Revolution, in Eliot's, to the failed mid-century European revolutions and the pressures of
British imperialism--we will consider how each writer conceives social and historical exigencies to shape dramas of consciousness. Readings will include Aus-
ten's Pride and Prejudice, Emma, Mansfield Park, and Persuasion; Eliot's The Mill on the Floss, The Lifted Veil, and Daniel Deronda; selected letters and prose;
essays by Burke and Marx; and recent criticism. F
ormat: discussion/seminar. Requirements: two 8- to 10-page papers.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25).
(1700-1900, LH-B)
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W SOKOLSKY
ENGL 329(F) Cultures of War: U.S. Wars in Asia and American Culture (Same as American Studies 329)
(See under AMST 329 for full description.) UM
ENGL 333(S) The Nineteenth-Century British Novel (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 333)
Imagine this: a form of art and entertainment that purports to be able to represent everything-intimate, even inaccessible human thoughts and feelings, love, class,
the city, shopping, sexuality, bureaucracy, social bonds, industrialization, nationalism, even modernity itself. In this course we will try to understand the scope of
the nineteenth-century British novel's jaw-dropping representational aspirations: its claim to comprehend in its pages both the dizzying complexity of new social,
political, and economic structures, as well as delineate in finest detail the texture of individual minds and lives. We will pay attention to the fictional modes by
which apparently intractable social problems are resolved, through a sleight of hand act we seem never to tire of, in the realm of romantic love. And while we
might think of the novel as an Empire of the Little, endlessly occupied with giving significance to the smallest acts of ordinary human life, we will think about the
broader historical and social conditions the novel both represents in its pages, and is a crucial not-so-silent partner in promoting and contesting. We will also
interest ourselves in the kind of under- the-counter work the Victorian novel does on behalf of British empire, as well as empire's own behind-the-scenes work for
the novel. Since so many of these stories of everyday life seem as familiar to us as everyday life, we will work hard to maintain what is strange and specific about
the nineteenth century even as we recognize within these works the birth of so much that is modern in our own culture. Likely authors include: Austen, Scott,
Bront,, Dickens, Eliot, Braddon, and Forster.
Format: seminar/discussion. Requirements: heavy reading load, flexible writing requirements with options for journal, short papers, exam, and final long paper.
Prerequisite: 100-level English course or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 20). Preference given to English majors.
(1700-1900, LH-B)
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR CASE
ENGL 335T Manners, Modernity, and the Novel (Same as Comparative Literature 335) (Not offered 2007-2008) (W)
The novel, particularly in some of its nineteenth-century British iterations, has long been nearly obsessive with taste and good form, ceaselessly preoccupied
with the nicer aspects of social life and etiquette. Historians of the "rise of the novel," the period when novels took shape as Britain's signal cultural form, have
allied that development with the civilizing process itself, as if novels were what both keep us from killing each other at the dinner table, and from being so
141
uncouth as to use a fish fork to eat our salad. What's more, manners are at the heart of many of the novel's own central concern, and those concerns are some of
the most pressing ones of modernity: the nature of social authority amidst increasingly fluid notions of class, the role of taste in the discourse of aesthetics, and
the relation of civilization to the discontents it engenders (as Freud famously put it). This course will think about the 19th and early-20th-century novel's at times
manic interest in good social form, using this as a way of thinking about the novel's own formal development and cultural status, its increasingly self-conscious
sense of itself as no longer simply low entertainment, but something more refined as it enters the 20th century. We will read novels alongside discourses of style
and taste, ranging from the rise of etiquette books, to philosophical writing on aesthetics, ethics, and sociological theories of taste as an engine of social distinc-
tion. This class also will try to see how early theories of the novel are themselves grounded in social form, asking how manners in the novel became a manner of
speaking about the novel, with the idiom of tact and well-heeled form shaping the emergence of the professional study of the novel from the early in the 20th
century onward. We will ask how something seemingly as quaint as good manners becomes a means of registering, and contending with, the vicissitudes of
modernity in fiction, from the perfection of social form in Oscar Wilde to the calculated reticence of Henry James. Finally, though strange bedfellows Henry
James and Bret Easton Ellis may be, we will turn to one late 20th-century gothic version of the novel of manners, American Psycho, see what remains so
terrifying, and so novelistic, about the compulsion to keep up appearances. Novelists will include Jane Austen, William Makepeace Thackeray, Oscar Wilde,
Henry James, Edith Wharton, Bret Easton Ellis. Theorists will include Pierre Bourdieu, Theodor Adorno, and Erving Goffman among others.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: weekly papers and discussion.
Prerequisites: 300-level English course. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to English majors.
(1700-1900, LH-B)
MCWEENY
ENGL 336(F) Victorian Modernity
For the Victorians, modernity was a central preoccupation. They both marveled at and feared their culture's own quickened pulse and feverish delirium amidst a
world in which everything once solid seemed melting into air. With their deafening, crowded cities and queasy stomachs from the bone-shaking shock of railway
carriages, the Victorians put to themselves a question that this course will also take as its own: What does modernity feel like? Introducing students to some of the
major works and concerns of that huge portion of the nineteenth century over which Queen Victoria reigned, this course will chart the thrills and chills of the
Victorian world. Although the novel is the signal literary achievement of the era, we'll also read poetry, drama, and essays to gain a sense of the century's enor-
mous variety of literary production. Among our concerns will be the rise of commodity culture (shopping as we know it was invented by the Victorians); the
novel's part in the formation of Britain's vast empire; and how life in cities such as London gave rise to new forms of representation. We'll pay attention to how
these works transform stories of getting and spending (i.e. the pursuit of economic interests) into dramas of romantic desire (and vice versa), and how they work
both to uphold and overturn the social arrangements of gender, class, sexuality and race in nineteenth-century England. Because so many of the stories told by
these works are as familiar to us as everyday life--in fact, are crucial to the construction of what we now know as everyday life--we'll also work hard to maintain
what's strange and specific to the nineteenth century about these works even as we glimpse our own world's fun-house mirror reflection in them. Among the
authors likely to be studied: Charles Dickens, William Thackeray, Tennyson, Lewis Carroll, Oscar Wilde, Thomas Hardy, Joseph Conrad. To help ourselves with
this course's focus on a rather large concept, we will also read some more contemporary theorists of modernity.
Format: seminar. Requirements: 2 papers, regular and considered discussion in class.
Prerequisites: A 100- or 200-level English course, or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Preference given to English majors.
(1700-1900, LH-B)
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF MCWEENY
ENGL 338(S) Literature of the American Renaissance (Same as American Studies 338)
The 1840s and 50s are known as "the American Renaissance," a watershed in American literary history which includes Thoreau's Walden and Melville's Moby-
Dick, Emerson's essays and Hawthorne's fiction. It also includes major abolitionist writings by Frederick Douglass and Harriet Beecher Stowe, Poe's grotesque
tales, and the groundbreaking poetry of Walt Whitman and Emily Dickinson. We will explore this essential period by inquiring into the ways these authors figure
emotion, experience, and, identity, both personal and national. We will also consider the belief in the transformational power of language shared by the majority of
our authors, and the strategies they developed in their efforts to call themselves and the nation into new forms of being.
Format: discussion/seminar. Requirements: class participation, two essays, and a 24-hour take-home final examination.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Preference given to Englishand American Studies majors.
(1700-1900, LH-B)
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR DAVIS
ENGL 339(F) Faulkner and His Influence
William Faulkner was a great writer in two ways. First, he was the most interesting formal innovator of all the novelists of American modernism (as in The Sound
and the Fury and As I Lay Dying). Second, he was a strange and provocative theorist of race (as in Go Down, Moses and Absalom, Absalom!). We shall consider
both of these dimensions of Faulkner, and what they have to do with each other. Then we shall take up one or more novelists in the Faulkner tradition.
Format: seminar. Requirements: one 5- to 8-page paper and one 8- to 10-page paper..
Prerequisites: a 100-level English course; not open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). No preferences.
(Post-1900)
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR LIMON
ENGL 341(F) American Genders, American Sexualities (Same as Women's and Gender Studies 341) (D)
This course investigates how sexual identities, desires, and acts are represented and reproduced in American literary and popular culture. Focusing on two cultur-
ally rich periods--roughly 1880-1940 (when the terms "homosexual" and "heterosexual" came to connote discrete sexual identities), and on the last twenty
years--we will explore what it means to read and theorize "queerly." Among the questions we will ask: What counts as "sex" or "sexual identity" in a text? Are
there definably lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender or queer writing styles or cultural practices? What does sexuality have to do with gender? How are sexual
subjectivities intertwined with race, ethnicity, class, and other identities and identifications? And why has "queerness" proven to be such a powerful and some-
times powerfully contested concept? We will also explore what impact particular historical events, such as the rise of sexology, the Harlem Renaissance, and the
emergence of a transgender movement have had on queer cultural production. Readings may include works by the following theorists--Almaguer, Butler, Sedg-
wick, Foucault, Freud, Hammond--as well as James's "The Beast in the Jungle," Stein's QED, Cather's "Paul's Case," Larsen's Passing, Fitzgerald's The Great
Gatsby, Diaz's "Drown," Feinberg's Stone Bitch Blues, and poetry by Lorde, Hughes, Pratt, and Rich, as well as screenings of contemporary videos and films
such as Looking for Langston and The Wedding Banquet.
This course meets the requirements of the Exploring Diversity Initiative in that it focuses on empathetic understanding, power and privilege, and critical theoriza-
tion, especially in relation to class, gender, sexuality, race and ethnicity within a U.S. context.
Format: discussion/seminar. Requirements: active class participation, several short writing assignments, two 5-page papers, and one 8- to 10-page paper.
Prerequisites: a 100-level English course. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Preference given to English majors and/or students interested in Gender/Queer
Studies.
(Post-1900 or Criticism, LH-C)
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF KENT
ENGL 345(F) Envisioning Blackness (Same as Africana Studies 344 and American Studies 345)
Historically, blackness has been an ideologically fraught mode of identity, a receptacle of meaning filled and refilled by various actors. From self-perceptions to
cultural icons and stereotypes, blackness has always been a welter of contestations, where memories bleed into dreams and nightmares shadow affirmations.
This course will examine how 19th and 20th-century artists, musicians, filmmakers, and writers have grappled in their works with American blackness. Though
we will focus primarily on the works of serious artists, we will also note the circulation of blackness through the various modes of popular culture. Visual artists
will include figures such as Thomas Eakins, Winslow Homer, Henry Ossawa Tanner, Jacob Lawrence, Romare Bearden, Faith Ringgold, David Hammonds, and
Kara Walker. Iconic musicians such as Louis Armstrong, Duke Ellington, Billie Holiday, Bessie Smith, Charles Mingus, James Brown, and Michael Jackson will
be considered alongside dancers and comedians, such as Bill "Bojangles" Robinson, Katherine Dunham, Alvin Ailey, Savion Glover, Redd Foxx, Moms
Mabley, Richard Pryor, and Dave Chappelle. Writers may include James Weldon Johnson, Zora Neale Hurston, Ralph Ellison, Amiri Baraka, and Toni Morrison.
Films such as Cabin in the Sky and Bamboozled will be analyzed, as well as cultural icons, such as Lena Horne, Muhammad Ali, and Malcolm X.
Format: seminar. Requirements: students will write a journal and a 15-page paper.
Prerequisites: A 100-level English course. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 10). Preference given to English majors, Africana Studies concentrators, upper class
students.
(Post-1900, LH-C)
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR D. L. SMITH
ENGL 349 Contemporary Drama and Performance (Same as Comparative Literature 355 and Theatre 345) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under THEA 345 for full description.) HOLZAPFEL
142
ENGL 356T(S) Feeling Queer: Theories of Emotion and Affect in Literary and Cultural Studies (Same as American Studies 356,
Comparative Literature 356 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 355) (W) (D)
Shame, pride, hope, rage, lust, depression: all of these feelings and others are proving to be exciting sites for rich readings of literary and cultural texts, analyses of
political movements and claims, and theories of subjectivity, temporality and affiliation. This tutorial will explore affect studies and its relation to queer theory; for
example, we may consider the historical emergence of the discourse of "gay pride" in the U.S. since the late sixties and its representations in literary and cultural
writings, or explore whether shared affects can create transhistorical connections between those who "feel queerly" (the feeling of gendered abjection, say, that
might link Stephen Gordon's narrative in The Well of Loneliness with contemporary transgender-identified autobiographies). We will also investigate the degree
to which affect theory challenges prominent accounts of the formation of raced, gendered, sexualized selves and how emotions influence or even produce politi-
cal movements and aesthetic creation. We will read key theoretical works in the field by such authors as Silvan Tompkins, Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick, David Eng,
Robert Reid-Pharr, Heather Love, Ann Cvetkovich, Jos E. Muoz, Sara Ahmed and Lee Edelman, and put them in dialogue with literary and cultural works, in
order to explore such issues as affect as affiliation; the distinction between public and private feeling; affective, temporal states of being such as (queer) childhood;
what it means to feel black and queer; and more in order to investigate how one might apply queer theories of affect to a set of aesthetic, political and inter- and
intrasubjective concerns.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: active participation, 5 tutorial papers, 5 responses, final project.
Prerequisites: English 100-level course. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to senior English and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies
majors.
Hour: TBA KENT
ENGL 360(F) James Joyce's "Ulysses"
This course will explore in depth the demanding and exhilarating work widely regarded as the most important novel of the twentieth century, James Joyce's
Ulysses, which both dismantled the traditional novel and revitalized the genre by opening up new possibilities for fiction. We will discuss the ways in which
compelling issues of character and theme (e.g., questions of heroism and betrayal, oedipal dynamics, sexuality and the politics of gender, civic engagement and
artistic isolation, British imperialism and Irish nationalism) are placed in counterpoint with patterns drawn from myth, theology, philosophy, and other literature,
and will consider the convergence of such themes in an unorthodox form of comedy. In assessing Ulysses as the outstanding paradigm of modernist fiction, we
will be equally attentive to its radical and often funny innovations of structure, style, and narrative perspective. In addition to Joyce's novel, readings will include
its epic precursor, Homer's Odyssey, as well as biographical and critical essays. Students unfamiliar with Joyce's short novel A Portrait of the Artist as a Young
Man, which introduces characters later followed in Ulysses, are urged to read it in advance of the course.
Format: discussion/seminar. Requirements: active participation in class discussions, a midterm exam, two papers, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Preference given to English majors.
(Post-1900)
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF R. BELL
ENGL 361(F) Nabokov and Pynchon
After a brief comparative study of their short stories, the course will focus on selected novels by each author. Texts include: Pnin, Lolita, and Pale Fire by Nabo-
kov; and, by Pynchon, The Crying of Lot 49, and Gravity's Rainbow (to which a substantial portion of the latter part of the course will be devoted).
Format: seminar. Requirements: midterm and final papers, and a take-home final exam.
Prerequisites: any 100-level English course. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Preference given to English majors.
(Post-1900)
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF FIX
ENGL 362(S) From "The Quiet Man" to "The Cripple of Inishmaan:" Irish literature after Yeats and Joyce
In the sixty years since Ireland officially became a Republic, the country has undergone extraordinary transformations: from a poor rural economy to the wealth of
the "Celtic Tiger;" from an ethnically and culturally insular Catholic state (in which censorship was routine), to an assertively outward-looking and increasingly
multicultural nation. This course will begin by considering the effects of decolonization and political independence, and the continuing influence of earlier cultur-
al nationalism, on the work of Irish writers of the 1940s through the 1960s, including texts by Kavanagh, Behan, Beckett and others. We will then turn to the
remarkably fertile literary and creative environment of recent years, in which Irish writers and filmmakers have renewed and extended the traditional concerns of
the Irish literary canon with an increasingly joyous embrace of influences from other traditions and of the hybridizing impacts of postmodernism. Our readings
will include poetry by Seamus Heaney, Evan Boland, Michael Longley, Derek Mahon, Medbh McGuckian, Paul Muldoon; plays by Brian Friel, Frank McGui-
ness, Martin McDonagh, Marina Carr; fiction by Samuel Beckett, James Plunkett, William Trevor, Edna O'Brien, Neil Jordan; the films The Quiet Man and Six
Shooter; and episodes of the scurrilous, iconoclastic T.V. comedy Father Ted.
Format: seminar. Requirements: two papers totaling about 14 pages, several short responses, active participation in discussion.
Prerequisites: a 100-level English course. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Preference given to English and Theatre majors.
(Post-1900, LH-C)
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR PETHICA
ENGL 363(F) Literature and Psychoanalysis (Same as Comparative Literature 340) (W)
(See under COMP 340 for full description.) NEWMAN
(Criticism)
ENGL 372T(S) American Modernist Fiction (Same as American Studies 372T) (W)
Modernism among writers began in the second half of the nineteenth century and continued through perhaps World War II; we shall concentrate on fiction from
around the 1920s, by such writers as Faulkner, Hemingway, Fitzgerald, Toomer, Cather, and Stein. Modernism tends to be difficult and elitist, though such writers
as Fitzgerald and Hemingway tried to make popular careers out of its methods. Its reception has always been controversial and paradoxical: modernism either
unleashes revolutionary thinking or displaces it (and either alternative may be its value); it either allows expression to repressed forms of sexuality or re-represses
them; it either registers new racial realities or is specifically designed to keep racial structures in place. In this tutorial we shall address both American modernist
fiction and its reception, and thus will conduct a continuing investigation of the relation of obscure meaning and imputed historical significance.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: five meetings of one hour every week; students will write papers every other week (five in all) of 5-7 pages, and will critique
papers in their off-weeks.
Prerequisites: 100-level English course; not open to first-year student. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to English majors.
(Criticism or Post-1900, LH-C)
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. LIMON
ENGL 373(S) Modern Critical Theory (Same as Comparative Literature 343)
In this course, we will explore the work of a range of contemporary theorists who have transformed our sense of what we do when we interpret texts. What sorts
of assumptions underlie our critical acts? What expectations --of pleasure, of ethical insight--charge these assumptions? By prompting such questions, these
theorists have transformed the critical landscape, leading us to re-think what is at stake in the act of reading, in the relation between aesthetics and political
thinking, and in our sense of what constitutes private, sexual, cultural and political experience. Our critical readings will be drawn from works by such theorists as
Jacques Derrida, Walter Benjamin, Theodore Adorno, Michel Foucault, Luce Irigaray, Frederic Jameson, Julia Kristeva, Alain Badiou, Georgio Agamben,
Aamir Mufti, Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick, and Judith Butler. We will pair these texts with literary ones by Marguerite Duras, George Eliot, Charles Baudelaire,
Thomas Mann, Franz Kafka, Jorge Luis Borges and Tony Kushner, and with films by William Wyler, Alfred Hitchcock, and Andre Tartovsky.
Format: discussion/seminar. Requirements: two 5-page, and a final 10-page paper.
Prerequisite: a 100-level English course. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25).
(Criticism)
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR SOKOLSKY
ENGL 374(S) Cities of the Anglophone Chinese Imagination (Same as American Studies 305, Asian Studies 305 and Comparative
Literature 303) (D)
(See under AMST 305 for full description.) WANG
ENGL 375 New Asian American, African American, Native American, and Latina/o Writing (Same as Africana Studies 403, American
Studies 403, Comparative Literature 375 and Latina/o Studies 403) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under AMST 403 for full description.) WANG
(Post-1900)
143
ENGL 380(S) The Art of Modern Crisis
The first half of the twentieth century was marked by extraordinary social and political upheaval. The same era witnessed a feverishly creative revolution in the
nature and the strategies of artistic representation. In this course we will examine what these two kinds of crisis have to do with one another: how a wide range of
startling innovations in literary and cinematic art may be seen as responses to the particular pressures of the historical crises they represent. Focusing mainly on
British and American instances, but also on works from France and Russia, we will study such diverse historical crises as the spread of anarchism around the turn
of the century; the Bolshevik revolution; the woman's suffrage movement and the emergence of the so-called "New Woman"; World Wars I and II; and the Cold
War. Novels, plays, poems and films will be studied for their distinctive, often dazzling aesthetic strategies for representing these crises, and will include such
works as Jarry's Ubu roi, Bely's Petersburg, Woolf's Mrs. Dalloway, poems of Owen and Sassoon, Ford's Parade's End, Eisenstein's Potemkin, Heller's
Catch-22, and Kubrick's Dr. Strangelove.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active participation in class discussions, two papers, and a final exam. About 15 pages of writing.
Prerequisite: a 100-level course except 150. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 15-20). Preference given to English majors.
(Post-1900, LH-C)
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR TIFFT
ENGL 386 From Hermeneutics to Post-coloniality and Beyond (Same as Comparative Literature 344 and Religion 304) (Not offered
2011-2012) (D)
(See under REL 304 for full description.) DREYFUS
(Criticism)
ENGL 389(F) The Fiction of Virginia Woolf (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 389)
"Let us record the atoms as they fall upon the mind in the order in which they fall, let us trace the pattern, however disconnected and incoherent in appearance,
which each sight or incident scores upon the consciousness. Let us not take it for granted that life exists more fully in what is commonly thought big than in what is
commonly thought small" ("Modern Fiction")
Virginia Woolf's fiction represents a self-conscious and highly experimental challenge to the conventions of Victorian and Edwardian fiction. This course will
explore the evolution of the innovative narrative techniques by which she tried to bridge the gap between the experience of consciousness and its representation in
language. Accompanying concerns will be Woolf's challenges to stable gender roles, her conception of the relationship of gender to creativity, and the ways in
which her powerful lyric impulses are reflected in her fiction. We will read most of the major novels, including The Voyage Out, Jacob's Room, Mrs. Dalloway, To
the Lighthouse, Orlando, The Waves, and Between the Acts, together with selected short fiction and critical essays. The course will be taught largely by discus-
sion.
Format: seminar. Requirements: weekly journal entries, one 5- to 7-page paper and one 10- to 12-page paper.
Prerequisites: 100 level English class; not open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 20). No preference.
(1700-1900, LH-B)
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M CASE
ENGL 392(F) Wonder (Same as Comparative Literature 392)
We tend to imagine "wonder" as a nave, wide-eyed response, something quite distinct from the cold and sophisticated act of critical analysis. In this discussion
class, we will consider wonder as an eminently analyzable concept, but one that raises provocative questions about the nature and limits of our own, distinctly
modern forms of critical engagement. The course examines three historical incarnations of "wonder," each involving complex relations among the aesthetic,
philosophical, and social domains: the Renaissance tradition on wonder and the marvelous; the eighteenth-century analysis of the sublime; and twentieth-century
accounts of the culture of spectacle. We will consider writers such as Shakespeare, Sir Thomas Browne, Wordsworth, Borges, and W.G. Sebald (all wonderful);
painters such as Leonardo and Vermeer, the photography of Andreas Gursky and Thomas Struth; films including Lang's Metropolis and Scott's Blade Runner;
and critical philosophical writers, including Aristotle, Descartes, Kant, and Walter Benjamin.
Format: seminar. Requirements: three papers totaling 20 pages.
Prerequisites: a 100-level English course. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Preference given to English and Comparative Literature majors.
(Pre-1700 or Criticism, LH-A)
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR PYE
ENGL 393(F) "The feel of not to feel it": Romanticism and Senselessness
This course engages what Keats calls "The feel of not to feel it" in British Romanticism. This class has two aims: to read fundamental Romantic texts carefully
and thoughtfully and to think about those texts' essential engagement with the feeling of not feeling. Keats' surprising phrase suggests that a lack of feeling can be
experienced as a feeling itself--that the absence of feeling is a perceptible sense. Understanding "sense" as both feeling and meaning, we will work to imagine a
mode of sense that opens out new possibilities for perception: it allows us to inhabit and feel senselessness. This class will explore the feeling of senselessness in
poetry and prose by Rousseau, Hlderlin, William Wordsworth, Dorothy Wordsworth, Coleridge, Clare, Keats, Shelley, De Quincy, Blake, and Austen. These
writers make of the feeling of not feeling a sustained linguistic investigation, and their work encourages us to ask: What does a lack of feeling feel like? What
happens when the traditional markers of sense become numb? What experiences become possible through the feeling of senselessness? In our work with Roman-
tic texts, we will consider senseless feeling in literary form to examine forms of thought that are themselves senseless, such as particular styles of narration and
poetic figures. Contemporary affect theories that address how emotionality, sensation, and embodiment influence the status of the feeling subject are important to
our enquiry, and throughout the semester we will read influential works of theory as part of our engagement with Romantic senselessness.
Format: seminar/discussion. Requirements: class participation, email responses to readings, two essays, one 5-8 pages, one 10-12 pages
Prerequisites: a 100-level English course. Open to first-year students with permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 25.
(1700-1900, LH-B)
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR JOOSTEN
ENGL 395(S) Transatlantic Entrancement
In Adventures on Salisbury Plain, Wordsworth writes of a traveler: "He fell and without sense or motion lay, / And when the trance was gone, feebly pursued his
way." This course considers nineteenth century British and American writing's preoccupation with trance states. Through an astute, lively engagement with
poetry and prose by Wordsworth, Blake, Coleridge, Shelley, Keats, Dickinson, Melville, Poe, Martineau, and Fuller and criticism that addresses conditions of
consciousness--how consciousness emerges, falters, recurs, imagines, and dreams--this class will work toward mapping the psychological, physiological, and
cultural phenomena of trances. We will explore lapses in consciousness, from sleep-walking and astonishment to reverie and mesmerism, to trace the effects of
trances on psychic and social development during the nineteenth century. Addressing the evolving politics of trance states as they move from Britain to America
and back again, this class will ask: What is one's relation to oneself and to others while entranced? What possibilities emerge in the suspension of autonomy and
agency? How do knowledge and power operate in trances? We will consider how trances influence feeling and thought, body and mind. And we will address the
implications of the different names trances are known by, such as animal magnetism, artificial somnambulism, automatic writing, and improvisational poetics, in
specific social and historical contexts.
Format: seminar/discussion. Requirements: class participation, email responses to readings, two essays, one 5-8 pages, one 10-12 pages.
Prerequisites: a 100-level English course. Open to first-year students with permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 25.
(1700-1900, LH-B)
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR JOOSTEN
400-LEVEL COURSES
On the aims of these courses, please see description at beginning of the English Department section of the catalog.
ENGL 404(S) History and Drama in Shakespeare's Henriad
Shakespeare's "Henriad" is the quartet of history plays: Richard II, Henry the Fourth, parts one and two, and Henry the Fifth. In this advanced course we will
consider each play in detail from several perspectives: as history, as theater, as literature. We'll learn about Shakespeare's sources and his uses of history in staging
extraordinary drama. We will view Orson Welles's film Falstaff: Chimes at Midnight and compare two rousing versions of Henry V by Laurence Olivier and
Kenneth Branagh. In the second half of the semester, each student will develop in individual consultations with the instructor a substantial critical essay. This is a
course for highly-motivated students seeking the experience of intense and sustained research and writing.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active participation and a substantial term paper.
Prerequisites: a course in Shakespeare or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 7). Preference given to the strongest students and the most
motivated students.
(Pre-1700, LH-A)
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR Conference: R. BELL
144
ENGL 409(F) Sublime Confusion: A Survey of Critical Theory (Same as Comparative Literature 401))
(See under COMP 401 for full description.) C. BOLTON
ENGL 410(S) American Avant Garde Poetry Since 1950 (Same as American Studies 410)
(See under AMST 410 for full description.) WANG
ENGL 414(F) Poetry and Prose of John Donne (W)
"Wit!--Wonder-exciting vigour, intenseness and peculiarity of thought," Samuel Coleridge wrote, "this is the wit of Donne!" There is no greater, more daring or
more witty writer of love poems, divine poems, or religious prose in the English language. Donne wrote in a wide variety of classical genres: elegy, epigram,
satire, love lyric, epithalamion or marriage song, verse epistle, holy sonnet, hymn, familiar letter, meditation, sermon. Yet he constantly reinvigorated convention-
al language with "new-made idiom," turning traditional forms to unpredictable ends.This intensive, discussion-oriented seminar will explore the following ques-
tions. What are the characteristics of Donne's style, and how does his writing evolve over his career? What was the impact of his coterie audience? How does
Donne woo his earthy lovers and God in and through verse? To what extent are biography and history pertinent or helpful in understanding Donne's writing?
What made Donne so appealing to T. S. Eliot and the modernists, and more recently, the post-modernists? What are the compelling issues in contemporary Donne
criticism?
Format: seminar/tutorial. Requirements: short journal entries and a final 15-page seminar paper.
Prerequisites: a 300-level English course or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15). Preference given to junior and senior English ma-
jors.
(Pre-1700, LH-A)
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR I. BELL
ENGL 424(F) Documentary Fictions (W)
Documentary Fictions investigates the various ways in which electric and electronic media have affected our sense of what's real, and the kinds of stories we tell
about the world and ourselves. Topics to be considered will include cinema and radio; digital photography; medical imaging; home video; and the radical person-
alization of media via the internet and other mobile devices. We'll explore the transformation of reference, the collapse of space, and changing notions of evi-
dence, in different generic contexts.
Format: seminar. Requirements: one long research paper; several exercises in different media.
Prerequisites: at least one 300-level English course, or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15). Preference given to senior majors; junior
majors; Studio Art majors; sophomores with permission of the instructor.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR ROSENHEIM
ENGL 430T(F) Hitchcock and Psychoanalytic Theory (W)
While Alfred Hitchcock is best known as the creator of many of Hollywood's most entertaining and enduringly popular movies, his films have also inspired a
large body of impressively searching theoretical and critical work, particularly in the field of psychoanalytic film criticism. In this tutorial, intended primarily for
upperclassmen who have already taken an introductory course in cinema as well as at least one upper-level English course, we will use several of Hitchcock's
films as the staging ground for explorations of psychoanalytic theory and its applicability to popular culture. We will not be concerned with applying psychoana-
lytic ideas to Hitchcock's life. Rather, we will explore the ways in which psychoanalytic models might illuminate the psychology and behavior of his characters,
the narrative structures of his films, and the nature and dynamics of a spectator's engagement with the films. Topics will include sadism and masochism, voyeur-
ism, the uncanny, fetishism, incest and oedipal conflict, repression, and the strange itineraries of desire. No prior knowledge of psychoanalytic theory is neces-
sary; this course is meant to serve in part as an introduction to Freudian theory. After a basic theoretical foundation has been laid, readings will focus on particular
psychoanalytic concepts and phenomena which have special relevance to a given film. A week's assignment will normally comprise one screening and a couple
of essays: for the most part, theoretical writings by Freud, but also including some contemporary feminist, queer, and film theory and criticism by such authors as
Jacques Lacan, Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick, Laura Mulvey, Tania Modleski, and Stephen Heath. Films to be studied will include Rebecca, Strangers on a Train,
Notorious, Spellbound, Shadow of a Doubt, Rear Window, Vertigo, and Psycho.
We will meet for two weeks as a group, then students will meet with the instructor in pairs for one hour each week, writing a paper every other week and a short
critique of their partner's paper in alternate weeks. Emphasis will be placed on developing skills not only in reading, viewing, and interpretation, but also in
constructing critical arguments and responding to them in written and oral critiques.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: five 5- to 6-page papers and five 1- to 2-page critiques.
Prerequisites: one 300-level English class, as well as English 203 ("Reading Films") or 204 ("The Feature Film"), or equivalent basic training in film analysis; or
permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to English majors.
(Criticism or Post-1900)
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. TIFFT
ENGL 450(S) Melville, Mark Twain, and Ellison (Same as Africana Studies 450) (D)
As an epigraph to his novel, Invisible Man, Ralph Ellison selects a quotation from Herman Melville's story, "Benito Cereno." In the prologue to Invisible Man,
Ellison invokes a sermon that appears briefly in the opening chapter of Moby-Dick. In his essays on comedy and American culture, Ellison comments trenchantly
on Adventures of Huckleberry Finn. Melville and Mark Twain were, in many obvious ways, as different as two writers can be. Nonetheless, they also have many
surprising similarities, and it is not difficult to understand why both are so important to Ellison.
This course will examine the novels, stories, and essays of these three writers, with particular attention to the themes that they have in common and to the traits that
make each of them distinctive. Race, slavery, epistemology, and the nature of American democracy are among those themes.
Format: seminar. Requirements: a journal and a 15-page paper.
Prerequisites: a 100-level English course. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 12). No preference.
(1700-1900, LH-B)
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF D. L. SMITH
CREATIVE WRITING COURSES
Students interested in taking a creative writing course should preregister and be sure to attend the first class meeting. Class size is limited; final selections will
be made by the instructor shortly after the first class meeting. Preregistration does not guarantee a place in the class. Students with questions should consult the
appropriate instructor.
ENGL 227(F) A Science Fiction and Fantasy-Writing Seminar
In this class the students will attempt to produce a genre short-story, or else a chunk of a longer narrative, every two weeks. It will be writing-intensive rather than
reading-intensive, though from time to time we might look at the odd piece of professional work, by way of example or inspiration, or as a source of stolen goods.
Mostly, though, we will be discussing our own stuff--original stories, or sketches for stories, or the occasional plot, character, or setting exercise. Passing the
course will require finishing at least three ten- to twenty-page stories, as well as numerous shorter assignments. A fair amount of work, in other words, although to
save time I'm hoping we can keep any analysis or interpretation to a strict minimum.
Format: seminar. Requirements: class participation, and regular assessment of written work.
Prerequisites: any 100-level English class. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 12). No preference.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR P. PARK
ENGL 257(S) The Personal Essay: Writing Workshop (W)
The personal essay as a literary form encompasses a wide range of genres including literary journalism, creative nonfiction and the lyric essay. Note the exclusion
of "memoir" or "autobiography" in this list. This course is NOT a course in memoir or autobiography. As we become more mindful of our particular points of
view (and of ways to exploit this subjectivity), we will turn the focus outside of ourselves. We will experiment with writing that is extro-- rather than introspec-
tive. While this is primarily a course in creative writing, we will give much of our time to literary analysis and imitation of exemplary essayists including Mon-
taigne, Thoreau, Woolf, Orwell, Baldwin, Agee, Didion, Dillard, McPhee, Baker, Eggers, Carson.
Format: discussion/writing workshop. Evaluation will be based upon class participation (critical engagement with assigned reading and with the work of peers)
and writing (regular, written responses to assigned reading; drafts and revisions of three polished essays).
Prerequisites: 100-level English course or AP equivalent. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 12). {Interested students should preregister for the course and come to
the first class meeting; selection will be based on writing samples.}
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR CLEGHORN
145
ENGL 232(F) The Art of the Long Story (W)
Long stories (over 35 pages) at their best combine a novel's richness and depth with a story's shapeliness and concision. In this course, intended for students with a
serious interest in writing, and in examining fiction from a writer's point of view, we'll study a variety of long stories and examine their craft elements. In addition
to Francine Prose's Reading Like a Writer, we'll read work by James Baldwin, Deborah Eisenberg, Mavis Gallant, Katherine Mansfield, Alice Munro, David
Foster Wallace, and others.
Format: seminar. Requirements: regular attendance, active participation in class discussion, weekly 1- to 2-page response papers, and one longer (5- to 7-page)
paper.
Prerequisites: a 100-level English course. Enrollment limit: 14 (expected: 14). Preference given to sophomores; first-year students who have placed out of a
100-level course; students interested in writing fiction.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF BARRETT
ENGL 281(F,S) The Writing of Poetry
A workshop in the writing of poetry. Weekly assignments and regular conferences with the instructor will be scheduled. Students will discuss each other's poems
in the class meetings.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit:15 (expected: 15). Preference given to students who have preregistered.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF Fall Semester: FILKINS
2:35-3:50 TF Spring Semester: RAAB
ENGL 283(F,S) Introductory Workshop in Fiction
A course in basic problems that arise in the composition of short fiction. Individual conferences will be combined with workshop sessions; workshop sessions
will be devoted to both published and student work. Considerable emphasis will be placed on the process of revision.
No prerequisites. For fall: enrollment limit:12 (expected: 12); for spring: enrollment limit:15 (expected: 15). Interested students should preregister for the course
and attend the first class; selection will be based on writing samples.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF First Semester: J. SHEPARD
1:10-2:25 TF Second Semester: J. SHEPARD
ENGL 288(F) Introductory Workshop in Memoir
A course in the basic problems and possibilities that arise in the composition of memoir. Individual meetings with the instructor will be available. Class sessions
will be devoted to the discussion of both published and student work. Students will receive written critiques from other students as well as the instructor.
Format: seminar. Requirements: successful completion of several writing exercises and at least 30 pages of final work; active class participation; critiques of
published and student work; one student-led class.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 12). Selection is based on writing samples. If writing samples are equal, preference will be given by seniority.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR K. SHEPARD
ENGL 326(F) Fiction Workshop: Revision and Radical Revision (W)
An advanced workshop in the revision of short fiction, with particular focus on more radical ways of enlarging the opportunities each story presents: in other
words, advanced practice in both realizing a story's initial aesthetic design and re-envisioning it entirely.
Format: seminar. Requirements: 30 pages of fiction.
Prerequisites: English 283 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 12). Admission to the course will be made on the basis of writing
samples.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF J. SHEPARD
ENGL 382(S) Advanced Workshop in Poetry
This course will combine individual conferences with workshop sessions at which students will discuss each other's poetry. Considerable emphasis will be placed
upon the problems of revision..
Prerequisites: English 281 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 12). Candidates for admission should confer with the instructor prior to
registration and be prepared to submit samples of their writing.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR RAAB
ENGL 385(F) Advanced Fiction Workshop: Form and Technique
A course for students with experience writing fiction and an understanding of the basics of plot, character, setting, and scene. Through close study of stories in
both traditional and unusual forms, we'll examine how a story's significant elements are chosen, ordered, and arranged; how the story is shaped; how, by whom,
and to what purpose it's told. Students will write new stories, employing the forms and techniques studied, and discuss them in workshop.
Format: seminar. Requirements: regular attendance, active participation in workshop, weekly1-2 pp brief imitations of assigned stories, two 8-18 pp story drafts
for discussion in workshop, and a final portfolio of at least two revised, polished stories.
Prerequisites: English 283 or 384, or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 8-10). Selection is based on writing sample, if prerequisites are
satisfied.
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M BARRETT
HONORS AND INDEPENDENT STUDY
ENGL 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
Prerequisites: unusually qualified and committed students who are working on a major writing or research project may confer with the English Department
about possible arrangements for independent study.
ENGL 493(F) Honors Colloquium
A colloquium for students pursuing critical theses and critical specializations. Students will present and critique their work in progress, and discuss issues particu-
lar to researching and structuring a long analytical thesis. We will also discuss the work of a variety of recent critics representing a range of methods of literary
study. Satisfactory completion of the course will be required for students to continue on in the honors program.
Evaluation will be based on participation and on individual progress on the thesis projects, which will be determined in consultation with each student's honors
advisor.
Prerequisite: admission to the department Honors program. No maximum enrollment.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF PYE, Director of Honors
ENGL 494(S) Honors Thesis
Required of all senior English majors pursuing critical theses and critical specialization.
PYE, Director of Honors
ENGL 497(F) Honors Independent Study
Required of all senior English majors pursuing Honors in creative writing.
PYE, Director of Honors
ENGL W30 Honors Thesis: Specialization Route
Required during winter study of all seniors admitted to candidacy for honors via the specialization route.
ENGL W31 Senior Thesis
Required during winter study of all seniors admitted to candidacy for honors via the thesis route.
ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES
Director, Associate Professor JENNIFER L. FRENCH
Associate Director, Lecturer SARAH S. GARDNER
Associate Professor FRENCH. Assistant Professors: HOWE, KOHLER. Class of 1946 Visiting Distinguished Professor of Environmental Studies: G.
WHITE. Lecturer: GARDNER. Research Associates: R. BOLTON, VENOLIA.
146
MEMBERS OF THE CENTER
HENRY W. ART, Professor of Biology and Environmental Studies
DAVID H. BACKUS, Lecturer in Geosciences
LOIS M. BANTA, Associate Professor of Biology**
DONALD deB. BEAVER, Professor of History of Science
DIETER BINGEMANN, Associate Professor of Chemistry
ROGER E. BOLTON, Professor of Economics, Emeritus
JAMES T. CARLTON, Professor of Marine Sciences
DAVID CASSUTO, Class of 1946 Visiting Distinguished Professor of Environmental Studies
MEA S. COOK, Assistant Professor of Geosciences
DAVID P. DETHIER, Professor of Geosciences and Mineralogy and Director of Research, Hopkins Forest
GEORGES B. DREYFUS, Professor of Religion
JOAN EDWARDS, Professor of Biology***
ANTONIA FOIAS, Professor of Anthropology and Sociology*
JENNIFER L. FRENCH, Associate Professor of Spanish
SARAH S. GARDNER, Lecturer in Environmental Studies
DARRA GOLDSTEIN, Francis Christopher Oakley Third Century Professor of Russian
KIM GUTSCHOW, Lecturer in Religion and Anthropology/Sociology
DOUGLAS GOLLIN, Professor of Economics*
NICOLAS HOWE, Assistant Professor in Environmental Studies
SARAH JACOBSON, Assistant Professor of Economics
ANDREW JONES, Mananger, Hopkins Memorial Forest
PAUL KARABINOS, Professor of Geosciences
PIA KOHLER, Assistant Professor in Environmental Studies
ELIZABETH KOLBERT, W. Ford Schumann Visiting Distinguished Professor in Democratic Studies
KAREN R. MERRILL, Professor of History
MANUEL MORALES, Associate Professor of Biology
JAMES NOLAN, Professor of Sociology
DAREL E. PAUL, Associate Professor of Political Science
JAY RACELLA, Technical Assistant, CES and Morley Sciences Laboratories
DAVID P. RICHARDSON, Professor of Chemistry
SHEAFE SATTERTHWAITE, Lecturer in Art
STEPHEN C. SHEPPARD, Professor of Economics*
DAVID C. SMITH, Senior Lecturer in Biology***
JOHN W. THOMAN, Jr., Professor of Chemistry
CLAIRE TING, Associate Professor of Biology
GREGORY WHITE, Class of 1946 Visiting Distinguished Professor of Environmental Studies
Environmental issues call upon citizens, organizations, and other agencies to grasp complex science, address conflicting human values, and make difficult
ethical and political choices. The three curricular options in Environmental Studies--the majors in Environmental Policy and Environmental Science and the
concentration in Environmental Studies--are designed to prepare students to deal effectively with these issues by integrating perspectives and methodologies
from the natural sciences, the social sciences, and the arts and humanities.
The program is administered by the Center for Environmental Studies (CES), located in Harper House. Founded in 1967, CES was one of the first environ-
mental studies programs at a liberal arts college. In addition to the academic program described below, CES is the focus of a varied set of activities in which
students lead and participate, often with other members of the Williams community. CES offers extensive resources including library materials and databases,
GIS facilities, and funding for student-initiated activities, summer research and internships. The Center administers the Hopkins Memorial Forest, a 2600-acre
natural area northwest of campus, where field-study sites, a laboratory, and passive-recreation opportunities may be found in all seasons. CES also operates the
Environmental Analysis Laboratory in Morley Science Center.
The Program in Environmental Studies offers three distinct curricular options: students may decide to pursue either a major in Environmental Policy or Envi-
ronmental Science or to complement a major in a different area with a concentration in Environmental Studies. Students may not double-major in Environmental
Policy and Environmental Science or combine either major with a concentration in Environmental Studies.
The majors and the concentration share a common "core" of four courses: ENVI 101, 203, 302, and 402. The core courses are designed to be taken in se-
quence, with ENVI 302 and ENVI 402 normally reserved for senior majors and concentrators. ENVI 101 is a broad introduction to the field, emphasizing the
humanities and social sciences. ENVI 203 is a course in ecology (offered by the Biology department) that provides a unified conceptual approach to the behavior
of living things in the natural world. ENVI 302 is an experiential course that puts teams of students to work on projects of immediate significance in the Berk-
shires. ENVI 402, the senior seminar, is an opportunity for majors and concentrators to draw together their interdisciplinary educational experiences and apply
what they have learned to specific environmental issues. The core course structure affords students freedom to explore and to specialize in diverse fields of study,
while sustaining a focus on environmental questions throughout their time at Williams.
An interdisciplinary course emphasizing field science, ENVI 102, is also required for students majoring in Environmental Policy or Environmental Science.
Environmental Studies concentrators are also strongly encouraged to take ENVI 102.
Advising in Environmental Studies
Students interested in pursuing a major or concentration sponsored by CES should seek advising from program faculty as early as possible. Students who
decide to major in either Environmental Policy or Environmental Science are required to identify a track through the major and a faculty advisor from the list
below at the time of declaration. Both the advisor's signature and that of the Director of the Center for Environmental studies are required on the major declaration
form.
Track: Advisors for 2010-11:
Political Economy Bradburd, Paul
Political Theory and Law Gardner, Paul
Society & Culture French
Environmental Biology Art, Morales, Ting, Smith, Edwards, Banta
Environmental Chemistry Thoman, Bingemann, Richardson
Environmental Geosciences Karabinos, Dethier, Johnson, Cook
The `Four Places' Goal and Study Away:
Learning about particular places is an essential part of Environmental Studies. By the time each student graduates, she or he should have developed intellectual
insight into and personal experience of four places: "Home," "Here," "There," and "The World." For practical purposes, "Here" is the Berkshires and "There" is a
place where the geography and socioeconomic circumstances are outside the student's previous experience. Although this goal is not a requirement of the majors
or the concentration, it is a significant aspect of the program, and CES resources are aimed in part at enabling all students to meet it. For example, students are
encouraged to pursue summer internships in their "Home" communities, and field courses in natural science, environmental planning, and other areas can deepen
familiarity with "Here." Summer recess and Winter Study provide many excellent opportunities for research and other learning outside the New England region.
A wide variety of study away options is available to students in Environmental Studies, including the Williams Mystic program. Students in Environmental
Studies are encouraged to study a foreign language and to spend all or part of their junior year abroad. Students considering either a semester or year away should
consult both the CES Director and the study abroad office as early as possible to discuss their options. Up to two courses for the majors and three courses for the
concentration may be taken outside of Williams. Approval for courses taken elsewhere must be granted in writing by the Director of CES.
Honors in Environmental Studies
A student earns honors in Environmental Policy, Environmental Science or Environmental Studies by successfully completing a rigorous independent re-
search project under the supervision of a member of the CES faculty. Juniors who wish to apply for the honors program should submit a 5page proposal to their
intended advisor and the Director of CES by the end of spring break. If a student wishes to work with a faculty member not affiliated with CES, the student must
also identify a co-advisor from within the program. Students will be notified by the end of the semester whether or not their proposal has been approved.
Students in the honors program are required to present their preliminary findings at a meeting of CES students, faculty and staff in November. The final
research project should be reported as a written thesis and presented orally before a faculty committee convened for that purpose. Environmental Studies concen-
trators may undertake an honors thesis and submit it to both their major department and Environmental Studies; petitions for a joint honors project should be
approved by the department chair and the Director of the program by the end of the junior year. Majors and concentrators who pursue honors in Environmental
Policy, Environmental Science or Environmental Studies alone should enroll in ENVP 493-W31-494, ENVS 493-W31-494, or ENVI 493-W31-494, Senior
Research and Thesis, in addition to completing the requirements of the major or concentration.
147
Because most research requires sustained field, laboratory or archival work that is difficult to combine with conventional coursework, students are strongly
encouraged to spend the summer before senior year doing honors research. Funds to support student research are available from restricted endowments of the
CES, and an open competition is held each spring to allocate funding resources. Some departments also provide limited support for summer thesis research.
Students and their faculty sponsors should plan the thesis with the possibility of summer research in mind.
Honors will be awarded on the basis of the academic merit and originality demonstrated by the student and in the completed thesis.
THE MAJOR IN ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY
The major in Environmental Policy brings together core courses in Environmental Studies with relevant coursework in related fields including Economics and
Political Science. The goal of the Environmental Policy major is to combine scientific literacy with an understanding of the economic, political and cultural
structures involved in institutional decision-making on environmental matters. Eight courses are common to all Environmental Policy majors; there are also three
distinct tracks through the major, each of which entails an additional theory/methods course and two electives. The three tracks through the major are a) Political
Economy, b) Political Theory and Law, and c) Society and Culture. Environmental Policy majors are also encouraged to take GEOS 214 Remote Sensing and
GIS. Students majoring in Environmental Policy should investigate the courses required for their chosen track and consult their advisor to plan an appropriate
schedule for completing the major, including any prerequisites not listed below. Courses cannot be double-counted within the major; for example, a course used to
fulfill the theory/methods requirement cannot also be used as an elective. The availability of required courses may vary slightly from year to year, and substitu-
tions may be authorized occasionally by the Director of CES. Environmental Policy majors will be exempt from taking Econ 110 if they received a score of 5 on
the Microeconomics AP exam, a 6 or 7 on the higher-level Economics IB examination, or an A or B in economics in A-levels. Students seeking exemption from
ENVI 102 on the basis of exam results should consult the Director of CES.
Requirements for the Major in Environmental Policy
ENVI 101 Nature and Society
ECON 110 Principles of Microeconomics
ENVI 102 Introduction to Environmental Science Methods
BIOL 203 Ecology
A theory/methods course:
For the Political Economy track, ECON 253 Empirical Methods in Political Economy
or ECON 255 Econometrics
For the Political Theory and Law track, PSCI 203 Introduction to Political Theory
or another PSCI course selected in consultation with the Political Science Department Chair and the Director of CES
For the Society and Culture track, ANSO 205 Ways of Knowing
or another ANSO course selected in consultation with the Anthropology and Sociology Department Chair and the Director of CES
or ENVI 209 Ecologies of Place
or ENVI/COMP 239 Introduction to Ecocriticism: North-South Dialogues on Nature and Culture
or ENVI 306 Environmental Discourse
or PHIL 209 Philosophy of Science
or another PHIL course selected in consultation with the Philosophy Department Chair and the Director of CES
Two electives appropriate to the track and approved by the student's advisor and the Director of CES if not included in the lists below.
For the Political Economy track, courses dealing with policy-making and resource allocation:
ECON 213 Introduction to Environmental and Natural Resource Economics
ECON 228 Water as a Scarce Resource
ECON 229 Law and Economics
ECON 379 Economics and the Environment
ECON 386 Environmental Policy and Natural Resource Management
ECON 395 Growth and Sustainability
ECON 457 Public Economics Research Seminar
PSCI 201 Power, Politics and Democracy in America
PSCI 216 American Constitutionalism I: Structures of Power
PSCI 238 Economic Liberalism and Its Critics
PSCI 327 Global Politics of Development and Underdevelopment
MAST 351 Marine Policy
For the Political Theory and Law track, courses dealing with liberalism and its critique:
ECON 229 Law and Economics
PHIL 236 Contemporary Ethical Theory
PSCI 201 Power, Politics and Democracy in America
PSCI 216 American Constitutionalism I
PSCI 223 International Law
PSCI 238 Economic Liberalism and Its Critics
PSCI 309 Environmental Policy
PSCI 311 Congress
PSCI 316 Making Public Policy
PSCI 334 Theorizing Global Justice
For the Society and Culture track, courses exploring culture and diversity as bearing on environmental issues:
ANSO 206 Social Theory
AMST 302 Public Sphere/Public Space
AMST/ENVI 221/LATS 220 Introduction to Urban Studies
AMST/LATS 312 Chicago
AMST/LATS 408 Envisioning Urban Life
ArtH/ENVI 201 American Landscape History
ArtH 311 North American Suburbs
ArtH/ENVI 308 North American Park Idea
ArtH/ENVI 310 North American Agriculture History
ArtH 318 The American Pastoral Mode
ENVI 306 Environmental Discourse
ENVI 309 Understanding Public Policy
ENVI/PHIL 311 Environmental Philosophy and the Emergence of the Ecosphere
HSCI 240 Technology and Science in American Culture
MAST/ENGL 231 Literature of the Sea
MAST/HIST 352 America and the Sea, 1600-Present
PHIL 210 Philosophy of the Social Sciences
PHIL 236 Contemporary Ethical Theory
PSCI 203 Introduction to Political Theory
PSCI 238 Economic Liberalism and its Critics
PSCI 334 Theorizing Global Justice
REL 287 Society, Religions and the Environment
SCST 401 Critical Perspectives on Science and Technology
SOC 368 Technology and Modern Society
ENVI 302 Environmental Planning Workshop
ENVI 307 Environmental Law
148
One course in environmental policy: ENVI 309 Environmental Policy
or MAST 351 Marine Policy
or ECON 386 Environmental Policy and Natural Resource Management
ENVI 402 Senior Seminar
THE MAJOR IN ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
The major in Environmental Science brings together core courses in Environmental Studies with relevant coursework in a specific scientific discipline. The
goal of the major in Environmental Science is to provide training in one of the natural sciences as well as an understanding of the complex array of natural, social
and political factors involved in environmental issues. Five courses are common to all Environmental Science majors; there is also a methods requirement and
three disciplinary tracks, each comprised of five additional courses. The three disciplinary tracks are a) Environmental Biology, b) Environmental Chemistry, and
c) Environmental Geosciences. Students majoring in Environmental Science should investigate the courses required for their chosen track and consult their
advisor to plan an appropriate schedule for completing the major, including any prerequisites not listed below. Courses cannot be double-counted within the
major; for example, a course used to fulfill the methods requirement cannot also be used as an elective. The availability of required courses may vary slightly from
year to year, and substitutions may be authorized occasionally by the Director of CES. Students seeking to place out of particular courses on the basis of AP, IB or
A-level exams should consult the Director.
Requirements for the Major in Environmental Science
ENVI 101 Nature and Society
ENVI 102 Introduction to Environmental Science Methods
BIOL 203 Ecology
A methods course:
GEOS 214 Remote Sensing/GIS
or CHEM 364 Instrumental Methods
or STAT 201 Statistics and Data Analysis
or STAT 231 Statistical Design of Experiments
A five-course disciplinary track:
for Environmental Biology
Three electives at the 300+ level from:
BIOL 402T/ENVI 404T Topics in Ecology
BIOL 422T Ecology of Sustainable Agriculture
BIOL 424T Conservation Biology
BIOL 425T Coevolution
BIOL 305 Evolution
BIOL 308 Integrative Plant Biology
BIOL 315 Microbiology
BIOL 302/ENVI 312 Communities and Ecosystems
CHEM 341 Toxicology and Cancer
CHEM 364 Instrumental Methods of Analysis
MAST 311 Marine Ecology
Two electives from:
BIOL 102 The Organism
CHEM 151/3/5 Concepts of Chemistry
GEOS 101 Biodiversity in Geological Time
GEOS 103 Global Warming and Natural Disasters
GEOS 104 Oceanography
BIOL 106 Human Evolution
BIOL 134 Tropics: Biology and Social Issues
GEOS 215 Climate Changes
GEOS 218T The Carbon Cycle
BIOL 220 Field Botany and Plant Natural History
BIOL 225 Natural History of the Berkshires
MATH 235T Biological Modeling with Differential Equations
MAST 211 Oceanographic Processes
for Environmental Chemistry
CHEM 151 Introductory Concepts of Chemistry
or CHEM 153 Introductory Concepts of Chemistry: Advanced Section
or CHEM 155 Principles of Modern Chemistry
CHEM 155 Principles of Modern Chemistry or CHEM 256 Foundations of Modern Chemical Sciences
CHEM 156 Organic Chemistry: Introductory Level
CHEM 251 Organic Chemistry: Intermediate Level or CHEM 255 Organic Chemistry Intermediate Level-Special Laboratory Section
CHEM 341 Toxicology and Cancer
or CHEM 364 Instrumental Methods
for Environmental Geosciences
One introductory Geosciences class:
GEOS 101 Biodiversity
or GEOS 103 Global Warming
or GEOS 104 Oceanography
or GEOS 105 Geology Outdoors
GEOS 201 Geomorphology
GEOS 215 Climate Changes
GEOS 206 Renewable Energy and the Sustainable Campus or GEOS 218T Carbon Cycle
or GEOS 205 Earth Resources or MAST 211/GEOS 212 Oceanographic Processes
One 300+-level elective in Geosciences
ENVI 302 Environmental Planning Workshop
ENVI 402 Senior Seminar
CONCENTRATION IN ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES
The Environmental Studies concentration provides students with an opportunity to explore how humans interact with the environment, including physical,
biological, philosophical, and social elements. The concentration is designed so that students will understand the complexity of issues and perspectives and
appreciate that most environmental issues lack distinct disciplinary boundaries. The goal of the concentration is to educate students to be well-informed, environ-
149
mentally-literate citizens of the planet who have the capacity to become active participants in the local and global community. To this end, the concentration is
designed to develop the capability to think in interdisciplinary ways and to use synthetic approaches to solve problems while incorporating the knowledge and
experiences gained from majoring in other departments at the College. The concentration in Environmental Studies consists of four core courses and one elective
course in each of the three divisions: natural science, social science, and humanities and arts.
Requirements for the Concentration in Environmental Science
101 Nature and Society: An Introduction to Environmental Studies
203 Ecology
302 Environmental Planning and Design Workshop
402 Senior Seminar: Perspectives on Environmental Studies
Distribution Courses
In order to earn the concentration a student must take one course from each of the following three groups. Courses may be counted both toward the concentra-
tion in Environmental Studies and toward a disciplinary major.
Students can check with the department coordinator to see if other courses not listed here might count as
electives.
The Natural World
BIOL/ENVI 134 The Tropics: Biology and Social Issues
BIOL/ENVI 220 Field Botany and Plant Natural History
BIOL/ENVI/ INTR 225 Natural History of the Berkshires
BIOL 302/ENVI 312 Communities and Ecosystems
BIOL/ENVI 422T Ecology of Sustainable Agriculture
CHEM/ENVI 341 Toxicology and Cancer
CHEM/ENVI 364 Instrumental Methods of Analysis
ENVI 102 Introduction to Environmental Science
ENVI 219T/GEOS 220T Evolution Of and On Volcanic Islands
ENVI/BIOL 414 Conservation Biology
GEOS 101/ENVI 10 Biodiversity in Geologic Time
GEOS 102 An Unfinished Planet
GEOS/ENVI 103 Global Warming and Natural Disasters
GEOS/ENVI/MAST 104 Oceanography
GEOS 201/ENVI 205 Geomorphology
GEOS 205/ENVI 207 Earth Resources
GEOS/ENVI 206 Renewable Energy and the Sustainable Campus
GEOS/ENVI 214 Remote Sensing and Geographic Information Systems
GEOS/ENVI 215 Climate Changes
GEOS/ENVI 218T The Carbon Cycle and Climate
GEOS/ENVI 254T Gulf of California Tectonics and Coastal Ecosystems
MAST 211/GEOS 21 Oceanographic Processes
MAST 311/BIOL 231 Marine Ecology
MATH 335T/BIOL/ENVI 235T Biological Modeling with Differential Equations
PHYS/ENVI 108 Energy, Science and Technology
Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences
ANTH 102/ENVI 106 Human Evolution: Down from the Trees, Out to the Stars
ANTH 214/ENVI 224 The Rise and Fall of Civilizations
ANTH/WGST 272 Sex in Society: The Cultural Construction of Reproduction
ArtH/ENVI 201 American Landscape History
ArtH 304/ENVI 324 American Transport History
ArtH/ENVI 308 Three Cities
ArtH/ENVI 311 North American Suburbs
ArtH/ENVI 318 The American Pastoral Mode
ArtS 329 Architectural Design II
ENGL/ENVI 378 Nature/Writing
ENVI/ANTH 209 Ecologies of Place: Culture, Commodities and Everyday Life
ENVI/AFR/SOC 211 Race and the Environment
ENVI/LATS/REL 227 Utopias and Americas
ENVI/SOC 236 Sustainability Theory and Practice: A Critical Assessment
ENVI/COMP 239 Introduction to Ecocriticism: North-South Dialogues on Nature and Culture
ENVI/ENGL 263 Contemporary Fictions of the Environment, 1970 to Now
ENVI/ENGL/SOC 285 After Nature
ENVI/REL/SOC 291 God's Green Earth: Religion and Environment in America
ENVI/ENGL 300 Imagining Contamination
ENVI/SOC 303 Cultures of Climate Change
ENVI 306 Interpreting Nature and Society: The Study of Meaning, Values, and World Views
ENVI/PHIL 311 Environmental Philosophy and the Emergence of the Ecosphere
ENVI 340/ENGL 339 The Art of Looking: A Course in Creative Non-Fiction
ENVI/PSYC 346 Environmental Psychology
ENVI/HIST 371 The History of U.S. Environmental Politics
LATS/AMST 220/ENVI 221 Introduction to Urban Studies: Shaping and Living the City
LATS/AMST 312/ENVI 313 Chicago
MAST/ENGL 231 Literature of the Sea
MAST/HIST 352 America and the Sea, 1600-Present
PSYC/ENVI 346T Environment Psychology
REL/ENVI 287 The Dynamics of Globalization: Society, Religion and the Environment
SOC 268 Space and Place
SOC 315 Culture, Consumption and Modernity
SOC 368 Technology and Modern Society
Environmental Policy
ECON 204/ENVI 234 Economic Development in Poor Countries
ECON/ENVI 213 The Economics of Natural Resource Use
ECON 215 International Trade, Globalization and Its Effects
ECON/ENVI 228T Water as a Scarce Resource
ECON/ENVI 379 Economics of the Environment
ECON/ENVI 386/ECON 515 Environmental Policy and Natural Resource Management
ECON 521/ECON/ENVI 388 Urbanization and Development
ENVI 208 The Challenge of Climate Change: Policy Responses
ENVI 307/PSCI 317 Environmental Law
ENVI 308/PSCI 316 U.S. Environmental Law and Policy
ENVI/HSCI/SCST 309/PSCI 301 Environmental Policy
ENVI/PSCI 328 International Environmental Law
MAST/ENVI 351 Marine Policy
PSCI 229 Global Political Economy
150
PSCI 327/ENVI 329 The Global Politics of Development and Underdevelopment
Variations from the requirements of the concentration must be approved in writing by the director of the program. Students are urged to consult with program
faculty and the director as soon as they develop an interest in the concentration or if they intend to participate in study away opportunities.
In addition to courses fulfilling the concentration requirements, the following electives and related electives are offered:
Environmental Studies 397, 398 Independent Study of Environmental Problems
Environmental Studies 493-W31-494 Senior Research and Thesis
Winter study courses play an important role in the program, offering opportunities to experiment in fields unfamiliar to the student, and for interdisciplinary
topics to be developed by faculty working alone and in teams. Students are urged to review each year's winter study offerings bearing in mind their interests in the
environment.
ENVI 101(F) Nature and Society: An Introduction to Environmental Studies
This course introduces environmental studies as an interdisciplinary field of learning. Concerned with the complex dynamics of nature-society relations, environ-
mental studies is indispensable to the development of societies that promote the well-being of people, animals and their habitats. Organized around the ecological,
social and ethical knowledges that dominate environmental studies, we explore the nature of this knowledge and its implications for sustainability. We also
examine the evolving history and philosophy of environmental studies, and note how different conceptions of nature, society and interdisciplinarity inform the
field.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation is based on tests, papers and/or projects, as well as active participation in class.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 35.
Satisfies one semester of the Division II requirement.
Required course for students wishing to complete the majors in Environmental Policy and Environmental Science and the concentration in Environmental Stud-
ies.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR, 1:10-2:25 TF KOHLER, HOWE
ENVI 102(S) Introduction to Environmental Science Methods
The field of environmental science considers physical, chemical, and biological interactions in an integrated approach to complex environmental systems. This
course introduces students to multidisciplinary scientific methods used to assess and interpret human impacts on the environment through hands-on study of
several local sites. Examples of topics covered are: anthropogenic carbon dioxide, acid rain, toxic metals, water quality, and waste treatment. Discussions of case
studies from other parts of the world illustrate the global analogues of these local studies. Following these group projects, students design and complete indepen-
dent projects in subjects of particular interest to them.
Format: two 75-minute workshop/discussion sessions, and one 4-hour field/laboratory session each week. Evaluation is based on reports of field and laboratory
projects, participation in discussion, and an independent research project.
Enrollment limit: 24 (expected: 24). Preference given to first-year students. This course is an introductory science seminar, designed for students who have a
strong interest in Environmental Science. It is a required course for the majors in Environmental Policy and Environmental Science and satisfies one semester of
the Division III requirement. This course also satisfies the "Natural World" requirement for the Environmental Studies concentration.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR Lab: 1-4 T,R BINGEMANN and COOK
ENVI 103(F) Global Warming and Natural Disasters (Same as Geosciences 103)
(See under GEOS 103 for full description.) COOK and DETHIER
This course satisfies the "Natural World" requirement for the Environmental Studies concentration.
ENVI 104(S) Oceanography (Same as Geosciences 104 and Maritime Studies 104)
(See under GEOS 104 for full description.) COX
This course satisfies the "Natural World" requirement for the Environmental Studies concentration.
ENVI 105(F) Biodiversity in Geologic Time (Same as Geosciences 101)
(See under GEOS 101 for full description.) M. JOHNSON
This course satisfies the "Natural World" requirement for the Environmental Studies concentration.
ENVI 108 Energy Science and Technology (Same as Physics 108) (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
(See under PHYS 108 for full description.) STRAIT
This course satisfies the "Natural World" requirement for the Environmental Studies concentration.
ENVI 134 The Tropics: Biology and Social Issues (Same as Biology 134) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under BIOL 134 for full description.) D. C. SMITH
This course satisfies the "Natural World" requirement for the Environmental Studies concentration.
ENVI 201(F) American Landscape History (Same as ArtH 201) (W)
(See under ARTH 201 for full description.) SATTERTHWAITE
This course satisfies the "Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences" requirement for the Environmental Studies concentration.
ENVI 203(F) Ecology (Same as Biology 203) (Q)
(See under BIOL 203 for full description.) J. EDWARDS
Required course for students wishing to complete the majors in Environmental Policy and Environmental Science and the Environmental Studies concentration.
ENVI 205(F) Geomorphology (Same as Geosciences 201)
(See under GEOS 201 for full description.) DETHIER
This course satisfies the "Natural World" requirement for the Environmental Studies concentration.
ENVI 206 Renewable Energy and the Sustainable Campus (Same as Geosciences 206) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under GEOS 206 for full description.) DETHIER
This course satisfies the "Natural World" requirement for the Environmental Studies concentration.
ENVI 207 Earth Resources (Same as Geosciences 205) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under GEOS 205 for full description.) COX
This course satisfies the "Natural World" requirement for the Environmental Studies concentration.
ENVI 208(F) Science and Politics in Environmental Decision Making (D)
This course explores the relationship between science and politics in environmental decisionmaking. How do legislators know when a species is endangered and
warrants protection? What precautions should be applied in allowing genetically modified foods onto our plates? Can we, and should we, weigh the risks of
malaria against the impacts of pesticides used to control those mosquitoes that transmit the disease? How has the global community come together to understand
the risks from global climate change, and how has this understanding shaped our policy responses? What are some of the limits of science in shaping policy
outcomes? In addressing these and other questions, we will pay particular attention to how power relations and existing institutions shape what knowledge, and
whose knowledge, is taken on board in decisionmaking, be it at the local, national or global level. We will delve into how these dynamics shape policy outcomes
and we will also examine novel approaches for incorporating the knowledge of traditionally disempowered groups, including indigenous and local communities.
Format: lecture/discussion with some roleplay exercises. Requirements: several shorter writing assignments and two 5 to 7page essays.
No prerequisites; open to firstyear students. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15). This course fulfills the Exploring Diversity Initiative requirement; it may also be
used an environmental policy elective by ENVI concentrators. Students majoring in environmental policy or environmental science should ask the Director of
CES how it may be used towards the completion of the major.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF KOHLER
151
ENVI 209(F) Ecologies of Place: Culture, Commodities and Everyday Life (Same as American Studies 209 and Anthropology 209)
This course will explore the environmental implications of everyday life in modern America. It will ask how cultural, political, economic, and ecological systems
interact to produce ordinary places and vernacular landscapes, from campuses to culdesacs, farms to forests, nationstates to national parks. Combining ap-
proaches from cultural geography, environmental history, and political ecology, it will focus on the hidden lives of "things"--the commodities and technologies
that form the basic building blocks of place: food, oil, water, wood, machines. With strong emphasis on localglobal relations, it will look beneath the surface of
the ordinary to reveal the complex networks of power, meaning, and matter that connect "here" to "there," "now" to "then," and "us" to "them." In so doing, it will
pursue parallel goals: to understand the sociospatial processes shaping today's global environment; and to explore the cultural systems through which those
processes are understood and contested. Topics will include the bottled water controversy, factory farming and local agriculture, the political economy of lawns,
and the cultural politics of invasive species.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: three 5- to 7-page essays and several shorter writing assignments.
No prerequisites; open to first-years. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20).
This course satisfies the "Theory/Methods" requirement for the Society & Culture track through the Environmental Policy major and the "Humanities, Arts and
Social Sciences" requirement of the Environmental Studies concentration.
Satisfies one semester of Division II requirement.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR HOWE
ENVI 211(F) Race and the Environment (Same as Africana Studies 211 and Sociology 211) (D)
(See under AFR 211 for full description.) J. MANIGAULT-BRYANT
ENVI 213(S) Introduction to Environmental and Natural Resources Economics (Same as Economics 213) (Q)
(See under ECON 213 for full description.) JACOBSON
This course satisfies the "Environmental Policy" requirement for the Environmental Studies concentration.
ENVI 214(S) Remote Sensing and Geographic Information Systems (Same as Geosciences 214)
(See under GEOS 214 for full description.) DETHIER and KARABINOS
This course satisfies theory/methods requirement for the major in Environmnental Science and the "Natural World" requirement for the Environmental Studies con-
centration.
ENVI 215(S) Climate Changes (Same as Geosciences 215) (Q)
(See under GEOS 215 for full description.) COOK
This course satisfies the "Natural World" requirement for the Environmental Studies concentration.
ENVI 218T(F) The Carbon Cycle and Climate (Same as Geosciences 218T) (W)
(See under GEOS 218 for full description.) COOK
This course satisfies the "Natural World" requirement for the Environmental Studies concentration.
ENVI 219T(S) Evolution Of and On Volcanic Islands (Same as Geosciences 220) (W)
(See under GEOS 220 for full description.) KARABINOS
ENVI 220(S) Field Botany and Plant Natural History (Same as Biology 220)
(See under BIOL 220 for full description.) J. EDWARDS
This course satisfies the "Natural World" requirement for the Environmental Studies concentration.
ENVI 221 Introduction to Urban Studies: Shaping and Living the City (Same as American Studies 221 and Latino/a Studies 220) (Not
offered 2011-2012)
(See under LATS 220 for full description.) RA
This course satisfies the "Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences" requirement for the Environmental Studies concentration.
ENVI 224(S) The Rise and Fall of Civilizations (Same as Anthropology 214)
(See under ANTH 214 for full description.) FOIAS
This course satisfies the "Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences" requirement for the Environmental Studies concentration.
ENVI 227(S) Utopias and Americas (Same as Environmental Studies 227, Latina/o Studies 227 and Religion 227)
(See under REL 227 for full description.) HIDALGO
ENVI 228T(S) Water as a Scarce Resource (Same as Economics 228) (W)
(See under ECON 228 for full description.) BRADBURD
This course satisfies the "Environmental Policy" requirement for the Environmental Studies concentration.
ENVI 234 Economics of Developing Countries (Same as Economics 204) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under ECON 204 for full description.) RAI
This course satisfies the "Environmental Policy" requirement for the Environmental Studies concentration.
ENVI 285(S) After Nature (Same as English 286) (W)
Over the last few decades, the nature of nature has changed and so, necessarily, has nature writing. In this course, we will consider some of the major texts in the
tradition, as well as very recent work. Readings will include: Thoreau's Walden, Rachel Carson's Silent Spring, Edward Abbey's Desert Solitaire, and John
McPhee's Encounters with the Archdruid. Student writing will be a major focus of the course. Over the semester, students will write two short essays and produce
a long, non-fiction work (medium and genre negotiable). In total, students will be expected to produce the equivalent of about 25 double-spaced pages over the
semester. Along with regular classes, there will be occasional conferences and small group meetings.
Format: seminar. Requirements: two short essays and one long non-fiction work.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15). Preference give to Environmental Studies majors and concentrators.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR KOLBERT
ENVI 287 The Dynamics of Globalization: Society, Religion and the Environment (Same as Religion 287) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under REL 287 for full description.) DREYFUS
This course satisfies the "Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences" requirement for the Environmental Studies concentration.
ENVI 302(F) Environmental Planning Workshop
This interdisciplinary course introduces the theories, approaches, methodologies, and legal framework of environmental planning and provides students with
experience in the planning process through project work in the Berkshire region. The first part of the course introduces the students to planning literature through
analysis and discussion of case studies. In the second part of the course students tackle an actual planning problem. Small teams of students, working in conjunc-
tion with a client in the community and under supervision of the instructor, conduct a planning project, using all the tools of an environmental planner. The project
work draws on students' academic training, extracurricular activities, and applies interdisciplinary knowledge and methodologies. The course includes several
class presentations and culminates in a public presentation of each team's planning study. This course also includes field trips, town meetings, interviews, survey
work, and computer mapping labs.
Format: seminar discussion/project lab. Requirements: short written exercises, class presentations, public presentations, final group report..
Prerequisites: Environmental Studies 101 and Biology/Environmental Studies 203, or permission of instructors; open to juniors and seniors only; preference
given to senior Environmental Policy and Environmental Science majors and Environmental Studies concentrators. Enrollment limit: 16 (expected: 16).
Required course for students wishing to complete the majors in Environmental Policy and Environmental Science and the Environmental Studies concentration.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR Lab: 1-4 T,R GARDNER
152
ENVI 303(S) Cultures of Climate Change (Same as Sociology 303) (W)
This course asks why people think and talk about climate change in such very different ways. Climate change is a physical phenomenon that can be observed,
quantified, and measured. But it is also an idea, and as such it is subject to the vagaries of cultural interpretation. Despite scientific agreement about its existence
and its causes, many people do not see climate change as a serious problem, or as a problem at all. Many others see it as the most serious problem our species has
ever faced. What are the sources of this disparity? Why can't we agree about climate change? How does something as complex and confusing as climate change
become a "problem" in the first place? This course will explore a broad array of factors, from religion to race, class to colonialism. It will focus especially closely
on the communication of scientific knowledge, risk perception, and environmental ethics, and it will apply a range of theories from the social sciences and
humanities to a set of concrete case studies In the climate change debate, culture matters. By investigating how culture shapes the politics and policy of climate
change, students will develop the interpretive skills required to understand not just this most contentious of issues, but environmental issues in general.
Format: lecture. Requirements: three 5- to 7-page essays and several shorter writing assignments.
Prerequisites: ENVI 101. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to ENVI majors and concentrators first; ANSO majors second.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR HOWE
ENVI 307(F) Environmental Law (Same as Political Science 317)
We rely on environmental laws to make human communities healthier and protect the natural world, while allowing for sustainable economic growth. Yet, despite
40 years of increasingly varied and complex legislation, balancing human needs and environmental quality has never been harder than it is today.
Environmental Studies 307 analyzes the transformation of environmental law from fringe enterprise to fundamental feature of modern political, economic and
social life. ENVI 307 also addresses the role of community activism in environmental law, from local battles over proposed industrial facilities to national cam-
paigns for improved corporate citizenship.
By the completion of the semester, students will understand both the successes and failures of modern environmental law and how these laws are being rein-
vented, through innovations like pollution credit trading and "green product" certification, to confront globalization, climate change and other emerging threats.
Format: seminar, with guest lecturers. Student-selected midterm paper, final exam and several brief papers on individual readings.
Prerequisites: Environmental Studies 101 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 25.
Required course for students wishing to complete the major in Environmental Policy; this course satisfies the "Environmental Policy" requirement for the Envi-
ronmental Studies concentration.
Satisfies one semester of the Division II requirement.
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M CASSUTO
ENVI 309(S) Environmental Policy (Same as History of Science 309, Political Science 301 and Science and Technology Studies 309)
<description coming>
Prerequisites: Environmental Studies 101 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 20). Preference given to Environmental Policy and Environ-
mental Science majors and Environmental Studies concentrators, but other students interested in public policy are welcome.
Satisfies one semester of the Division II requirement.
This course satisfies the "Environmental Policy" requirement for the Environmental Policy major and the Environmental Studies concentration.
Hour: TBA TBA
ENVI 312 Communities and Ecosystems (Same as Biology 302) (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
(See under BIOL 302 for full description.) MORALES
This course satisfies the "Natural World" requirement for the Environmental Studies concentration.
ENVI 313(S) Chicago (Same as American Studies 312 and Latina/o Studies 312)
(See under LATS 312 for full description.) RA
This course satisfies the "Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences" requirement for the Environmental Studies concentration.
ENVI 328(F) Global Environmental Politics (Same as Political Science 328)
This seminar examines the environmental and ecological dimensions of the international political economy. The focus is on the changing role of the state, global-
ization, the politics of industrial development, northsouth politics, and international environmental diplomacy. Special emphasis is devoted to the controversies
and debates that have emerged since the 1950s, including the tragedy of the commons, sustainable development, climate change and global warming, environ-
mental refugees, and evolving notions of environmental security. Format: seminar. Requirements: a research paper, to be constructed in stages over the course of
the semester and presented in class, and several shorter writing assignments; active participation in class discussions.
Prerequisites: ENVI 101 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limited to 15. Expected enrollment: 15. Priority given to Environmental Policy majors, Environ-
mental Science majors, Environmental Studies concentrators and Political Science majors.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W G. WHITE
ENVI 329 The Global Politics of Development and Underdevelopment (Same as Political Science 327) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under PSCI 327 for full description.) PAUL
This course satisfies the "Environmental Policy" requirement for the Environmental Studies concentration.
ENVI 341 Toxicology and Cancer (Same as Chemistry 341) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under CHEM 341 for full description.) RICHARDSON
This course is required for the Chemistry track through the Environmental Science major and satisfies the "Natural World" requirement for the Environmental Studies
concentration.
ENVI 346(S) Environmental Psychology (Same as Psychology 346)
(See under PSYC 346 for full description.) SAVITSKY
This course satisfies the "Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences" requirement for the Environmental Studies concentration.
ENVI 351(F,S) Marine Policy (Same as Maritime Studies 351 and Political Science 319) (Offered only at Mystic Seaport.)
(See under MAST 351 for full description.) HALL
Satisfies one semester of the Division II requirement. This course satisfies the "Environmental Policy" requirement for the Environmental Policy major and the Envi-
ronmental Studies concentration.
ENVI 364(S) Instrumental Methods of Analysis (Same as Chemistry 364)
(See under CHEM 364 for full description.) C. GOH
This course satisfies the theory/methods requirement for the Environmental Science major and the "Natural World" requirement for the Environmental Studies con-
centration.
ENVI 371 The History of U.S. Environmental Politics (Same as History 371) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under HIST 317 for full description.) MERRILL
ENVI 386(S) Environmental Policy and Natural Resource Management (Same as Economics 386 and Economics 515) (Q)
(See under ECON 386 for full description.) JACOBSON
This course satisfies the "Environmental Policy" requirement for the Environmental Policy major and the Environmental Studies concentration.
ENVI 388 Urbanization and Development (Same as Economics 388 and Economics 521) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under ECON 521 for full description.) S. SHEPPARD
This course satisfies the "Environmental Policy" requirement for the Environmental Studies concentration.
ENVI 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study of Environmental Problems
Individuals or groups of students may undertake a study of a particular environmental problem. The project may involve either pure or applied research, policy
analysis, laboratory or field studies, or may be a creative writing or photography project dealing with the environment. A variety of nearby sites are available for
the study of natural systems. Ongoing projects in the College-owned Hopkins Forest include ecological studies, animal behavior, and acid rain effects on soils,
153
plants, and animals. Students may also choose to work on local, national, or international policy or planning issues, and opportunities to work with town and
regional planning officials are available. Projects are unrestricted as to disciplinary focus. Students should consult with faculty well before the start of the semester
in which they plan to carry out their project.
Prerequisites: approval by the director of the Center.
Hour: TBA Members of the Center
ENVI 402(S) Senior Seminar: Perspectives on Environmental Studies (Same as Maritime Studies 402)
<description coming>
Format: seminar. Requirements: evaluation is based on tests, papers and/or projects, as well as active participation in class.
Prerequisites: Environmental Studies 302 or MAST 351 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 15). Preference given to senior majors in
Environmental Policy and Environmental Science and Environmental Studies or MAST concentrators.
No division 1, 2 or 3 credit. Required course for students wishing to complete the Environmental Policy and Environmental Science majors and the Environmen-
tal Studies or Maritime Studies concentrations.
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M TBA
ENVI 422T Ecology of Sustainable Agriculture (Same as Biology 422T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under BIOL 422T for full description.) ART
This course satisfies the "Natural World" requirement for the Environmental Studies concentration.
ENVI 424T(F) Conservation Biology (Same as Biology 424T) (W)
(See under BIOL 424 for full description.) J. EDWARDS
ENVI 478(S) Cold War Landscapes (Same as History 478)
(See under HIST 478 for full description.) MERRILL
ENVI 493(F)-W31-494(S) Senior Research and Thesis
ENVP 493(F)-W31-494(S) Senior Research and Thesis
ENVS 493(F)-W31-494(S) Senior Research and Thesis
FIRST-YEAR RESIDENTIAL SEMINAR
Since the early 1990s, firstyear students at Williams have had the opportunity to participate in an innovative program called the FirstYear Residential Semi-
nar (FRS). Students who elect to take this seminar live in the same residential entry and take the course together in the fall semester. The program is designed to
foster interconnections between students' social and academic lives, partly via its residential aspectdiscussions begun in class can be readily continued beyond it,
and students can test or refine their ideas about an assignment with their peers before coming to classand through the seminar's central engagement with the
question of what intellectual life is "for" and how it impacts our daily lives.
The heightened interconnection between the social and academic experiences of FRS participants is designed to help students establish comfortable and produc-
tive relationships with classmates and professors during their first year as undergraduates, and to encourage them to integrate their intellectual interests with the
rest of their pursuits at Williams. By providing students with texts and issues they negotiate collectively and collaboratively both in the classroom and beyond, the
program encourages students to share with one another their ideas, passions, values, and beliefs, and to benefit from and come to terms with the differing ap-
proaches, ideas and opinions of their peers. The FRS program seeks to reduce the sense of separation between intheclassroom life and outsidetheclassroom
life. This is done in order to emphasize that the process of learning is not restricted to the classroom, and to promote a fuller awareness among Williams' students
of their opportunities and responsibilities in contributing to one another's education and intellectual life.
The course will seek to exploit the unique residential aspect of FRS by posing questions of a kind that firstyear students are likely to find fundamental to their
experience and concerns in assimilating to college life, and which will naturally lend themselves to robust debate. The course also aims to be both a foundational
introduction to comparative methodologies and to the multidisciplinary intellectual opportunities of the liberal arts experience at Williams.
It should be stressed that FRS is not an advanced placement or honors program; its academic standards and expectations are similar to those in other firstyear
courses. It is expected that this opportunity will appeal to a broad crosssection of the entering class. In the past, FRS students (like all Williams students) have
pursued highly diverse academic and extracurricular interests. It should be noted that participation in FRS does not limit or interfere in any way with the pursuit
of other interests and courses outside of the program.
To include FRS 101 as one of your four preregistration choices, refer to Choosing Your First Year Courses web link for instructions. In the case of overenroll-
ment, selection will be made primarily on a firstcome, firstserved basis. The preregistration deadline is June 17. Because FRS links housing with coursework,
students who enroll in the course should not expect to drop it before the start of the semester without also affecting their housing situation.
FRS 101(F) Interpreting Human Experience (W)
How we make sense of the world, and of our lives, depends to a considerable degree on the intellectual methodologies we apply to the task of interpretation.
Freud, for instance, saw selfhood and perception as fundamentally determined by the structures of the psyche itself; Marx, by contrast, argued that our sense of
reality is conditioned primarily by our material and social circumstances; more recently, historian of science Thomas Kuhn has emphasized that the underlying
assumptions which shape the very questions we pose as thinkers significantly influence and limit what data, and thus what reality, we are most likely to observe.
This course aims to provide a foundational experience for the liberal arts education by engaging with key religious, political, literary, anthropological, philosophi-
cal and psychoanalytic texts with a view to complicating our sense of the purposes and possibilities of intellectual life and to confronting the challenges of epis-
temology. Readings will include works by Plato, John Stuart Mill, Marx, Coetzee, Freud, Rousseau, Woolf, Beckett, Mahfouz, Locke, along with the Bible and
the Qur'an. In keeping with the aims of the FRS program, the course is intended to foster productive connections between what we discuss and debate in class and
your broader experiences as students. The course will invite and promote interdisciplinary connections between core ways of seeing and interpreting the world,
with a strong emphasis on improving your critical and writing skills.
Format: seminar; students who participate live together in the same residential unit, and take the seminar together during the fall semester. Requirements: regular
short writing assignments designed to hone your reading skills; four papers ranging from 3-5 pages; and active contribution to discussion.
Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Enrollment limited to FRS students.
Satisfies one semester of the Division I requirement.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR J. PETHICA
GEOSCIENCES (Div. III)
Chair, Professor PAUL M. KARABINOS
Professors: COX, DETHIER, M. JOHNSON, KARABINOS, WOBUS. Assistant Professors: COOK, GILBERT. Research Associates: BAARLI,
BACKUS, BRANDRISS.
MAJOR
The Geosciences major is designed to (1) provide an understanding of the physical and biological evolution of our planet and its interacting global systems, (2)
help us learn to live sustainably with our environment, and (3) appreciate our place within the vastness of Earth history. Forces within the Earth are responsible for
the creation of mountain ranges and ocean basins. Waves, running water, and glaciers have shaped the surface of the Earth, providing the landscapes we see today.
Fossils and the geochemical record preserved in sedimentary rocks supply evidence for the evolution of life and climate on Earth.
Students who graduate with a major in Geosciences from Williams can enter several different fields of geosciences or can use their background in other
careers. Students who have continued in the geosciences are involved today, especially after graduate training, in environmental fields ranging from hydrology to
earthquake prediction, in the petroleum and mining industries, federal and state geological surveys, geological consulting firms, and teaching and research in
universities, colleges, and secondary schools. Graduates who have entered business or law have also found many applications for their geosciences background.
Other graduates now in fields as diverse as art and medicine pursue their interest in the outofdoors with a deeper appreciation for the natural world around them.
The Geosciences major includes at most two 100level courses:
154
GEOS 101 Biodiversity in Geologic Time
GEOS 102 An Unfinished Planet
GEOS 103 Global Warming and Natural Disasters
GEOS 104 Oceanography
GEOS 105 Geology Outdoors
At least two 200level courses selected from this group:
GEOS 201 Geomorphology
GEOS 202 Mineralogy and Geochemistry
GEOS 212/BIOL 211 Invertebrate Paleobiology
GEOS 214 Remote Sensing and Geographic Information Systems
GEOS 215 Climate Changes
At least two 300level courses selected from this group:
GEOS 301 Structural Geology
GEOS 302 Sedimentology
GEOS 303 Igneous and Metamorphic Petrology
The senior seminar:
GEOS 401 Stratigraphy
Finally, students must take enough electives to bring the total to a minimum of nine courses.
Geosciences embrace a very broad range of subjects. It is therefore possible  although not required  for students to focus on subdisciplines within the major.
Possible groupings are listed below as guidelines to assist students,but any array of courses that satisfies the requirements laid out above is acceptable for the
major. Geosciences faculty are happy to discuss course choices with individual students.
I Environmental Geosciences. For students interested in surface processes, climate change, and the application of geology to environmental problems such as
land use planning, resource planning, environmental impact analysis, and environmental law. Such students should also consider enrolling in the coordinate
program of the Center for Environmental Studies.
GEOS 101/ENVI 105 Biodiversity in Geologic Time
GEOS/ENVI 103 Global Warming and Natural Disasters
GEOS/ENVI/MAST 104 Oceanography
GEOS 201 Geomorphology
GEOS 205 Earth Resources
GEOS/ENVI 206 Renewable Energy and the Sustainable Campus
GEOS/ENVI 214 Remote Sensing and Geographic Information Systems
GEOS/ENVI 215 Climate Changes
GEOS/ENVI 218T The Carbon Cycle and Climate
GEOS 302 Sedimentology
(Students interested in Environmental Geosciences should consult with Professors Dethier or Cook.)
II Oceanography, Stratigraphy and Sedimentation. For students interested in the study of modern and ancient sedimentary environments and the marine
organisms that inhabited them.
GEOS 101/ENVI 105 Biodiversity in Geologic Time
GEOS/ENVI/MAST 104 Oceanography
GEOS 201 Geomorphology
GEOS 212/BIOL 211 Invertebrate Paleobiology
GEOS/ENVI 214 Remote Sensing and Geographic Information Systems
GEOS 302 Sedimentology
(Students interested in Oceanography, Stratigraphy, and Sedimentation should consult with Professors M. Johnson or Cox.)
III The Solid Earth. For students interested in plate tectonics, the processes active within the Earth, the origin and deformation of rocks and minerals, and
mineral exploration.
GEOS 102 An Unfinished Planet
GEOS 105 Geology Outdoors
GEOS 202 Mineralogy and Geochemistry
GEOS 214 Remote Sensing and Geographic Information Systems
GEOS 301 Structural Geology
GEOS 303 Igneous and Metamorphic Petrology
GEOS 360T Geology of the Appalachians
(Students interested in The Solid Earth should consult with Professors Wobus or Karabinos.)
With the consent of the department, certain courses at the 200 level or higher in biology, chemistry, mathematics and statistics, or physics may be substituted
for elective courses in the major. Credit may be granted in the Geosciences major for American Maritime Studies 211/Geosciences 210 (Oceanographic Pro-
cesses) or American Maritime Studies 311/Biology 231 (Marine Ecology) taken at Mystic Seaport.
Students considering graduate work in geosciences should consult with faculty to ensure that they have completed courses typically expected by graduate
programs. They should also take courses in the allied sciences and mathematics in addition to the requirements of the Geosciences major. The selection of outside
courses will depend on the field in which a student intends to specialize. Geosciences graduate programs commonly expect entering students to have taken
courses in chemistry and mathematics. For those going into Environmental Geosciences, courses in computer science or statistics are recommended. For those
considering Oceanography, Stratigraphy, and Sedimentation, Biology 102 and Biology 203 are suggested. For students entering SolidEarth fields, Physics 131
and 132 are recommended.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN GEOSCIENCES
In order to be recommended for the degree with honors, a student is expected to have completed at least two semesters and a winter study project (031) of
independent research culminating in a thesis that demonstrates outstanding achievement of an original and innovative nature. The principal considerations in
admitting a student to a program of independent research are mastery of fundamental material and skills, ability to pursue independent study successfully, and
demonstrated student interest and motivation.
Further advice on the major can be obtained from the department chair.
STUDY ABROAD
Students planning on studying abroad should meet as early as possible with the Department Chair to plan studyabroad courses and to discuss how potential
courses might be used in the Geosciences major. In recent years students have found that courses offered by universities in New Zealand, particularly the Univer-
sity of Otago, provide an excellent complement to courses offered at Williams. Courses offered at Norwegian Technical Universities and at several universities in
the United Kingdom have also been accepted as part of the Geosciences major. Many other studyabroad programs, however, do not usually offer courses that are
acceptable substitutes for courses required by the Williams Geosciences major.
GEOS 101(F) Biodiversity in Geologic Time (Same as Environmental Studies 105)
Is planet earth now undergoing the most severe mass extinction of species ever to have occurred during its 4.5-billion-year history? By some calculations, the
expanding population of a single species is responsible for the demise of 74 species per day. This provocative question is addressed by way of the rock and fossil
record as it relates to changes in biodiversity through deep geologic time before the appearance of Homo sapiens only 250,000 years ago. Long before human
interaction, nature conducted its own experiments on the complex relationship between evolving life and changes in the physical world. This course examines
ways in which wandering continents, shifting ocean basins, the rise and fall of mountains, the wax and wane of ice sheets, fluctuating sea level, and even crashing
asteroids all shaped major changes in global biodiversity. Particular attention is drawn to the half dozen most extensive mass extinctions and what factors may
have triggered them. Equal consideration is given to how the development of new ecosystems forever altered the physical world. How and when did the earliest
microbes oxygenate the atmosphere? Do the earliest multicellular animals from the late Precambrian portray an architectural experiment doomed to failure?
What factors contributed to the explosive rise in biodiversity at the start of the Cambrian Period? What explanation is there for the sudden appearance of verte-
155
brates? How and when did plants colonize the land? What caused the demise of the dinosaurs? Is the present dominance of mammals an accident of nature? The
answers to these and other questions are elusive, but our wise stewardship of the planet and its present biodiversity may depend on our understanding of the past.
Concepts of plate tectonics and island biogeography are applied to many aspects of the puzzle.
Format: lecture; one laboratory per week (some involving field work); plus one all-day field trip to the Helderberg Plateau and Catskill Mountains of New York.
Evaluation will be based on weekly quizzes and lab work, a midterm exam, and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 35 (expected: 30).
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-3 M,T M. JOHNSON
GEOS 102(S) An Unfinished Planet
The earth is a work-in-progress, an evolving planet whose vital signs--as expressed by earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, and shifting plates--are still strong. In a
geological time frame, nothing on earth is permanent: ocean basins open and close, mountains rise and fall, continental masses accrete and separate. There is a
message here for all who live, for an infinitesimally brief time, on the moving surface of the globe. This course uses the plate tectonics model--one of the
fundamental scientific accomplishments of this century--to interpret the processes and products of a changing earth. The emphasis will be on mountain systems
(on land and beneath the oceans) as expressions of plate interactions. Specific topics include the rocks and structures of modern and ancient mountain belts, the
patterns of global seismicity and volcanism, the nature of the earth's interior, the changing configurations of continents and ocean basins through time, and, in
some detail, the formation of the Appalachian Mountain system and the geological assembly of New England. Readings will be from a physical geology textbook
and primary source supplement, selected writings of John McPhee, and references about the geology of the Northeast.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; lab (several involving field work), two hours per week; one required all-day field trip during the last week of the semester to
the Connecticut Valley and the highlands of western Massachusetts. Evaluation will be based on two hour-tests, weekly lab work, and a scheduled final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 40). Preference to first- and second-year students.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-3 W,R WOBUS
GEOS 103(F) Global Warming and Natural Disasters (Same as Environmental Studies 103)
The destruction caused by recent hurricanes such as Katrina, devastation of prolonged drought in the African Sahel, catastrophic flooding and mudslides in
Indonesia and sea level encroachment on the Alaska coast are visible examples of natural disasters that may be modulated by climate change. Reports from the
World Bank conclude that global climate change, together with environmental degradation and urbanization, has the potential to increase the severity and impact
of natural disasters. In this course we globally examine geological and climatological processes that "set up" natural disasters such as hurricanes, floods, land-
slides, droughts, extreme temperatures, and coastal surges, as well as the processes that condition availability of water resources. We study in detail the causes and
anticipated consequences of human alteration of climate and its impact on the spectrum of natural hazards and resources. During laboratory sessions we use local
field sites and computer models to analyze recent disasters/hazards and options for mitigating future impacts and study trends in weather and climate.
Format: lectures, 3 hours per week; laboratory, 2 hours per week. Evaluation based on written reports from laboratories, two hour exams and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 24 (expected 24). Preference to first- and second-year students.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF Lab: 1-3 M,W COOK and DETHIER
GEOS 104(S) Oceanography (Same as Environmental Studies 104 and Maritime Studies 104)
In this integrated introduction to the oceans we will examine formation and history of the ocean basins; the composition and origin of seawater; currents, tides, and
waves; ocean-atmosphere interactions; oceans and climate; deep-marine environments; coastal processes; productivity in the oceans; and marine resources.
Coastal oceanography will be investigated on an all-day field trip, hosted by the Williams-Mystic program in Connecticut.
Format: lecture/discussion, three hours per week; one two-hour laboratory in alternate weeks; one all-day field trip. Evaluation will be based on two hour exams,
lab work, oral presentation of an oceanographic topic, participation in the field trip, and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 50 (expected: 50). Preference to first-year and secondyear students.
This course may not be taken pass-fail; not available for the Gaudino option. Students who have taken GEOS 210/MAST 211 (at Williams-Mystic) may not take
GEOS 104 for credit.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF Lab: 1-3 M,T COX
GEOS 105(F) Geology Outdoors (W)
An introduction to geology through student field projects. The mountains, lakes, rivers, and valleys of the Williamstown area provide unusual opportunities for
learning geology in the field. Student projects will include the study of streams as active agents of erosion and deposition, the effects of glaciation on the New
England landscape, and the history of mountain building in the Appalachians. Following several group projects introducing the techniques of field geology,
students will pursue independent projects on subjects of particular interest to them. This course departs from the standard science course format with three lectures
and a required lab each week. Instead, emphasis is placed on learning through active participation in field projects and presentation of results through high quality
writing. The class will meet two afternoons each week from 1:00 to 3:50 p.m. There will be two all day field trips. This course is designed for students who have a
serious interest in geology or other natural and environmental sciences, the outdoors, and writing.
Format: discussion/field laboratory, six hours per week. Evaluation will be based on participation in field work and discussions, five 8-page papers based on field
projects, and an oral presentation of independent projects. Students will use detailed comments on their papers to improve their writing style in successive assign-
ments.
No prerequisites; no previous knowledge of geology required. Open only to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected:10).
Hour: 1:10-3:50 TF KARABINOS
GEOS 201(F) Geomorphology (Same as Environmental Studies 205)
This course is designed for geosciences majors and for environmental studies students interested in surficial geologic processes and their importance in shaping
the physical environment. The course emphasizes the nature and rates of constructional, weathering, and erosional processes and the influence of climatic, tecton-
ic, and volcanic forces on landform evolution. Labs focus on field measurements of hydrologic and geomorphic processes in the Williamstown area as well as on
the analysis of topographic maps and stereo air photos.
Format: lecture/discussion, three hours per week; laboratory, three hours per week/student projects; weekend field trip to the White Mountains. Evaluationwill be
based on two hour exams, a project, and lab work.
Prerequisites: any 100-level Geosciences course or consent of the instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 15).
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR Lab 1-4 T DETHIER
GEOS 202(S) Mineralogy and Geochemistry
This course progresses from hand-specimen morphology and crystallography through element distribution and crystal chemistry to the phase relations, composi-
tional variation, and mineral associations within major rock-forming mineral systems. Laboratory work includes the determination of crystal symmetry; mineral
separation; the principles and applications of optical emission spectroscopy, x-ray diffraction and x-ray fluorescence analysis; the use of the petrographic micro-
scope; and the identification of important minerals in hand specimen and thin section.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; laboratory, three hours per week; independent study of minerals in hand specimen; one afternoon field trip. Evaluation will
be based on one hour test, lab work, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: one 100-level Geosciences course or consent of the instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 12).
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR Lab: 1-4 T WOBUS
GEOS 205 Earth Resources (Same as Environmental Studies 207) (Not offered 2011-2012)
The metal in your soda can, the plastic in your Nalgene, the components of your computer, the glass in your window, the hydrocarbons being burned to keep
you warm in the winter or to transport you in cars or aircraft, the cars and aircraft themselves: all are made of materials mined from the earth. Right now there
are more people building more houses, paving more roads, making more vehicles, more electronics, and more plastic packagingall with geologic materials.
As demand soars in both established and growing economies, and as we realize the environmental damage that can result from resource extraction and process-
ing, the importance of understanding earth's resources increases. Finding new deposits and managing those we have requires insight into the geology that
underlies the location and origin of strategic earth materials.
This class introduces the geologic processes that control formation, distribution, and extent of materials reserves: dimension stone and gravel, base and precious
metal ores, gemstones, petroleum, nuclear energy sources, and specialty materials for medical, technological, and military uses.
Format: lecture, three hours per week. Four field labs in the course of the semester, and a semester project culminating in a poster session. Grading will be based
on one hour exam, a final exam, participation in labs, and the semester project.
Prerequisites: one 100level Geosciences course or permission of instructor; open to firstyear students. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). May not be taken
pass/fail. Preference given to sophomores and Geosciences majors.
COX
156
GEOS 206 Renewable Energy and the Sustainable Campus (Same as Environmental Studies 206) (Not offered 2011-2012)
Rising oil and electricity costs disrupt the economy and help fuel global insecurity. Clearer understanding of how fossil-fuel consumption contributes to global
climate change is increasing demand for renewable sources of energy and for more sustainable campus environments. What sources of energy will supply
Williams College and nearby areas in the twenty-first century? How will campus buildings, old and new, continue to be attractive spaces while making far more
efficient use of heat and light? This course is a practical introduction to renewable sources of energy, including conservation, and to their application to the
campus environment. Topics covered include: biological sources of energy (biomass, biogas, liquid fuels), wind energy, geothermal and solar energy, energy
efficiency and the environmental impacts of using renewable energy. Lectures, field trips and individual projects emphasize examples from the campus and
nearby area.
Format: seminar, three hours per week. Evaluation will be based on an hour exam, class participation that includes a seminar presentation, and a research project
that investigates some aspect of campus energy use and greenhouse-gas emissions.
Enrollment limit 20 (expected: 20). Preference given to sophomores.
DETHIER
GEOS 210(F,S) Oceanographic Processes (Same as Maritime Studies 211) (Offered only at Mystic Seaport.)
(See under MAST 211 for full description.) GILBERT
Students who have taken Geosciences 104 may not take Geosciences 210 for credit.
GEOS 212(S) Invertebrate Paleobiology (Same as Biology 211)
This course offers an introduction to the study of prehistoric life. The fossils of marine invertebrates provide an excellent foundation for this purpose, because they
are widespread and abundant, they are often well-preserved, and they have a record that reaches back in time over 600 million years. The intellectual discovery of
fossils as organic relics and the ways in which fossils were used by earlier generations to support conflicting views on nature are briefly surveyed. The lecture
topics that follow are organized to illustrate the various directions explored by paleontologists today to solve a broad range of questions. These include: biological
and paleontological views on the species concept relevant to taxonomy; ongoing debate over the timing and mechanisms of evolution; biostratigraphy as a means
to correlate sedimentary rocks; functional morphology as a means to reconstruct the biomechanics of extinct species; analysis of fossil assemblages to interpret
the ecology of ancient environments; paleogeography as related to patterns in biodiversity, and the possible causes of mass extinctions. Laboratory exercises
utilize superb fossil collections to study the processes of fossilization and to survey the biology and taxonomy of the major invertebrate phyla.
Format: lecture/laboratory; field trip to the Lower Devonian Helderbergs of New York State. Evaluation will be based on weekly lab reports, a midterm paper, a
midterm exam, a lab practicum, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: any 100-level Geosciences course or Biology 102 or 203. No enrollment limit (expected: 12).
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR Lab: 1-4 W M. JOHNSON
GEOS 214(S) Remote Sensing and Geographic Information Systems (Same as Environmental Studies 214)
This class provides a practical look at fastevolving methods used to integrate information about the earth's surface with spatial data collected by disciplines such
as archaeology, economics, the field sciences, history and political science. Remote sensing involves collection and processing of data from satellite and airborne
sensors to yield environmental information about the earth's surface and lower atmosphere. Remote sensing allows regional mapping of rock materials, analysis
of vegetation cover and measurement of urban areas and landuse change over time. A Geographic Information System (GIS) links satellitebased environmen-
tal measurements with spatial data such as topography, transportation networks, and political boundaries, allowing display and quantitative analysis at the same
scale using the same geographic reference. This course covers concepts of remotedata capture and geographic rectification using a Global Positioning System
(GPS), as well as principles of remote sensing, including linear and nonlinear image enhancements, convolution filtering, and image classification. Principles of
GIS include display and classification, spatial buffers, logical overlays and techniques of spatial analysis. Weekly labs focus on training in the application of
techniques using data from the region and other areas of North America.
Class format: lecture, three hours per week; laboratory, three hours per week. Evaluation will be based on weekly lab exercises, an hour exam, and a final project.
Prerequisites: at least one introductory course in Biology, Environmental Studies, or Geosciences. Enrollment limit: 16 (expected: 16). Preference given to sopho-
mores and juniors.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MW Lab: 1-4 M DETHIER and BACKUS
GEOS 215(S) Climate Changes (Same as Environmental Studies 215) (Q)
In recent years, there has been a growing public and scientific interest in the earth's climate and its variability. This interest reflects both concern over future
climate changes resulting from anthropogenic increases in atmospheric greenhouse gases and growing recognition of the economic impact of "natural" climate
variability (for example, El Nio events), especially in the developing world. Efforts to understand the earth's climate system and predict future climate changes
require both study of parameters controlling present day climate and detailed studies of climate changes in the past. In this course, we will review the processes
that control the earth's climate, like insolation, the greenhouse effect, ocean circulation, configuration of continents, and positive and negative feedbacks . At the
same time, we will review the geological record of climate changes in the past, examining their causes
Laboratory exercises and problem sets will emphasize developing problem solving skills and using quantitative analyses to assess if a given explanation is pos-
sible and reasonable. These exercises will include developing and applying numerical models of the radiative balance of earth and the carbon cycle.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; one three-hour lab every other week. Evaluation will be based on lab exercises and problem sets (25%), three hour exams
(50%), and a final project (25%) where students will collect, analyze, and interpret data.
Prerequisites: 100-level course in Geoscience, Chemistry, or Physics or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). Preference to Geoscience
majors.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 W COOK
GEOS 217T Planetary Geology (Same as Astronomy 217T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
The diversity of our solar system is incredible. No two plants are exactly alike, and as we acquire more data and higher-resolution images, our sense of wonder
grows. However, we can't hike around and hammer rocks on Venus or Titan, so we have to infer composition, form, texture and process from remotely-cap-
tured images and sparse chemical and spectral data. This leaves plenty of room for interpretation and hypothesising about geological processes on other bodies.
Through reading recent research papers we will examine a number of topics, including the possible Late Heavy Bombardment of the moon, tectonics on Venus,
water on Mars, hidden oceans on Europa, and the methane weather cycle on Titan.
Format: tutorial. Evaluation will be based on six 2500-word papers, discussion, and critical analysis. There will be a strong focus on polished writing and
argument, and papers will be thoroughly edited by the professor for style, grammar and syntax. Students will improve their writing by integrating into succes-
sive papers the editorial comments they receive, and also by editing the writing of their tutorial partners.
Prerequisites: one Geosciences course, or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to sophomores.
COX
GEOS 218T(F) The Carbon Cycle and Climate (Same as Environmental Studies 218T) (W)
Carbon dioxide is the most important atmospheric greenhouse gas, and human activities are adding carbon to the atmosphere at unprecedented rates. Yet only half
of the carbon we emit each year remains in the atmosphere because biological, geological, and chemical processes continually cycle carbon from the atmosphere
to the ocean, to land plants and soils, and to sediments. The workings of the carbon cycle are at the center of many controversies surrounding the causes of past
climate changes and the outcome of future global warming. How was the earth's climate steered by past changes in the carbon cycle, billions and millions of years
ago? Will natural processes continue to take up such a high percentage of carbon emissions as emissions continue and climate changes? Can and should we coax
natural systems to take up even more carbon? How might carbon emissions be reduced on the scale of the Williams campus? We will explore these issues through
readings of current journal articles and reports.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: The class will meet weekly for a one-hour orientation to the topic, and students will meet in pairs for one hour each week with the
instructor. Each student will orally present a written paper every other week for criticism during the tutorial session. Evaluation will be based on the five papers
and each student's effectiveness as a critic.
Prerequisites: one introductory course in Biology, Chemistry, or Geosciences or one course cross-listed in the Environmental Studies program; not open to first
year students. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to sophomores and juniors.
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. COOK
GEOS 220T(S) Evolution Of and On Volcanic Islands (Same as Environmental Studies 219) (W)
Plate tectonic theory accounts for the vast majority of volcanic islands in ocean basins. They form above mantle plume hot spots (Hawaiian and Galapagos
Islands), subduction zones (Aleutian and Indonesian arcs), and midocean ridges (Azores and Ascension Island). Iceland is unusual because it is located above a
hot spot and the midAtlantic ridge. Each plate tectonic setting produces chemically distinctive magmas, and the lifespan of volcanic islands varies widely.
157
Islands above hot spots may be geographically remote and emergent for only several million years, but be part of a longlived sequence of islands that persists for
over a hundred million years. In contrast, island arc volcanoes belong to long geographically continuous chains of volcanoes, commonly in close proximity to
continents. This tutorial explores the geologic evolution and lifespan of volcanic islands from formation to submergence, and searches for correlations between
these characteristics and plate tectonic setting. We will also consider how geographic isolation, areal extent, lifespan, and climate affect biological evolution on
volcanic islands. There will be weekly tutorial meetings with pairs of students, and all members are eligible to participate in a twoweek field trip to Hawaii and
Kauai during Spring Break at no cost to students.
Format: tutorial. Evaluation based on five written papers and an individual contribution to a field guide to Hawaiian geology. Students on the field trip will also
produce a field journal.
Prerequisites: any 100level geosciences course. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to geosciences majors and students with a demonstrated
interest in geosciences.
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. KARABINOS
GEOS 301(F) Structural Geology (Q)
The structure of the earth's crust is constantly changing and the rocks making up the crust must deform to accommodate these changes. Rock deformation occurs
over many scales ranging from individual mineral grains to mountain belts. This course deals with the geometric description of structures, stress and strain analy-
sis, deformation mechanisms in rocks, and the large scale forces responsible for crustal deformation. The laboratories cover geologic maps and cross sections,
folds and faults, stereonet analysis, field techniques, strain, and stress.
Format: lecture/discussion, three hours per week; laboratory, three hours per week. Evaluation will be based on weekly laboratory exercises, problem sets, a
midterm exam, and a final exam. Many of the laboratories and problem sets use geometry, algebra, and several projection techniques to solve common problems
in structural geology.
Prerequisites: Geosciences 101, 102, 103, or 105 or permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 12).
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MW Lab: 1-4 M KARABINOS
GEOS 302(S) Sedimentology (W)
The composition and architecture of sediments and sedimentary rocks preserve information about the rocks that were eroded to form them, the fluids and forces
that transported them, the mechanisms by which they were deposited, and the processes by which they were lithified. This course will provide an introduction to
the principles of sedimentology, including sedimentary petrology, fluid mechanics, bedform analysis, and facies architecture.
Format: lecture/discussion, three hours per week; laboratory, three hours per week; two half-day and one all-day field trip. Evaluation will be based on laboratory
work, writing assignments, an hour exam, and a final exam. Ten written critiques (each 350-400 words) of specific assigned papers from the sedimentological
literature are designed to teach clear written expression and careful analytical reading. Papers will be thoroughly edited for style, grammar and syntax. Students
will improve their writing by integrating editorial comments into successive papers. Each student will compile his/her papers as a growing body of work, and each
new paper will be read and edited in the context of the previous submissions.
Prerequisites: Geosciences 202 (may be taken concurrently with permission of instructor). Enrollment limit: 16 (expected:12).
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR Lab: 1-4 R COX
GEOS 303(F) Igneous and Metamorphic Petrology
The origin of metamorphic, plutonic, and volcanic rocks are examined in the light of field evidence and experimental work. Rock texture and composition are
used to interpret the environment of formation of individual rock types, and important assemblages are related, where possible, to theories of global tectonics.
Laboratory work emphasizes the study of individual rock units and rock suites in hand specimens and by petrographic and xray techniques.
Format: lecture/discussion, three hours per week; laboratory, three hours per week; several field trips including one allday trip to central New Hampshire. Evalu-
ation will be based on lab work, an hour test, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Geosciences 202 or consent of the instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 12).
Hour: 9:5511:10 TR Lab: 14 W WOBUS
GEOS 360T Geology of the Appalachians (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
The Appalachians are the eroded remnants of a mountain range that once rivaled the Alps and, perhaps, the Himalayas in elevation. They formed hundreds of
millions of years ago in three distinct collisions with other continents. The Appalachians record a rich geologic history of continental rifting, formation and
closing of ocean basins, continental collision, and mountain building. We will read papers that describe the history of the Appalachians beginning with the Late
Precambrian opening of the Iapetus ocean, through the Paleozoic orogenies that formed the Appalachians, and ending with the formation of the Atlantic. The
history of the Appalachians remains controversial, in part, because of diverse perspectives that geologists bring to their work and interpretations, such as differ-
ent specialties, guiding paradigms, and field areas. The readings are designed to illuminate the roots of the important controversies as well as the geologic
history of this well studied mountain belt.
Format: tutorial; after an initial group meeting, students will meet in pairs for one hour each week with the instructor. Each student will orally present a written
paper every other week for criticism during the tutorial session. Evaluation will be based on the five papers and each student's effectiveness as a critic.
Prerequisites: one upper-level Geosciences course. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10).
KARABINOS
GEOS 401(F) Stratigraphy
Study of the composition, sequence, and correlation of layered sedimentary rocks is traditionally applied to geologic mapping and the reconstruction of ancient
environments. Through the use of various time scales, stratigraphy is the unifier of historical geology while also at the heart of conceptual debates over the
uniformism or episodicity of geological processes. During the first half of the course, emphasis will be placed on the various methods of correlation based on
physical means and the use of fossils. The second half of the course will focus on plate migrations and the relationships between climate and depositional environ-
ments as a model for the broad scale interpretation of sedimentary sequences. This part of the course will be conducted as a seminar, with students responsible for
topics on the paleogeographic linkage of climate-sensitive facies and natural resources. As a final project, students working individually or in pairs will present a
detailed analysis of North-American stratigraphic relationships during a specific interval of Cambrian to Cretaceous time. In sequence, these class reports will
provide highlights of the geologic history of the North-American continent through Paleozoic and Mesozoic time.
Format: lecture, three hours a week; one three-hour lab per week during the first half of the course (including field problems); independent projects during the
second half of the course; one major field trip. Evaluation will be based on weekly lab assignments during the first half of the semester, seminar participation, and
the completion of a final project during the second half of the semester, as well as a midterm and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Geosciences 302 or permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 12).
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR Lab: 1-4 R M. JOHNSON
GEOS 493(F)-W31-494(S) Senior Thesis
GEOS 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
GERMAN (Div. I)
Chair, Professor GAIL NEWMAN
Professors: DRUXES**, B. KIEFFER, NEWMAN***. Visiting Assistant Professor: COLLENBERG. Lecturer: E. KIEFFER.
Teaching Associates: EBERHAUT, GEBHARD.
LANGUAGE STUDY
The department provides language instruction to enable the student to acquire all four linguistic skills: understanding, speaking, reading, and writing. German
101-W-102 stresses communicative competence and covers German grammar in full. German 103 combines a review of grammar with extensive practice in
reading and conversation. German 104 aims to develop facility in speaking, writing, and reading. German 111-112 offers an alternative introduction to German
with a focus on reading competence. German 201 emphasizes accuracy and idiomatic expression in speaking and writing. German 202 combines advanced
language study with the examination of topics in German-speaking cultures. Students who have studied German in secondary school should take the placement
test given during First Days in September to determine which course to take.
STUDY ABROAD
The department strongly encourages students who wish to attain fluency in German to spend a semester or year studying in Germany or Austria, either inde-
pendently or in one of several approved foreign study programs. German 104 or the equivalent is the minimum requirement for junior-year abroad programs
158
sponsored by American institutions. Students who wish to enroll directly in a German-speaking university should complete at least 201 or the equivalent. In any
case, all students considering study-abroad should discuss their language preparation with a member of the department.
LITERATURE IN TRANSLATION
The department regularly offers courses on German literature in translation for students who have little or no knowledge of German, but who wish to become
acquainted with the major achievements in German literary and intellectual history.
ADVANCED STUDIES
The department offers a variety of advanced courses for students who wish to investigate German literature, thought, and culture in the original. German 202 is
given each year and is recommended as preparation for upper-level courses.
THE CERTIFICATE IN GERMAN
To enhance a student's educational and professional profiles, the department offers the Certificate in German. It requires seven courses--three fewer than the
major--and is especially appropriate for students who begin study of the language at Williams.
Students who enter Williams with previous training in German may substitute more advanced courses for the 100-level courses; they can also be exempted
from up to two of the required courses.
The student must achieve proficiency at the level of a B in German 104 or the equivalent.
Appropriate elective courses can usually be found among the offerings of German, Art History, History, Music, Philosophy, Political Science, and Theatre.
Required Courses
German 101
German 102
German 103
German 104
German 201
Electives
z
at least one course (in German or English) on German cultural history (literature, art, drama, music)
z
at least one course (in German or English) on German intellectual, political, or social history
THE MAJOR
The German major offers students an interdisciplinary approach to German intellectual and cultural history by combining courses in German language and
literature with courses in History, Philosophy, Music, and other appropriate fields.
For students who start German at Williams, the major requires a minimum of ten courses: German 101-102, 103, 104, 201 and 202; two 300-level German
courses; and two electives from either German courses numbered above 202 or appropriate offerings in other departments.
For students who have acquired intermediate or greater proficiency in the language before coming to Williams, the minimum requirement is nine courses:
German 202; two 300-level German courses; and six other courses selected from German courses numbered above 102 and appropriate offerings in other depart-
ments.
Examples of appropriate courses in other departments are:
ArtH 267 Art in Germany: 1960 to the Present
History 239 Modern German History
History 338 The History of the Holocaust
Music 108 The Symphony
Music 117 Mozart
Music 118 Bach
Music 120 Beethoven
Philosophy 309 Kant
Students may receive major credit for as many as four courses taken during study abroad in Germany or Austria in the junior year.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN GERMAN
Students earn honors by completing a senior thesis (German 493-W31-494) of honors quality.
Students interested in honors should consult with the department chair no later than April 15 of their junior year. The usual qualifications for pursuing honors
are: (1) an overall GPA of 3.33 or better, (2) a departmental GPA of 3.67 or better, (3) a strong interest in a specific topic for which an appropriate faculty advisor
will be available in the senior year.
GERM 101(F)-W88-102(S) Elementary German
German 101-102 is for students with no previous study of German whose ultimate aim is to gain comprehensive fluency in the language. The course employs a
communicative approach involving all four language skills: listening comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing. We focus initially on practice in understand-
ing the spoken language and then move rapidly to basic forms of dialogue and self-expression. In the second semester, reading and especially writing come
increasingly into play. The course meets five days a week. Credit granted only on successful completion of 102. Students are required to attend and pass the
sustaining program in Winter Study Period.
Format: lecture and discussion. Principal requirements: active class participation, written homework, short compositions, oral exercises and tests.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 15).
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MTWRF First Semester: NEWMAN
10:00-10:50 MTWRF Second Semester: COLLENBERG
GERM 103(F) Intermediate German I
This course will provide a thorough grammar review at the intermediate level with plenty of reading, writing, and speaking practice and creative projects. Using
materials provided by the instructor, students will watch and discuss contemporary German feature films and develop a deeper understanding of the German
language and culture. Conducted in German.
Format: 4-skills language course. Requirements: extremely active class participation, midterm, homework assignments, short quizzes, compositions, and a writ-
ten and oral final project.
Prerequisites: German 102 or the equivalent. Enrollment limit: 18 (expected: 15).
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF COLLENBERG
GERM 104(S) Intermediate German II
The prerequisite to all advanced courses in German. Practice in speaking and writing; reading in a variety of contemporary texts ranging from interviews to social
documentary to short stories. Weekly film clips from a popular German TV series. Conducted in German.
Format: discussion, small group work. Requirements: daily short writing assignments, small group work, midterm, and final.
Prerequisites: German 103 or equivalent preparation. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 15).
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF DRUXES
GERM 111(F)-112(S) Reading German for Beginners
German 111-112 is for students whose principal reason for acquiring German is to work with written materials. It is particularly appropriate for students majoring
in fields in which the ability to read primary and secondary texts in German can be crucial, such as Art History, Classics, Comparative Literature, History, Music,
Philosophy, Political Science, and Theatre. In the first semester students learn the elements of grammar and acquire a core vocabulary. In the second semester,
while covering advanced grammatical topics, they practice reading in a variety of textual genres in the humanities and social sciences. They also learn how to
work with dictionaries, encyclopedias, and other reference works, in both printed and online forms. By the end of the course they will have a solid foundation for
building proficiency in German, whether through self-study or further course work. Credit granted only on successful completion of 112.
Format: lecture and discussion. Principle requirements: written homework, quizzes, tests, active class participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 15). Preference given to art-history graduate students, seniors and juniors.
Students who have taken or plan to take 101 and/or 102 may not take 111-112.
Students who wish to continue their study of German after 112 should consult a member of the department.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF First Semester: B. KIEFFER
9:00-9:50 MWF Second Semester: B. KIEFFER
159
GERM 201(F) Advanced German
This course expands on the reading, writing, and speaking skills acquired at the intermediate level, via extensive and intensive work with texts of various sorts,
including web sites, newspapers, fiction, audio and video material. Conducted in German; Readings in German.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: active class participation, frequent short writing assignments, oral presentations, final project.
Prerequisites: German 104 or the equivalent. No enrollment limit (expected: 12). Preference will be given to German majors.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF B. KIEFFER
GERM 202(S) Switzerland
While the tourist brochures for Switzerland tout the myth of the mountain, the Swiss writer Hugo Loetscher asserts that Swiss literature and culture defy that
myth; they traditionally represent rather the flight from the mountains into the cities, the quest for education, and the desire for home and identity. Students will
read texts by German speaking Swiss authors such as Gottfried Keller, Johanna Spyri, Friedrich Drrenmatt, Max Frisch, Robert Walser, Peter Bichsel, Hugo
Loetscher, Hermann Hesse and Zoe Jenny. We will also examine the concept of "Swissness" and how cultural artifacts such as literature, art, films, and products
contribute to, reflect, and challenge ideas about this complex, multi-lingual, multi-cultural, global country. Readings and discussions in German.
Format: seminar. Requirements: frequent short writing assignments, midterm, final exam, one oral presentation.
Prerequisites: German 201 or the equivalent. No enrollment limit (expected: 12).
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR COLLENBERG
GERM 202 Vienna 1900-2000 and Beyond (Not offered 2011-2012)
Once the center of a vast empire, Austria has tended to be overlooked since the demise of that empire. In fact, though, its trajectory can usefully serve as a guide
to the complex developments in Europe before, during, and after the Second World War. Contemporary Austria is indeed a laboratory of post-Cold War Eu-
rope: Its population is remarkably multicultural, in spite of resistances; its language is rich and dynamic, yet increasingly dominated by its more powerful
neighbor to the north; its political attitudes encompass extreme nationalism, pan-Europeanism, and much in between. Austria's capital, Vienna, will form the
lens through which we examine the origins and quirks of this fascinating, sometimes paradoxical, culture. The course will employ a variety of written, video,
audio, and cyber-materials to explore some of the issues facing contemporary Austria, and to continue the development of advanced reading, writing, and
speaking skills begun in German 201. Conducted in German.
Format: discussion/lecture. Requirements: active class participation, several 1- to 2-page writing assignments, final written/oral project.
Prerequisite: German 201 or the equivalent. Enrollment Limit: 16 (expected: 8). Preference given to German majors.
NEWMAN
GERM 202 Berlin--Multicultural Metropolis Between East and West (Not offered 2011-2012)
We will examine texts and films about Berlin as a center of cultural and social transformations in the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries, with special
emphasis on the post-wall period. We will move from the turn of the century (when the city's population had recently tripled in size) to the establishing of Berlin
as a world capital in the 1920s, then through Nazi-era transformations, wartime destruction and the cold war division of the city. We will conclude with the
reshaping of the city after the fall of the Berlin wall. Texts and films may include: Walter Benjamin, Berliner Kindheit um 1900, excerpts from Ulrich van der
Heyden und Joachim Zeller's Kolonialmetropole Berlin, Walter Ruttmann, Sinfonie einer Grostadt, Irmgard Keun's Das kunstseidene Mdchen, Nazi archi-
tect Albert Speer's plans for Berlin as the fascist capital "Germania," the 1956 East German youth protest film Ecke Schnhauser, short fiction by Reiner
Kunze, Aras ren, Peter Schneider, Bodo Morshuser, Irina Liebmann. Recent films to be included are: Sonnenallee, Goodbye, Lenin!, Berlin is in Germany,
Geschwister.
Format: seminar/discussion. Requirements: frequent short writing assignments. Conducted in German.
Prerequisite: German 201 or equivalent.
DRUXES
GERM 301T German Studies, 1770-1830 (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
From Gotthold Ephraim Lessing, whose quintessentially Enlightenment Nathan der Weise centers around all too familiar religious conflicts, to E.T.A. Hoff-
mann, whose "Sandman" formed the centerpiece of Freud's essay on the uncanny--and not forgetting Goethe's Faust--German literature from 1750-1830 has
informed a good deal of 20th-century thinking. This course will explore this amazing explosion of insight and creativity through the close reading of some of its
most prominent literary and theoretical texts, including many of the following: Kant, Lessing, Goethe, Novalis, Kleist, Hoffman, Eichendorff, Gnderrode,
Brentano, and B. von Arnim. Readings and discussion will be in German for tutorial pairs who speak German, in English for those who don't.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: paper or commentary most weeks.
Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to students in German and Comparative literature.
NEWMAN
GERM 303T German Studies, 1900-1938 (Not offered 2011-2012)(W)
This tutorial surveys the major social and literary movements of Germany from the turn of the century to the rise of the Nazis. We will study various phenomena
associated with modernism: urban institutions like the department store and the cinema (Hessel, Benjamin), expressionist poetry (Trakl, Lasker-Schler), gen-
erational conflict via Kafka's alienated sons, Jews in Germany (Klemperer), the patriotic fervor of World War One and its aftermath (Toller, Jnger), Dadaism
(Schwitters), the Weimar Republic, inflation and the big crash (Fallada), Nazi ideology and propaganda tactics (Riefenstahl, Speer). Wherever possible, we will
read journalism, diary entries, or letters that give us insight into daily life during this highly fractured period of tumultuous political and social changes.Readings
in German or English.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: weekly 1-hour meetings, alternating 4-page tutorial papers, and 2-page responses.
Prerequisites: for students taking the course in German, German 201 or German 202; for students taking the course in English, one previous course in English
or Comparative Literature. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 8).
DRUXES
GERM 310T(S) Storm and Stress and More (Same as Comparative Literature 310) (W)
The first half of the course will focus on the Sturm-und-Drang movement (1770-1785) that launched the literary careers of Goethe and Schiller; the second half
will map the lasting influence of the movement's extremist aesthetic by considering a variety of works by authors, artists and filmmakers of the 19th and 20th
centuries. We'll deal with themes like forbidden love, suicide, crime, war and revolution and with formal tendencies like poetic egotism, social realism, and
radical expressionism. We'll read plays, poems, manifestos and stories by Goethe, Klinger and Schiller, and then move on to texts by Bchner, Nietzsche,
Hauptmann, Wedekind, Kafka and Benn, paintings by Marc, Schmidt-Rottluff, Lohse-Wchtler and Kirchner, and films by Murnau, Lang and Herzog. All
materials in German for those who take the course as GERM 310T; all materials in English for those who take it as COMP 310T.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: five 4-page presentations and five 2-page responses.
Prerequisites: for GERM 310T, German 202 or the equivalent; for COMP 310T, at least one college-level course in literature. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10).
Preference given to German majors and Comparative Literature majors.
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. B. KIEFFER
GERM 311(F) O Immortality! The Legacy of Heinrich von Kleist (W)
2011 is the 200-year anniversary of the death of Heinrich von Kleist, the German author who is famous for texts that challenge ideas of reason, destiny, truth,
patriotism, and love and for his death on November 21, 1811, when he shot his terminally ill friend and then himself at the Kleiner Wannsee near Berlin. In this
course, we will follow the ongoing commemorations of Kleist in Germany and abroad, becoming familiar with his biography and most influential works and their
20th- and 21st-century reception in literature and film. Students will read and discuss texts such as Das Erdbeben in Chili, and Michael Kohlhaas, among others,
and analyze their reception in works by Christa Wolf, Heiner Mller, Elfriede Jelinek, Alexander Kluge, Dagmar Leupold, and in films by directors such as
Volker Schlndorff and Helma Sanders Brahms. By the end of the semester, students will have an overview of late 20th-century literature through the "green
lens" of Heinrich von Kleist and feel comfortable questioning the "truth" of his ghost and legacy. Reading and discussion in German.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active class participation, one short oral presentation, frequent short (1-2 page) writing assignments, and one 5-page paper, pre-
sented orally at a conference at the end of the semester, then revised into a 10-page final paper.
Prerequisites: German 202 or the equivalent. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to German majors and serious German students.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR COLLENBERG
GERM 493(F)-W31-494(S) Senior Thesis
NEWMAN
160
GERM 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
NEWMAN
GERM 511(F)-512(S) Reading German for Beginners
German 511-512 is for students whose principal reason for acquiring German is to work with written materials. It is particularly appropriate for students majoring
in fields in which the ability to read primary and secondary texts in German can be crucial, such as Art History, Comparative Literature, History, Music, Philoso-
phy, Political Science, and Theatre. In the first semester students learn the elements of grammar and acquire a core vocabulary. In the second semester, while
covering advanced grammatical topics, they practice reading in a variety of textual genres in the humanities and social sciences. They also learn how to work with
dictionaries, encyclopedias, and other reference works, in both printed and online forms. By the end of the course they will have a solid foundation for building
proficiency in German, whether through self-study or further course work. Credit granted only on successful completion of 512.
Format: lecture and discussion. Principal requirements: written homework, quizzes, tests, active class participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 15). Preference given to Graduate Program students, seniors and juniors.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF B. KIEFFER
GERM 513(F) Readings in German Art History and Criticism
This is an advanced course in German reading, focused on the literature of Art History. Texts are selected from fundamental works of art history and criticism and
from writings related to concurrent seminars in the Graduate Program in the History of Art. The course includes a grammar review.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on written homework, quizzes, tests, and class participation.
Prerequisites: German 511-512 or equivalent preparation (a score of 500 or higher on the SAT II German Reading Test). Enrollment limited to Graduate Program
students; others by permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 12).
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF E. KIEFFER
HISTORY (Div. II)
Chair, Professor CHRIS WATERS
Professors: R. DALZELL**, DEW***, KITTLESON, KOHUT, MERRILL, MUTONGI***, SINGHAM, W. WAGNER*, WATERS, WHALEN,
WONG, WOOD. Associate Professors: BERNHARDSSON, L. BROWN*, GARBARINI, LONG, SINIAWER*. Assistant Professors: BEN-
SON, CHAPMAN*, DUBOW, FISHZON**, A. REINHARDT, SPERO. Bennett Boskey Visiting Professor of History: HUFFMANЁ.Research
Associates: GUNDERSHEIMER, STARENKO. Bolin Fellow: PARWANI. Stint Foundation Fellow: ROSENGREN.
GENERAL STATEMENT OF GOALS
The History department seeks to cultivate a critical understanding and awareness of the past and the development of our students' intellectual, analytical, and
rhetorical abilities. In pursuit of the first objective, through its curricular offerings the department seeks both to expose students to the richness, diversity, and
complexities of human history over long periods of time and in different geographic regions and to provide students with the opportunity to explore aspects of the
past in depth. At the same time, the department endeavors to develop students' ability to think historically and to foster in them an appreciation of the contested
nature and the value of historical knowledge by confronting them with the variety of ways in which historians have approached and interpreted the past, engaging
them in issues that provoke historical debate, and familiarizing them with the nature and uses of historical evidence. By engaging students in the critical study of
the past, finally, the department seeks to develop their ability to formulate historically informed analyses and their analytical and rhetorical skills.
COURSE NUMBERS
The course numbering system used by the History Department reflects the different types and objectives of courses offered at each level. The different course
levels are distinguished less by degree of difficulty than by the purposes that the courses at each level are intended to serve and the background knowledge they
presume.
First-Year Seminars and Tutorials (102-199): These writing-intensive courses give students an opportunity to explore an exciting historical topic in-
depth, learn about the discipline of history, and improve their research and writing skills. Because these courses emphasize the acquisition of skills
required for the advanced study of History, they are ideal for students contemplating a major in History.
Each 100-level seminar is normally limited to nineteen students and focuses both on training in research skills (such as using the library, navigating
on-line resources, formulating a research question and developing a research agenda, and learning how to use different types of evidence) and on the
acquisition of reading skills (such as how to interpret different kinds of historical writing and the arguments historians make). These seminars especially
emphasize the importance of writing and include varied assignments that stress the mechanics of writing and revision and focus on issues of argu-
mentation, documentation, and style. Enrollment preference in 100-level seminars is normally given to first-year students and then to sophomores.
Each 100-level tutorial stresses the importance of interpreting historical evidence and evaluating the arguments made by historians and likewise fulfills
the writing-intensive requirement. Enrollment in these courses is limited to ten students, each of whom is expected to write five or six interpretive
essays and present five or six oral critiques of another student's work. First-year students and sophomores will normally be given equal enrollment
preference in 100-level tutorials.
Because first-year seminars and tutorials serve as an introduction to the study of history, only one course of each type may count toward the History
major; these courses can also be used to meet the department's group and concentration requirements.
Introductory Survey Courses (202-299): These courses are open to all students and are intended to provide a basic understanding of the history of
peoples, countries, and geographic regions over relatively long time-spans. Most of all, they will provide students with the background necessary for
more advanced study in history at the 300 and 400 level. They are offered in either small or large formats, depending on the individual course.
Major Seminars (301): Major seminars explore the nature and practice of history, are required for the degree in History, and are normally restricted to
junior History majors. Although these seminars vary in topic and approach, each focuses on the discipline of history itself--on the debates over how to
approach the past, on questions of the status of different kinds of evidence and how to use it, on the purpose of the study of history. Focusing on
questions of methodology, epistemology, and historiography, these courses ask: What kind of knowledge do historians claim to produce? What does it
mean to study the past? How do historians approach the project of studying the past? Each year several major seminars will be offered. Students who
plan to study abroad during their junior year may take their Major Seminar in the spring semester of their sophomore year (space permitting), and those
planning to be away for the whole of their junior year are encouraged to do so.
Advanced Electives (302-396): These advanced, topical courses are more specialized in focus than are the introductory survey courses (202-299) and
are intended to follow such courses. Enrollment is often limited. Because these courses may presume some background knowledge, the instructor may
recommend that students enroll in an appropriate introductory course before registering for an advanced elective.
Advanced Seminars (402-479): These are advanced courses normally limited in enrollment to fifteen students. Each seminar will investigate a topic in
depth and will require students to engage in research that leads to a substantial piece of historical writing. All History majors are required to complete
either an advanced seminar (402-479) or a tutorial (480-492). Instructors may recommend prior coursework in the area of the seminar. Preference is
given to senior History majors, followed by junior History majors.
Advanced Tutorials (480-492): These are advanced reading and writing courses that offer an in-depth analysis of a topic in tutorial format. Tutorials are limited
in enrollment to ten students and preference is given to senior History majors. All History majors are required to complete either an advanced seminar
(402-479) or a tutorial (480-492). Instructors may recommend prior coursework in the area of the tutorial. The writing of five or six essays and the oral presen-
tation of five or six critiques of another student's essays are central to tutorials.
Within each of these levels, courses are further divided by geographical area:
Africa and the Middle East 102-111 202-211 302-311 402-411
Asia 112-121 212-221 312-321 412-421
Europe and Russia 122-141 222-241 322-341 422-441
Latin America and the Caribbean 142-151 242-251 342-351 442-451
United States 152-191 252-291 352-387 452-471
Transnational/Comparative 192-199 292-299 388-396 472-479
161
ADVISING
Both majors and non-majors are encouraged to talk at any time with the department chair, the department administrative assistant, or any other member of the
department about the History major.
All incoming majors will choose a faculty advisor in the spring of their sophomore year. All majors must meet with their advisor in the beginning of the fall
semester, to develop their Concentration (see below), and at the time of the spring semester registration period in order to have their courses and plans for the
History major approved. Students who are interested in the senior honors program or graduate school should contact the faculty director of the Honors Program.
Prospective study abroad students should contact the department's administrative assistant.
THE MAJOR
The major consists of at least nine semester courses as follows:
Required Courses in the Major
One Major Seminar (History 301)
At least one Advanced Seminar (History 402-479) or Tutorial (History 480-492)
Elective Courses
Seven (or more) additional semester courses in History, at least one to be chosen from among three of the following groups:
Group A: The History of Africa
Group B: The History of Asia
Group C: The History of Europe and Russia
Group D: The History of Latin America and the Caribbean
Group E: The History of the Middle East
Group F: The History of the United States and Canada
In addition, students must take at least one course dealing with the premodern period (designated Group G in the catalog); this may be one of the courses used
to fulfill the group requirement (Groups A-F).
A single course can meet the requirement for no more than one of Groups A through F.
Concentration in the Major
All students are required to adopt a concentration within the History major. Students are responsible for designing their own concentration, in consultation with
a faculty advisor, in the fall semester of their Junior year. Each student's concentration will be formally approved by the Department's Curriculum Committee. A
concentration will consist of at least three courses linked by common themes, geography, or time period; only one of those courses can be a 100-level seminar
while at least one must be a 300- or 400-level course. Courses in the concentration may be used to fulfill the group requirements. In the Concentration Proposal,
the student must list a minimum total of six courses that could satisfy the requirements of the concentration, from which they can select three to fulfill the con-
centration requirement (recognizing that not all courses are offered every year); courses taken abroad may be included in the concentration with the approval of
the chair.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN HISTORY
The History Department offers a thesis route to the degree with honors in History. This involves a ten-course major as well as an independent WSP. Students
wishing to undertake independent research or considering graduate study are encouraged to participate in the thesis program and honors seminar.
Application to enter the honors program should be made by spring registration in the junior year and should be based on a solid record of work of honors
caliber, normally defined as maintaining at least a B+ average in courses taken for the major. Students who intend to write an honors thesis must submit a proposal
to the History Department at this time. Students who will be away during the spring semester of their junior year should make arrangements to apply before
leaving. Normally, it is the responsibility of the individual student to procure the agreement of a member of the department to act as his or her thesis advisor, and
the student must therefore consult with a member of the department about a thesis topic and a possible thesis advisor prior to submitting a proposal to the depart-
ment. A student who is uncertain of which member of the department might be an appropriate advisor, or who otherwise is unable to find an advisor, should
contact the chair of the honors committee. An honors thesis proposal must be signed by a member of the History Department. Normally, the thesis topic should be
related to course work which the student has previously done. Students should be aware, however, that while the department will try to accommodate all students
who qualify to pursue honors, particular topics may be deemed unfeasible and students may have to revise their topics accordingly. Final admission to the honors
program will depend on the department's assessment of the qualifications of the student and the feasibility of the project.
Once the student has been notified of admission to the honors program, he or she should register for History 493, Senior Honors Thesis Research Seminar, in
the fall semester, for History 031 during winter study, and for History 494, Senior Honors Thesis Writing Seminar, in the spring. In addition to doing the research
for and writing a thesis of approximately 75-100 pages, students will attend special presentations under the History Department's Class of 1960 Scholars Pro-
gram.
During the fall, students should work regularly on their research and consult frequently with their advisors. Throughout the semester, honors candidates will
also present written progress reports for group discussion to the seminar (History 493). Performance in the seminar will be evaluated on the basis of class partici-
pation and completed written work and will determine if a student will continue in the thesis program. For students proceeding to History 031 and History 494,
performance in the fall semester will figure into the thesis grade calculated at the end of the year.
Students who are deemed to be making satisfactory progress on their research and writing at this point will be allowed to continue with the thesis. They will
devote the entire winter study period to thesis work. They should conclude their research during winter study and complete at least one chapter of their thesis for
submission to their advisor before the end of winter study. At the end of winter study, the honors committee will formally consult with advisors and make recom-
mendations to the department concerning which students should be allowed to proceed with the thesis. During the early weeks of the second semester, students
will present a draft chapter of their thesis to the honors seminar.
Completed theses will be due in mid-April, after which each student will prepare and make a short oral presentation of his or her thesis for delivery at the
departmental Honors Colloquium. Another student who has read the thesis will then offer a critique of it, after which the two faculty readers of the thesis will offer
their own comments and questions. Finally, there will be a general discussion of the thesis by students and other members of the department.
LANGUAGE
Study of a foreign language is basic to the understanding of other cultures. Particularly those students who might wish to do graduate work in History are
encouraged to enroll in language courses at Williams.
STUDY ABROAD
The History Department considers immersion in and familiarity with a foreign culture not only to be valuable in themselves, but also to provide an important
way of understanding the past. Students who major in History therefore are encouraged to study a foreign language and to consider studying abroad during their
junior year. History courses taken as part of a study abroad program that is recognized by the college normally can be used to satisfy departmental distribution and
general requirements, up to a maximum of three courses (this limit does not apply to tutorials taken as part of the Williams-Exeter Program; no courses taken
abroad, even at Oxford, can be used to satisfy the major seminar and advanced seminar/tutorial requirements). Students who plan to study abroad during their
junior year may take their Major Seminar in the spring semester of their sophomore year, and those planning to be away the whole of their junior year are strongly
encouraged to do so.
Students interested in studying abroad during their junior year should discuss their plans with a member of the department as well as with the department's
administrative assistant. Approval of departmental credit for courses taken abroad normally must be obtained from the chair or from the administrative assistant
prior to the commencement of the study abroad program.
COURSES
FIRST-YEAR SEMINARS AND TUTORIALS (102-199)
These writing-intensive courses give students an opportunity to explore an exciting historical topic in-depth, learn about the discipline of history, and
improve their research and writing skills. Because these courses emphasize the acquisition of skills required for the advanced study of History, they are
ideal for students contemplating a major in History.
Each 100-level seminar is normally limited to nineteen students and focuses both on training in research skills (such as using the library, navigating
on-line resources, formulating a research question and developing a research agenda, and learning how to use different types of evidence) and on the
acquisition of reading skills (such as how to interpret different kinds of historical writing and the arguments historians make). These seminars especially
emphasize the importance of writing and include varied assignments that stress the mechanics of writing and revision and focus on issues of argu-
mentation, documentation, and style. Enrollment preference in 100-level seminars is normally given to first-year students and then to sophomores.
Each 100-level tutorial stresses the importance of interpreting historical evidence and evaluating the arguments made by historians and likewise fulfills
the writing-intensive requirement. Enrollment in these courses is limited to ten students, each of whom is expected to write five or six interpretive
162
essays and present five or six oral critiques of another student's work. First-year students and sophomores will normally be given equal enrollment
preference in 100-level tutorials.
Because first-year seminars and tutorials serve as an introduction to the study of history, only one course of each type may count toward the History
major; these courses can also be used to meet the department's group and concentration requirements.
FIRST-YEAR SEMINARS AND TUTORIALS: Africa and the Middle East (102-111)
HIST 103 The City in Africa: Nairobi and Johannesburg (Same as Africana Studies 103) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Accra, Nairobi, and Johannesburg are three major African cities with very different origins. In each of these cities African, Asian, Arabic, and European cultures
have converged and intermingled in complicated ways that give rise to hybrid cultures, economies, and politics. This seminar will trace the development of
these cities from the 19th century to the present. The experience of various groups of city dwellers will be our main focus, as well as the development of the
cities' physical infrastructure like transportation, housing, trade, and labor networks. More importantly, though, we will explore the underworld of these cities
and will, with the inquisitiveness of a voyeur, the zeal of a private investigator, and the sensibility of a historian, examine ways in which class, race ethnicity,
nationality, politics, and gender have influenced the structural growth of these cities and the experiences of their inhabitants. Students will also get a chance to
read about the various artistic movements in these cities over the last century, focusing especially on music, theater, and street performances. Students should
emerge from this course with a greater awareness of African urban life and with a deepened understanding of colonial and postcolonial societies in Africa and
elsewhere in the so-called Third World.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class attendance and participation, five short papers, and a final research paper.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students and sophomores only. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference will be given to first-year students, and
then sophomores who have not previously taken a 100-level seminar.
Group A
MUTONGI
HIST 104 Travel Narratives and African History (Same as Africana Studies 104) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
In a way, all historical thinking and writing deals with travel accounts given that, as many scholars have noted, the past can be likened to a foreign country and
the historian can be viewed as a traveler in foreign places. Nevertheless, actual travel narratives-narratives about the physical visits of writers to distant lands-call
for careful and critical analysis because they can be seductive, and they can shape the ways we think about the present-and the past-of distant lands and cultures.
This course discusses Arab, Indian, European, African, and African American travel narratives about various regions of Africa since the fourteenth century. We
will mine the travel accounts for descriptions of local contexts. We will also explore what travel writing says about the author's perceptions of self, home, and
"other." Ultimately, we will investigate the authors' biases and how the narratives influence both our perception of Africa and the writing of African history.
This course is highly interdisciplinary and draws heavily on literary, anthropological, geographical, and historical methodologies.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class participation, oral reports, 1-2 short papers, and a research paper.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students and sophomores only. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Enrollment preference will be given to first-year
students, then to second-year students who have not previously taken a 100-level seminar.
Group A
MUTONGI
HIST 111 Movers and Shakers in the Middle East (Same as Leadership Studies 150) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
This course examines the careers, ideas, and impact of leading politicians, religious leaders, intellectuals, and artists in the Middle East in the twentieth century.
Utilizing biographical studies and the general literature on the political and cultural history of the period, this course will analyze how these individuals achieved
prominence in Middle Eastern society and how they addressed the pertinent problems of their day, such as war and peace, relations with Western powers, the
role of religion in society, and the status of women. A range of significant individuals will be studied, including Gamal Abd al-Nasser, Mustafa Kemal Ataturk,
Ayatollah Khomeini, Muhammad Mussadiq, Umm Khulthum, Sayyid Qutb, Anwar Sadat, Naghuib Mahfouz, and Huda Shaarawi.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class participation, short essays, and a final paper.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students and sophomores only. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15-19). Preference will be given to first-year students,
and then sophomores who have not previously taken a 100-level seminar.
Group E
BERNHARDSSON
FIRST-YEAR SEMINARS AND TUTORIALS: Asia (112-121)
HIST 115 The World of the Mongol Empire (Same as Asian Studies 115) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
By the middle of the thirteenth century, Mongol armies led by Genghis Khan had conquered an enormous swath of territory, extending from China westward to
Eastern Europe. Further expanded by Genghis's descendants, the Mongol Empire incorporated a vast range of different peoples and cultures, enhancing com-
munications, trade, and exchange among them. In this course we will examine the "world order" of the Mongol Empire from its origins on the Asian steppe
through its expansion, consolidation, disintegration, and legacies for later periods. From a wide range of primary and secondary sources, including travelers'
accounts, chronicles, art, and literature, we will investigate the diverse experiences of the Mongol world in different places, such as China, Russia, Persia, and
Central Asia.
Format: seminar . Evaluation will be based on class participation, several short papers, and a final research paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15-19 ). Preference will be given to firstyear students and then to sophomores who have not previously taken
a 100-level seminar.
Groups B and G
A. REINHARDT
HIST 117T Clash of Empires: China and the West, 1800-1900 (Same as Asian Studies 117T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
As ever greater numbers of Western traders sought access to China's products and markets in the early nineteenth century, their ideas of free trade, hopes for
commercial expansion, and expectations for international intercourse clashed with the policies and practices of the Qing Dynasty's multi-ethnic empire. This
conflict reached a climax in the mid-century Opium Wars, in which China's defeat inaugurated a period of Western domination by several powers (including
Britain, France, the United States, and later, Japan). Despite its weakened position, the Qing dynasty continued to contest the definition and scope of Western
privilege in China through the end of the century. Historians have long disagreed over how to interpret this "clash of empires," some seeing Western involve-
ment in China as exploitative imperialism and others seeing it as a positive, modernizing force. In either case, however, this conflict profoundly affected China's
national development in the twentieth century, and continues to inform contemporary China's view of itself and its international position.
This tutorial course will examine a series of significant points of contention between the Qing Dynasty and expanding Western powers during this period. These
will include the opium trade, Christian missionaries, extraterritorial privilege, Western technology, the looting of Chinese artworks and antiquities, and contests
over sovereignty in Tibet and Manchuria. We will examine both Western and Chinese perspectives on these conflicts, how the period has been remembered and
interpreted, and how it continues to affect Chinese and Western perceptions of China's place in the world.
Format: tutorial. Students in the tutorial will meet in weekly one-hour sessions with the instructor and a classmate. Each week, students will alternate between
writing a 5- to 7-page paper on the assigned readings (to be presented orally in class) and writing and presenting a 2-page critique of his/her classmate's paper.
The course will conclude with a final paper that examines one of the issues raised in class in greater depth.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students and sophomores only. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference will be given to sophomores, and then
first-year students who have not previously taken a 100-level tutorial.
Group B
A. REINHARDT
HIST 118 "Ten Years of Madness": The Chinese Cultural Revolution (Same as Asian Studies 118) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
In 1966 Mao Zedong launched the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution in an attempt to restore revolutionary purity to the Chinese Communist Party and
society. The Cultural Revolution decade (1966-1976) is remembered most often as a period of political violence and intense struggle, over which Mao reigned
as supreme leader. In this course, we will complicate this standard interpretation by examining the Cultural Revolution in a variety of ways: as an elite political
struggle, an attempt to proletarianize culture and the arts, a social movement, and a youth movement. The course will address themes of participation and
complicity, new gender roles, impact on different social groups, and differences between rural and urban experience. In addition to relevant historiographical
works, the course will use memoirs, fiction, films, and ethnographies.
163
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class participation, several short papers, and a final research paper.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students and sophomores only. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to first year students.
Group C
A. REINHARDT
HIST 119 The Japanese Empire (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
The largest non-Western empire of modern times, Japan extended its reach to Taiwan, Korea, China, Sakhalin, Southeast Asia, and the South Pacific. This
course explores the many contentious political, economic, social, and cultural questions that arise from Japan's imperial project. We will ask what drove imperi-
alist expansion; how the Japanese ruled; who won and lost in economic relations; what various aspects of life were like in the empire; how to understand the
dynamics between Japanese settlers and the colonized; what effects empire building had at home in Japan; how to explain the nature of wartime conquests; and
what legacies Japanese imperialism and empire left in their wake. Throughout the semester, we will make a point of examining these issues from various
standpoints, and we will also read theoretical works that place the Japanese empire in a comparative context. Course materials will include political documents,
intellectual treatises, films, memoirs, and literature.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class participation, response papers, short essays, and a final research paper.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students and sophomores only. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15-19). Preference will be given to first-year students,
and then to sophomores who have not previously taken a 100-level seminar.
Group B
SINIAWER
HIST 121T The Two Koreas (Same as Asian Studies 121T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
The two Koreas-North and South-were born in the aftermath of World War II, when the United States and the Soviet Union arbitrarily divided the peninsula
into two zones of occupation at the 38th parallel. Today, over six decades later, the split endures as what has been called "the Cold War's last divide." This
tutorial examines the history of the two Koreas from their creation in 1945 to the present. We will explore the historical and ideological origins of the division;
how tensions between North and South led to the outbreak of the Korean War; why the paths of the two Koreas have differed so markedly; how each country
has been shaped by its political leaders and their ideologies; and what recent developments in North Korea, including its nuclear program, have meant for
relations on the peninsula and beyond. Course material will include primary and secondary sources of various kinds, including political documents, intellectual
treatises, films, and short stories.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: students will meet with the instructor in pairs for an hour each week. Each student will write and present orally a 5- to 7-page
essay every other week on the readings assigned for that week. In alternate weeks, students will be responsible for offering an oral critique of the work of their
partner. Attention will also be given to revising written work. Students will be evaluated on their essays and their analyses of their partner's work.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students and sophomores only. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to first-year students and sophomores.
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Group B
SINIAWER
FIRST-YEAR SEMINARS AND TUTORIALS: EUROPE AND RUSSIA (122-141)
HIST 127 The Expansion of Europe (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
This course investigates the expansion of European power and influence over much of the rest of the world from the late Middle Ages to the mid-nineteenth
century--the early period of European Imperialism. Specific topics will vary, but include the development and initial expansion of medieval and Renaissance
Europe, the discovery and conquest of the New World, the struggle with Islam for command of the seas, the establishment of European influence in the East
and Far East, the slave trade, the invasion of North America, and the initial steps toward hegemony in the Middle East and Africa. Students will investigate the
ways in which individual personality, religiosity, greed, critical first contacts, and cultural misunderstandings and prejudices combined with important aspects of
the Military, Scientific, and early Industrial Revolutions to establish European hegemony on a world-wide scale during this early period of European Imperial-
ism.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on five short written exercises and one research paper.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students and sophomores only. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15-19). Preference will be given to first-year students,
and then sophomores who have not previously taken a 100-level seminar.
Groups C and G
WOOD
HIST 128T Conquistadors in the New World (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
The Spanish conquest of the Americas happened with astonishing rapidity. Christopher Columbus entered the Caribbean in 1492; Hernando Cortes completed
the conquest of the Aztecs of central Mexico in 1521; Francisco Pizarro triumphantly entered the Inca capital Cuzco, in Peru, in 1545. Other conquistadors
pushed north to the Carolinas and California, south to the Tierra del Fuego and the River Plate, and across the Amazonian basin to the Atlantic. "We came,"
wrote the conquistador Bernal Diaz del Castillo, "to serve God, and our King, and to get rich." Their deeds were legendary, their courage, daring, and endurance
remarkable. They were also notoriously quarrelsome, greedy, and cruel. Before their onslaught the major civilizations of the new world crumbled--destroyed
or changed beyond recognition. Rarely in history have so few conquered so many so quickly. The conquest of the New World has both excited and appalled the
human imagination for more than five centuries. Many questions about the event remain to be answered or are still capable of provoking controversy, questions
that will be addressed in this tutorial: Who exactly were the conquistadors? What motivated them? How did their self-perpetuating conquistador system origi-
nate and operate? What meaning did they themselves assign to their actions? How could they justify their many, misdeeds? How did they develop their sense of
the Other? Why did often inspired resistance by indigenous peoples and regimes ultimately fail? Was conquest somehow preordained? Could it have failed?
What mixture of human agency, culture, technology, religion, nature, and biology can best explain the results of this encounter between the conquistador and
Amerindian worlds?
Format: tutorial. Students will meet in weekly one-hour sessions with a student tutorial partner and the instructor, one presenting a paper, the other offering a
critique.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students and sophomores only. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference will be given to sophomores and to
second-semester first-year students who have not already taken a 100-level seminar.
Groups D and G
WOOD
HIST 129 Blacks, Jews, and Women in the Age of the French Revolution (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
The French Revolution was an important turning point in world history. Besides ushering in an age of libert (liberty) and egalit (equality), it also postulated
the existence of a new revolutionary fraternit (brotherhood) between peoples of all backgrounds. Would revolutionary fraternity include women, African
slaves, and Jews in the new democratic polity? French men and women debated these questions in ways that have had a direct impact on our contemporary
discussions of race, gender, religious freedom and ethnicity. In this course, we will explore these debates, their Enlightenment roots, and the legacy of these
debates for France's minorities today, especially those of Arabic and Islamic origin. Students will be introduced to various types of historical sources (rare
books, art, opera, plays), as well as to the lively historiographical debates between historians of France concerning methodology, politics, and the goal of histori-
cal research.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class participation, oral reports, 1-2 short papers, a 15- to 20-page research paper, and a final examination (may be
an oral and/or take-home exam). The class will also be expected to go on a couple of field trips.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students and sophomores only. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15-19). Preference will be given to first-year students,
and then sophomores, who have not previously taken a 100-level seminar.
Groups C and G
SINGHAM
HIST 135T(F) The Great War, 1914-1918 (Same as Leadership Studies 135T) (W)
During the nineteenth and early twentieth century Europeans and their immediate offspring created the modern world. European industry, science, trade, weap-
ons, and culture dominated the globe. After a century of general peace the continual "progress" of Western Civilization seemed assured. Then, in August, 1914,
the major European powers went to war with one another. After four years of unprecedented carnage, violence, and destruction, Europe was left exhausted and
bitter, its previous optimism replaced by pessimism, its world position undermined, and its future clouded by a deeply flawed peace settlement.
164
What were the fundamental causes of the Great War? How and why did it break out when it did and who was responsible? Why was it so long, ferocious,
wasteful, and, until the very end, indecisive? Why did the Allies, rather than the Central Powers, emerge victorious? What did the peace settlement settle? How
was Europe changed? What is the historical significance of the conflict?
Format: tutorial.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students and sophomores only. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference will be given to first-year students, and
then sophomores, who have not previously taken a 100-level tutorial. Not available for the Gaudino option.
Group C
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. WOOD
HIST 136 Before the Deluge: Paris and Berlin in the Interwar Years (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Paris and Berlin were the two poles of Europe in the 1920s, rival capital cities of two historically hostile nations that had only just put an end to the carnage of
World War I. Paris was the grande dame; Berlin the upstart. In the 1920s, these two pulsating metropolises became the sites of political and cultural movements
that would leave a lasting imprint on European society until the present day. This course focuses on the politics, society, and culture of these two cities in their
heyday in the 1920s. We will also consider their fate in the 1930s, first as depression set in, and then as the Nazis came to power. Devoting half the semester to
Paris and the other half to Berlin, we will examine a range of parallel topics in both contexts, including the impact of World War I, the growing popularity of
right-wing political movements and the increase in political violence, shifting gender norms and sexual mores, and new developments in the realms of art, film,
theatre, cabaret, and literature.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class attendance and participation, several short papers, and a final research paper.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students and sophomores only. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15-19). Preference will be given to first-year students,
and then sophomores who have not previously taken a 100-level seminar.
Group C
GARBARINI
HIST 141(S) Adventures and Pleasures in the Russian Metropolis, 1880-1917 (W)
This course introduces students to the artistic movements, everyday life, and socio-cultural upheavals of urban Russia in the fin-de-sicle (1880 to 1917). The
fast-paced, consumer-oriented modern city, with its celebrities, fashions, and technological wonders, gripped the imagination of imperial Russia's urban denizens.
The inhabitants of St. Petersburg and Moscow, conscious of living in a new era, embraced and grappled with the Modern Age as journalists, impresarios, and
artists narrated and interpreted it. We will explore the ways revolution and war, industrialization, the commercialization of culture, and new sensibilities about the
self and identity were reflected in modernist art and thought, literature, and autobiographical writings. We also will look closely at the realms of elite entertainment
and popular amusement in an attempt to relate consumer culture to notions of gender and sexuality, the redefinition of status and privilege, and concepts of leisure.
Historians have offered competing explanations of how and why the rapid social, economic and cultural changes of this period contributed to the fall of the
Russian monarchy and the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917. Our primary goal will be to use sources to assess their arguments and, hopefully, make our own. Texts
include: historical scholarship, literary works, philosophical and sociological writings, music, visual art, and film.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class participation, several short essays, and a final research paper.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students and sophomores only. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected 15-19). Preference will be given to first-year students, and
then sophomores who have not previously taken a 100-level seminar.
Group C
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR FISHZON
FIRST-YEAR SEMINARS AND TUTORIALS: LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN (142-151)
HIST 143(S) Soccer and History in Latin America: Making the Beautiful Game (W) (D)
This course examines the rise of soccer (ftbol/futebol) in modern Latin America, from a fringe game to the most popular sport in the region. Focusing especially
on Brazil, Argentina, Peru, and Mexico, we will analyze the central role that soccer played as these countries faced profound questions about race, masculinity,
and regional and national identities. Using autobiographies, videos, and scholarly works from several disciplines, we will consider topics including: the role of
race and gender constructions in the initial adoption of soccer; the transformation of this foreign game into a key marker of national identity; the relationship
between soccer and political and economic "modernization"; the production of strong, at times violent identities at club, national, and regional levels; and the
changes that mass consumerism and globalization have effected on the game and its meanings for Latin Americans. As an Exploring Diversity Initiative course,
the class uses primary sources as well as recent scholarship to explore these issues comparatively between regions and nations. Throughout the semester, we will
look at how the world of soccer reflects, produces, and at times apparently resolves cultural difference.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class participation, a series of short papers, and an 8- to 10-page research paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference will be given to first year students and then to sophomores who have not previously taken a
100-level seminar. If oversubscribed an application process may be developed to determine admission to the course.
Group D
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF KITTLESON
HIST 148 The Mexican Revolution: 1910 to NAFTA (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
The first great revolution in the twentieth century, the Mexican Revolution was as dramatic and compelling as later episodes in Russia, China and Cuba. Using a
wide variety of sources--from films, murals, and comic books to classic works of political and social history--this seminar will examine the forces that ex-
ploded in over a decade of violence and produced the peculiar "institutional revolutionary" government that ruled Mexico from the 1920s to the crises of the late
1990s. Was the Revolution a true social revolution or just a "palace coup"? Did workers, women, peasants, or indigenous peoples make real gains in social or
political power during the after the Revolution? How democratic or authoritarian is the Mexico that emerged from the brutal decade of the 1910s? Finally, in
light of globalization, the political scandals of the 1990s, the defeat of the long-ruling (and oxymoronically titled) Institutional Revolutionary Party, and the
Zapatista rebellion in Chiapas, is the Revolution dead or is its promise only now to be fulfilled?
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class participation, a series of short written assignments, and a research paper.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students and sophomores only. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15-19). Preference will be given to first-year students,
and then sophomores who have not previously taken a 100-level seminar.
Group D
KITTLESON
HIST 149(F) The 1959 Cuban Revolution: Precedents, Processes, and Legacies, 1898-2009 (Same as Africana Studies 149) (W)
Few events shaped world politics during the second half of the twentieth century as profoundly as the Cuban Revolution of 1959. Transformed by the leadership
of Fidel Castro into a socialist country battling U.S. intervention, the Cuban revolution attempted to reshape society by eradicating racism, sexism, and illiteracy.
However, policies against social inequalities were uneven and included contradictions that hampered the elimination of various forms of discrimination. Cubans
who lived the Revolution also differed in their reactions to it: while many celebrated the social impact of Cuba's revolution, others condemned the revolutionary
state as nothing more than a repressive (albeit populist) dictatorship. Exploring the precedents, processes, and legacies of the Cuban Revolution, this course will
give students a better understanding of how and why the Cuban state has endured for so long in the face of U.S. hostility. We will read historical monographs,
speeches by revolutionary leaders, and testimonies of Cubans living during the 20th century to access these themes. And while the course will begin in 1898 with
the Cuban wars for independence, it will end in the present and explore the meaning of President Obama's closure of U.S. prison camps in Guantanamo and the
transition from Fidel to Raul (and beyond) to try and answer the question that is on the minds of most Cubans and scholars of Cuban history: What next?
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class attendance and participation, five short papers, and a final research project.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students and sophomores only. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15-19). Preference will be given to first-year students,
and then sophomores who have not previously taken a 100-level seminar.
Group D
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR BENSON
FIRST-YEAR SEMINARS AND TUTORIALS: UNITED STATES (152-191)
HIST 152(F) The Fourteenth Amendment and the Meanings of Equality (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 152) (W)
For more than a century, the 14th Amendment of the U.S. Constitution has served as the principal touchstone for legal debates over the meaning of equality and
freedom in the United States. This course explores the origins of the 14th Amendment in the years immediately following the Civil War, and examines the
evolution of that amendment's meaning in the century that followed. Central themes in this course include the contested interpretations of "due process," "privi-
leges and immunities," "equal protection," and "life, liberty or property"; the rise, fall, and rebirth of substantive due process; and the battles over incorporating
165
the Bill of Rights into the 14th Amendment. We will pay particular attention to how debates over the 14th Amendment have shaped and been shaped by the
changing meanings of racial and gender equality, and how the 14th Amendment has transformed the promise and experience of American citizenship.
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on class discussion, three short analytical papers, and a final research paper.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students and sophomores only. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected 15-19). Priority given to first-year students, and then to
sophomores who have not previously taken a 100-level seminar.
Group F
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR DUBOW
HIST 154T The American Way of War: The First Three Centuries (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Is there an historically distinct American way of war? How have Americans experienced warfare? From the earliest days of European settlement through the
final campaigns against American Indians west of the Mississippi, Americans have often been at war. Long before the United States became a world power
those conflicts had determined many of the basic contours of American society, culture, and nationhood. This tutorial will investigate the nature and develop-
ment of American wars over the period 1600 to 1900. Though some attention will be paid to the American Revolution and the Civil War, the tutorial will
concentrate primarily on lesser known but still historically significant wars, including King Philip's War, the Seven Years War, the War of 1812, Jackson's
Indian Wars, the Mexican-American War, the Plains Indians Wars, and the Spanish American War. All but the last were fought to conclusion in North America
itself. How did Americans fight these wars? How did American militaries establish control over such a huge and varied continent? What role did military
institutions play in the development of a distinctive American society? Did war abet social mobility, or lend itself to social control? What role did race play in
the creation and sustaining of martial goals? What was the relationship between local military institutions and centralist attempts to create a national and/or
professional army? What was the impact of warfare on American culture, on concepts of masculinity, and national or community images? Despite the fact that
Americans have often conceived of themselves as a peace-loving people, war from the beginning has played a key role in shaping their society and nation. It is
exactly the nature, meaning, and paradoxes of American wars that this tutorial will attempt to unravel.
Format: tutorial. Students will meet with the instructor in pairs for an hour each week. Each student will write and present orally a 7-page essay every other
week on the readings assigned for that week. In alternate weeks, students will be responsible for offering an oral critique of the work of their partner.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students and sophomores only. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference will be given to first-year students, and
then sophomores, who have not previously taken a 100-level tutorial.
Group F
WOOD
HIST 157(F) From Powhatan to Lincoln: Discovering Leadership in a New World (Same as Leadership Studies 157) (W)
The collision of cultures and peoples in colonial North America created a New World that demanded new forms of political leadership. This course explores the
history of leadership from the colonial era to the Civil War through the study of consequential individuals whose actions shaped seminal moments in American
history. The course opens with Powhatan, whose Native American empire spanned the East Coast of North America, and John Smith, who confronted this Indian
empire as he tried to establish England's first toehold in the New World. It ends with Abraham Lincoln, who tried to keep together a nation that Jefferson Davis
aimed to destroy. In between, the course will explore colonial leaders like John Winthrop, African American leaders like Gabriel Prosser and James Forten,
presidents like George Washington and Andrew Jackson, advocates for women's rights like Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony, and others. Through
the study of these individuals, students will have a deeper appreciation of how historical processes shaped leaders--and how leaders have shaped history. Groups
F and G
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class participation (15%), weekly writing assignment (5%), class presentation (5%), three 5-page essay assignments
(each 15%), and a final project (30%).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15-19). Preference given to Enrollment preference will be given to first-year students and then to sophomores
who have not previously taken a 100-level seminar.
Groups F and G
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR SPERO
HIST 158(S) Thicker than Water: American Political Dynasties (W)
In a nation long committed to democratic principles, dynasties of any sort are bound to seem anomalous. Yet in six different instances members of the same family
have held or aspired to hold the highest office in the land, the Presidency of the United States. Our purpose will be to analyze three of those families: the Adamses,
the Roosevelts, and the Kennedys. In particular, we will focus on the paths they took to power, their performance as political leaders, and the legacies they left
behind. Throughout the semester we will also be exploring what differences family ties--the dynastic element--made in the three histories in question.
Format: seminar. Readings will consist of primary as well as secondary sources, with frequent short papers developing major points in the reading, and a longer
exercise involving in-depth research.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students and sophomores only. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15-19). Preference will be given to first-year students,
and then to sophomores who have not previously taken a 100-level seminar.
Group F
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF DALZELL
HIST 164 Slavery in the United States (Same as Africana Studies 164) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Slavery and freedom rose as concomitant ideologies--simultaneously and interrelated--critical to the development of the American colonies and United
States. Few areas of American social, political, and economic history have been more active and exciting in recent years than the study of this relationship. This
seminar introduces students to the most important aspects of American slavery, beginning with an examination of the international slave trade and traces the
development of the "peculiar institution" to its demise with the Civil War.
Format: seminar. In addition to reading key books in the field, students will engage in primary source research using the College library's extensive holdings of
microfilm and local records dealing with slavery in the North and the South. Building on several preliminary essays, each student will complete a research
project which leads to a final research paper.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students and sophomores only. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15-19). Preference will be given to first-year students,
and then to sophomores who have not previously taken a 100-level seminar.
Group F
L. BROWN
HIST 165 Going Nuclear: American Culture in the Atomic Age (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Ever since the Manhattan Project produced atomic weapons for Harry Truman to use against Japan at the end of World War II, atomic science has fueled
Americans' fears, hopes, nightmares, and fantasies. This course will examine all aspects of American nuclear culture, from scientists' movements to abolish
atomic weapons and expand peaceful atomic energy production to dystopian fiction about the nuclear apocalypse. It will investigate the role of the nuclear arms
race in the cold war and the development of civil defense and bomb shelter culture in the United States. Using scholarly books and articles, primary sources,
novels, and films, we will explore the interactions between science, diplomacy, and culture in the nuclear age. As this is a writing-intensive course, we will focus
on analyzing sources, writing clearly and effectively, and making persuasive arguments. Students will not only learn about history, but they will learn to think
and write as historians.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class participation, several short essays, and a final 8- to 10-page research paper.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students and sophomores only. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15-19). Preference will be given to first-year students,
and then sophomores who have not previously taken a 100-level seminar.
Group F
CHAPMAN
HIST 168(S) 1968-1969: Two Years in America (W)
These two years were tumultuous ones worldwide. The escalation of the war in Vietnam, the Soviet invasion of Prague, the student uprisings in Paris and Japan,
and the racial politics in the Summer Olympics held in Mexico City all had their counterparts that reverberated in the streets, college campuses, the halls of
Congress, movie theaters, and concert halls and rock festivals in the United States. This first-year seminar will examine some of the major events of this time
period in America: the assassinations of Martin Luther King, Jr. and Robert Kennedy, the Democratic Convention in Chicago, as well as cultural trends such as
the development of the anti-war movement, the push for curricular reforms on college campuses, and the rise of the "counter culture."
Format: seminar. Requirements: evaluation will be based on a number of writing assignments and library exercises; writing assignments will include conducting
166
an oral history, four short response papers, and a 7- to 10-page essay.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students and sophomores only. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15-19). Preference given to first-year students.
Group F
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF WONG
HIST 178T(S) Marriage and the American Nation (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 178T) (W)
This tutorial explores the transformation of marriage as an institution, idea, and experience from colonial times through the beginning of the twenty-first century.
What is marriage? Is it a private agreement or a public contract? A legal bond or a religious sacrament? A right or a privilege? Who can enter it? Who determines
when it is over, and on what grounds? Examining the long history of American debates about these questions, we will consider the complex ways that beliefs and
policies regarding marriage have affected national understandings of gender roles, of racial difference, of the meaning of citizenship, and of the function and reach
of government. We will explore many of the controversies associated with marriage over the last 400 years, including interracial marriage, polygamy, divorce,
domestic violence, property rights, custody, cohabitation, working mothers, and same-sex marriage.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: students will meet in weekly one-hour sessions with the instructor and a classmate; each week, students will alternate between
writing a 5- to 7-page paper on the assigned readings (to be presented orally in class) and writing and presenting a 2-page critique of his/her classmate's paper; the
course will conclude with a final paper that examines one of the issues raised in class in greater depth.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students and sophomores only. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to sophomores, and then to first-year
students who have not previously taken a 100-level tutorial. Not available for the Gaudino option.
Group F
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. DUBOW
FIRST-YEAR SEMINARS AND TUTORIALS: TRANSNATIONAL/COMPARATIVE (192-199)
HIST 193(F) Black Power Abroad: Decolonization in Africa, the Caribbean and Europe (Same as Africana Studies 193) (D) (W)
(See under AFR 193 for full description.) SINGHAM
INTRODUCTORY SURVEY COURSES (201-299)
These courses are open to all students and are intended to provide a basic understanding of the history of peoples, countries, and geographic regions over
relatively long time-spans. Most of all, they will provide students with the background necessary for more advanced study in history at the 300 and 400 level.
They are offered in either small or large formats, depending on the individual course.
HIST 201 History Behind the Headlines (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
What is the history behind today's major events? And what are some of the differing perspectives and interpretations around the world on how to address some
of the most significant issues that face us all? This course will challenge students to think globally and historically about the present by introducing the methods
and conceptual tools historians use to understand the past and how that may lead to a better appreciation of contemporary society. Students will be encouraged
to become more critical readers of the media and thus better assess when and how history is used and abused in the public sphere. Throughout the semester,
members of the History Department will visit the class and address how their field (e.g. East Asian, Latin American, African-American History) is represented
in the media and political discourse. The theme for 2009-10 will be citizenship. Because of its commitment to explore how people in different societies respond
to the pressing issues of the day and how people in various corners of the world are redefining and rethinking notions of citizenship, this course is part of the
Exploring Diversity Initiative (EDI).
Format: lecture/discussion. Students will be required to keep a media journal and follow the news in various media outlets around the world. Evaluation will be
based on participation, short papers, the media journal, and a final project.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 40). Preference given to first-year students and sophomores.
BERNHARDSSON
INTRODUCTORY SURVEY COURSES: AFRICA AND THE MIDDLE EAST (202-211)
HIST 203 A Survey of Modern African History (Same as Africana Studies 203) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
This course surveys the history of 19th and 20th century Africa. The first section of the course focuses on the European conquest of Africa and the dynamics of
colonial rule--especially its socio-economic and cultural consequences. The second section looks at how the rising tide of African nationalism, in the form of
labor strikes and guerrilla wars, ushered out colonialism. The third section examines the postcolonial states, focusing on the politics of development, recent civil
wars in countries like Rwanda and Liberia, and the growing AIDS epidemics. The last section surveys the history of Apartheid in South Africa up to 1994.
Course materials include fiction, poetry, memoirs, videos, newspaper articles, and outstanding recent scholarship. The course is structured around discussions.
History 203 is an introductory course, and requires no prior knowledge of African History. This EDI course explores the experiences and expressions of the
culturally diverse peoples of African descent in the New World (and the Old), as well as the myriad ways in which they confront, negotiate, and at times
challenge dominant U.S. and/or European hierarchies of race, culture, gender and class.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on two 7- to 10-page papers, one exam, and unspecified number of pop quizzes.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected 30-40).
Group A
MUTONGI
HIST 206 Muhammad and the Rise of Islam (Arabic 206 and Religion 235) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
This course will trace the historical development of Islam, one of the world's major religions and multi-cultural traditions, from early in the seventh century until
the establishment of the Safavid Empire in 1501. The first part of the course will focus on the life and career of Muhammad, as prophet and statesman, and how
he became an ideal for public and private behavior. The main part will consider the emergence of Islamic scripture, institutions, festivals, theology, and law and
how a religion that had its origins in the Arabian Peninsula developed in multifaceted ways in Asia, Africa, and Europe. One major aim of this course is to give
voice to Islamic texts and especially to how Muslims have defined themselves in multiple socio-historical contexts and how that context may have determined
their interpretations of the Qur'an and the legacy of the Prophet Muhammad. Because the course explores the myriad reactions to the rise of Islam in different
cultural communities, it is part of the Exploring Diversity Initiative.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on short quizzes and papers, a midterm, and final project.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 25-30). Preference given to Students who are majoring in History, Religion, or Arabic Studies or
intending to do so.
Groups E and G
BERNHARDSSON
HIST 207(F) The Modern Middle East (Same as Jewish Studies 217 and Religion 239) (D)
This survey course addresses the main economic, religious, political and cultural trends in the modern Middle East. Topics to be covered include the cultural
diversity of the Middle East, relations with Great Powers, the impact of imperialism, the challenge of modernity, the creation of nation states and nationalist
ideologies, the discovery of oil, radical religious groups, and war and peace. Throughout the course these significant changes will be evaluated in light of their
impact on the lives of a variety of individuals in the region and especially how they have grappled differently with increasing Western political and economic
domination. This course is part of the Exploring Diversity Initiative because it compares the differences and similarities between different cultures and societies in
the Middle East and the various ways they have responded to one another in the past.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on participation, short papers, quizzes, group project and final exam.
Prerequisites: none; open to all. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 30-40).
Group E
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF BERNHARDSSON
HIST 209(S) The Origins of Islam: God, Empire and Apocalypse (Same as Religion 231)
(See under REL 231 for full description.) DARROW
Groups E and G
INTRODUCTORY SURVEY COURSES: ASIA (212-221)
HIST 212(S) Transforming the "Middle Kingdom": China, 2000 BCE-1600 (Same as Asian Studies 212) (D)
China expanded from scattered Neolithic settlements to become one of the world's most complex and sophisticated civilizations. During this process, it experi-
enced dramatic transformation as well as remarkable institutional and cultural continuities. This course will examine Chinese history from prehistoric times to the
"early modern" seventeenth century. It will address topics such as the creation and transformation of dynastic authority, the reinterpretation of Confucian thought,
167
the transmission of Buddhism, the conquest of China proper by "barbarian" peoples, the composition of elites, and change in daily life, popular culture and
China's place in the East Asian and world systems. This course fulfills the Exploring Diversity Initiative requirement in that it disputes the idea of a single, stable
Chinese identity throughout history, and focuses instead on the variety of cultures and cultural encounters that contributed to what we currently think of as "Chi-
nese" history and culture.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short papers, a midterm, and a self-scheduled final exam.
Prerequisites: none; open to all. No enrollment limit (expected: 20).
Groups B and G
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR A. REINHARDT
HIST 213 Modern China, 1600-Present (Same as Asian Studies 213) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
Observers may be struck by the apparent contradictions of contemporary China: market reforms undertaken by a nominally Communist government, extremes
of urban wealth and rural poverty, increasing participation in the international community and intensifying nationalist rhetoric. This course will examine Chi-
na's historical engagement with the modern world in order to gain perspective on our current views. It will cover the Qing (1644-1911) dynastic order, encoun-
ters with Western and Japanese imperialism, the rise of Chinese nationalism, Republican and Communist revolutions, the "other Chinas" of Taiwan and Hong
Kong, economic liberalization, and globalization. This course is part of the Exploring Diversity Initiative in that it requires students to engage with questions of
difference through studying the development of the modern Chinese nation-state from the multi-ethnic empire of the Qing and China's particular experiences of
imperialism in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short papers, a midterm, and a self-scheduled final exam.
Prerequisites: none; open to all. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 35-40).
Group B
A. REINHARDT
HIST 214 Japanese Religions and the State (Same as Religion 259) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under REL 259 for full description.) JOSEPHSON
HIST 215T Crises and Critiques: The Literature and Intellectual History of Early 20th Century China (Same as Chinese 251T and
Comparative Literature 256T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
(See under CHIN 251 for full description.) NUGENT
Group B
HIST 216 The Greater Game? Central Asia and its Neighbors Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow (Same as Asian Studies 236 and Religion
236) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under REL 236 for full description.) DARROW
Groups B and G
HIST 217 Early Modern Japan (Same as Asian Studies 217 and Japanese 217) (Not offered 2011-2012)
The ascension of powerful warlords in the late 1500s brought to an end a century of constant warfare and laid the foundation for the Tokugawa bakufu, the
military government headed by the Tokugawa shogun that would rule Japan for almost three hundred years. This course will introduce students to the extraordi-
nary changes of the years between the establishment of the Tokugawa bakufu in 1603 and its collapse in 1868, an era characterized by relative peace and
stability, periods of economic growth as well as stagnation, the growth of cities and towns, the flourishing of urban culture, and the decline of the samurai. We
will focus on the political and social history of early modern Japan, including topics such as the establishment of the Tokugawa order, the nature of the political
system, urbanization, popular culture, rural life, gender and sexuality, class and status, religion, and the fall of the Tokugawa bakufu. Assigned materials will
include government documents, literature, and films.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, response papers, two short papers (5 pages), and a self-scheduled final exam.
Prerequisites: none; open to all. No enrollment limit (expected: 20).
Groups B and G
SINIAWER
HIST 218 Modern Japan (Same as Asian Studies 218 and Japanese 218) (Not offered 2011-2012)
A modernizing revolution, the construction and collapse of an empire, devastating defeat in a world war, occupation by a foreign power, and postwar economic
rollercoaster have marked Japan's modern experience. This course will examine the main themes of modern Japanese history with a focus on how various
"ordinary people" have lived through the extraordinary changes of the past century and a half. Through the perspectives of ordinary people, be it a young girl
working in a cotton textile factory in the 1920s, a wartime soldier, or a teenager of the early twenty-first century, issues of national identity and nationalism,
democracy, work, gender, family, youth and consumerism will be addressed. Reading materials will include anthropological studies, fiction, films, political
documents, and oral histories.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, response papers, two short papers (5 pages), and a self-scheduled final exam or
research paper.
No prerequisites; open to all. No enrollment limit (expected: 30).
Group B
SINIAWER
HIST 220(F) Cultures of China: Conflicts and Continuities (Same as Chinese 210) (D)
(See under CHIN 210 for full description.) NUGENT
Groups B and G
HIST 221(S) The Making of Modern South Asia (Same as Asian Studies 221)
Bounded by the Himalayas and the Indian Ocean, the vast South Asian subcontinent is home to one fifth of humanity. Boasting one of the world's oldest civiliza-
tions, it has had a tumultuous modern history. A common heritage and environment notwithstanding, South Asia presents a picture of social complexity, econom-
ic disparity, cultural diversity, and political heterogeneity. The course will explore the history of Modern South Asia between the eighteenth century and the
present. Beginning with a brief introduction to the premodern period, and a discussion of the Mughal empire, we will use a combined chronological and themat-
ic approach against a historical canvas that engages such diverse issues as gender, political economy, conquest, resistance, state formation, economic exploitation,
national liberation, and identity politics. The aim is to interrogate the impact of British colonialism and South Asian nationalisms on the state, society, and the
people of the subcontinent. Using primary and secondary sources, we will address both the most significant moments of modern South Asian history and the
historiographical debates that surround them. Students will be able to take away from this course an understanding of the successes, failures, and challenges faced
by the people and states of Modern South Asia today from a historical perspective.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, a map quiz, weekly response papers, 2 short essays (46 pages), and a take home final
exam (710 pages).
Prerequisites: none; open to all. Enrollment limit: 40; expected 2535. If oversubscribed, preference will be given to History majors.
Group B
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR PARWANI
INTRODUCTORY SURVEY COURSES: EUROPE AND RUSSIA (222-241)
HIST 222 Greek History (Same as Classics 222) (Not offered 2011-2012)
Ancient Greece has been thought to embody the origins of Western civilization in its institutions, values, and thought; it has been seen as the infancy of modern
society, with the attributes of innocence, purity, and the infant's staggering capacity for exploration and learning; it has been interpreted as an essentially primi-
tive, violent culture with a thin veneer of rationality; and it has been celebrated as the rational culture par excellence. The study of ancient Greece indeed requires
an interpretive framework, yet Greek culture and history have defied most attempts to articulate one. We will make our attempt in this course by investigating
ancient Greece as a set of cultures surprisingly foreign to us, as it so often was to its own intellectual elite. But we will also come to appreciate the rich and very
real connections between ancient Greek and modern Western civilization. The course will begin with Bronze Age-Greece and the earliest developments in
Greek culture, and will conclude with the spread of Greek influence into Asia through the conquests of Alexander the Great. We will explore topics such as the
aristocratic heritage of the city-state, the effects of pervasive war on Greek society, the competitive spirit in political and religious life, the confrontations with the
168
East, the relationship of intellectual culture to Greek culture as a whole, Greek dependence on slavery, and the diversity of political and social forms in the Greek
world. The readings will concentrate on original sources, including historical writings, philosophy, poetry, and oratory. The class will meet once a week for a
lecture, and will divide into two discussion sections for the second meeting of the week.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on contributions to class discussions, a midterm, a final exam, and a medium-length paper.
Prerequisites: none; open to all. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 40).
Group C and G
CHRISTENSEN
HIST 223(F) Roman History (Same as Classics 223)
The study of Roman history involves questions central to the development of Western institutions, religion, and modes of thought. Scholars have looked to Rome
both for actual antecedents of European cultural development and for paradigmatic scenes illustrating what they felt were cultural universals. Yet Roman history
also encompasses the most far-reaching experience of diverse cultures, beliefs, and practices known in the Western tradition until perhaps contemporary times. A
close analysis of Roman history on its own terms shows the complex and fascinating results of an ambitious, self-confident nation's encounter both with unex-
pected events and crises at home, and with other peoples. As this course addresses the history of Rome from its mythologized beginnings through the reign of the
emperor Constantine, it will place special emphasis on the impressive Roman ability to turn the unexpected into a rich source of cultural development, as well as
the complex tendency later to interpret such ad hoc responses as predestined and inevitable. The Romans also provide a vivid portrait of the relationship between
power and self-confidence on the one hand, and violence and ultimate disregard for dissent and difference on the other. Readings for this course will concentrate
on a wide variety of original sources, and there will be a strong emphasis on the problems of historical interpretation.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on weekly brief in-class response papers, one 8- to 10-page paper, a midterm, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: none; open to all. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 40).
Groups C and G
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR CHRISTENSEN
HIST 224(S) Roman Archaeology and Material Culture (Same as Anthropology 235, ArtH 235 and Classics 224)
(See under CLAS 224 for full description.) RUBIN
Groups C and G
HIST 226(F) Europe From Reformation to Revolution: 1500-1815 (Same as Religion 222)
This course introduces students to the major historical developments in Western Europe during the early modern period--such pan-European phenomena as the
Reformation, the Witch Craze, the Military Revolution, the rise of absolutist states, the seventeenth-century crisis in government and society, the Enlightenment,
the French Revolution and Napoleon, and the establishment of European influence around the world.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on two short papers, a midterm and a final exam.
Prerequisites: none; open to all. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 25-30).
Groups C and G
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR WOOD
HIST 227 A Century of Revolution: Europe, 1789-1917 (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course introduces students to the era of the European domination of the world, a time of revolutionary excitement and fervor, of war and travesty, of
profound social and economic change, and of great intellectual ferment. Topics include the French and Russian Revolutions, the Revolutions of 1830 and 1848,
the Industrial Revolution, German and Italian Unification, European imperialist expansion, processes of secularization and religious revival, and the origins of
World War I. With an eye toward exploring the origins of today's complex attitudes toward race, ethnicity, and gender, the course will also investigate racial
thought, anti-Semitism, and feminism in the nineteenth century.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, a midterm and final exam, and a 10- to 12-page research paper.
Prerequisites: none; open to all. No enrollment limit (expected: 25).
Group C
SINGHAM
HIST 228(S) Europe in the Twentieth Century
This course will offer a survey of some of the important themes of twentieth-century European history, from the eve of World War One to the end of the century.
Organized topically and thematically, the course will consider European society in the fin-de-sicle period; imperialism, racism, and mass politics; the impact of
the Great War on European thought, culture and society; the Russian Revolution and Stalinist Russia; economic and political stabilization in the 1920s; the
Depression; the rise of Fascism and National Socialism; World War II and the Holocaust; the establishment of postwar social democratic welfare states; decoloni-
zation; the "economic miracle" of the 1950s; the uprisings of 1968; the development of the European Union; and the 1989 revolutions in Eastern Europe.
Through a combination of lecture and discussion, the course seeks to introduce students to the major ideologies and institutions that shaped the lives of Europeans
in the twentieth century, and to reflect on the role of ordinary people who devised, adapted, embraced, and sometimes resisted the dominant ideas and practices of
their time.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, several quizzes, an iinterpretive exam, and two papers.
Prerequisites: none; open to all. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 35-40).
Group C
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF, 2:35-3:50 TF GARBARINI
HIST 229(S) European Imperialism and Decolonization (Same as Africana Studies 229) (D)
This course surveys European imperialism in the nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries, paying special attention to important case studies such as British India,
the Scramble for Africa, and the breakup of the Ottoman Empire following World War I. The class will both compare European societies, especially insofar as
their rival imperial policies contributed to World War I, and European and non-European cultures as they confronted one another for the first time. Issues to be
explored include imperialism and its relationship to Christianity, gender, racism, and economic profit. In the second half of the course, we will examine two of the
most dramatic cases of decolonization, Gandhi and Nehru's independence movement in India and Patrice Lumumba's torturous struggle for independence in
Lumumba's Congo. As a transatlantic and transpacific course focusing on race relations, power and privilege, this course fulfills the EDI requirement.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, a midterm and final examination, and a 10- to 12-page research paper.
No prerequisites; open to all. No enrollment limit (expected: 25).
Groups A, B, and C
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR SINGHAM
HIST 230 Modern European Jewish History, 1789-1948 (Same as Jewish Studies 230) (Not offered 2011-2012)
What does it mean to be a Jew? The vexed question of Jewish identity emerged at the end of the eighteenth century in Europe and has dominated Jewish history
throughout the modern period. Although Jewish emancipation and citizenship followed different paths in France and the German states, in both cases Jews
were confronted by unprecedented opportunities for integration into non-Jewish society and unprecedented challenges to Jewish communal life. This course
will introduce students to the major social, cultural, religious, and political transformations that shaped the lives of Europe's Jews from the outbreak of the
French Revolution to the aftermath of World War II. We will explore such topics as emancipation, Jewish diversity, the rise of religious denominations within
Judaism, competing political ideologies, Jewish-gentile relations, the role of Jewish women, Jewish responses to Nazism, and the situation of Jews in the
immediate postwar period. In addition to broad historical treatments, course materials will include memoirs and diaries.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, two papers, and a final exam.
No prerequisites. No enrollment limit (expected: 20-25).
Group C
GARBARINI
HIST 239(F) Germany in the Twentieth Century
Written documents, literature, film, and the writings of historians will be used in surveying the history of Germany since 1890. Topics to be considered include:
Wilhelmian Germany and the role played by domestic and foreign policy in the decision of the imperial government to opt for war in 1914; the impact of war and
defeat on German society; the relation of the cultural flowering that occurred in Germany during the 1920s to the political and social instability of the Weimar
Republic; Hitler and the collapse of democratic Germany; the Third Reich; World War II and the Holocaust; the reconstruction of Germany after 1945; Germany
169
in the context of the Cold War (the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic); and unitedGermany after the wall. A central theme of
the course will be the attempt of Germans during the twentieth century to decide what Germany is and how it fits into the rest of Europe, and to determine the
nature of their state and society.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: active and effective participation in class discussion, three interpretive essays, and a number of pop quizzes.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 25-30).
Group C
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR KOHUT
HIST 240 Muscovy and the Russian Empire (Not offered 2011-2012)
Between the fourteenth and the seventeenth centuries the princes and political elite of Muscovy created a vast multi-national empire in Eastern Europe and Asia.
Over the next 150 years their imperial heirs transformed and extended this empire, to the point that on the eve of the Crimean War (1853-1855) many believed it
to be the most powerful state in Europe. But defeat in the war exposed the weakness of the imperial regime and helped to provoke a process of state-led reform
that failed to avert, and may well have contributed to, the collapse of the regime in the February Revolution of 1917. Using a combination of primary and
secondary sources, this course will explore the character of the Muscovite and the Russian empires and the forces, processes, and personalities that shaped their
formation, expansion, and, in the latter case, decline.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, a map quiz, several short essays based on class readings, and a final self-scheduled
exam.
Prerequisites: none; open to all. No enrollment limit (expected: 15-25).
Groups C and G
FISHZON
HIST 241 The Rise and Fall of the Soviet Union (Not offered 2011-2012)
The October Revolution of 1917 brought to power in the debris of the Russian Empire a political party committed to the socialist transformation of society,
culture, the economy, and individual human consciousness. Less than seventy-five years later, the experiment appeared to end in failure, with the stunning
collapse of the Soviet Union in December 1991. Using a combination of primary and secondary sources, this course will explore the nature and historical
significance of the Soviet experiment, the controversies to which it has given rise, and the forces, processes, and personalities that shaped the formation, trans-
formation, and ultimate collapse of the Soviet Union.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, a map quiz, several short papers based on class readings, and a final self-scheduled
exam.
Prerequisites: none; open to all. No enrollment limit (expected: 25).
Group C
FISHZON
INTRODUCTORY SURVEY COURSES: LATIN AMERICAANDTHE CARIBBEAN (242-251)
HIST 242(F) Latin America From Conquest to Independence
This course will examine the processes commonly referred to as the creation of "Latin America" and will do so from numerous perspectives. Starting with the
construction of indigenous societies, from small and decentralized groupings to huge imperial polities, before 1492 to the invasion of Europeans from that date
forward, we will take up the question of the Iberian conquest, looking at the often violent encounters that made up that event and analyzing its success, limits, and
results. We will then study the imposition of Iberian rule from the point of view of would-be colonizers and the peoples they treated as objects of colonization,
stressing the multiple and conflicting character of European, indigenous, and African perspectives. Thus looking at the Americas from both the outside--in and
inside--out, we will focus on the unequal relations of power that came to define cultural, political, and economic life in the colonies, always with an eye on the
gendered and racialized nature of those relations. We will also not only compare very different regions of the Iberian Americas but also see how the grand shifts of
history intervened in-and perhaps consisted of-the most normal elements of daily life in northern Mexico, the central Andes, coastal Brazil, and other parts of
colonial Latin America. Visual as well as more traditional written primary materials, along with secondary texts and films, will serve as the basis for our discus-
sions throughout the semester.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short papers (4-5 pages), and a take-home final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 25).
Groups D and G
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF KITTLESON
HIST 243 Modern Latin America, 1822 to the Present (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course will examine salient issues in the history of the independent nations of Latin America. The first two sections of the course will focus on the turbulent
formation of nation-states over the course of the "long nineteenth century," from the crises of the Spanish and Portuguese colonial empires in the late eighteenth
century to the heyday of liberal political economies at the turn of the twentieth century. In this regard the course will analyze the social and economic changes of
the period up to World War I and the possibilities they offered for both political order and disorder. Key topics addressed will include caudillismo, the role of the
Church in politics, economic dependency and development, and the place of indigenous and African Latin-American peoples in new nations, and industrializa-
tion and urbanization. The latter two sections will examine the trend toward state-led national development in the twentieth century, considering the diverse
forms it took and conflicts it generated in different nations and periods. Here we will take up questions of the emergence of workers' and women's movements
and the rise of mass politics; militarism, democracy, and authoritarian governments; the influence of the U.S. in the region; and the life and possibly death of
revolutionary options. Within this chronological framework of national and regional political economy, we will consider the ways that various Latin American
social actors shaped their own lives and collective histories, sometimes challenging and sometimes accommodating the ideals of national elites. General region-
al trends will be illustrated by selected national cases, including Mexico, Brazil, Argentina, Cuba, Chile, Venezuela, Nicaragua, and Guatemala.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, two shorts papers (3-5 pages), and a take-home final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit 40 (expected: 35-45).
Group D
KITTLESON
HIST 248 History of the Caribbean: Race, Nation, and Politics (Same as Africana Studies 248) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under AFR 248 for full description.) BENSON
Groups D and G
INTRODUCTORY SURVEY COURSES: UNITED STATES (252-291)
HIST 252(F) North American History to 1865
A topical analysis of the history of what became the United States of America, beginning with the early years of European conquest and ending with the crisis of
the Civil War. Particular attention will be paid to the relationship between major political events and changing patterns of economic, social, and cultural life that
shaped them. Readings will include contemporary sources, historical studies, and biographies.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: students will write a series of short analytical papers and will have a choice of either writing a longer, final essay or
taking a final exam.
Prerequisites: none; open to all. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 20-30).
Groups F and G
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF LONG
HIST 253(F,S) History of the United States, 1865-Present
This course surveys the important themes and issues that inform the historical landscape of the United States since the Civil War nineteenth century. With special
attention to how Americans defined themselves as citizens and as a nation, the class examines the settlement of the west, the nuances of progressivism, the
expanding role of the United States in the world, desegregation and the rights revolution, and the emergence of conservatism. The course also tunes into connec-
tions between current affairs and the American past. Reading assignments include a range of primary sources and historical interpretations.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on participation, short papers, a midterm, and a final take-home exam.
Prerequisites: none; open to all. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 30-40).
Group F
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR First Semester: DUBOW
2:35-3:50 TF Second Semester: MERRILL
170
HIST 262 The United States and the World, 1776 to 1914 (Not offered 2011-2012)
From its foundation in 1776 to the beginning of World War I in 1914, the United States developed a complex of ideas for understanding--and methods for
securing --its place in the world. During this period, the nation's diplomacy went through several phases as it made the transition from a young republic
struggling to conduct its diplomacy, to an expansionist power in the first half of the nineteenth century, to an emerging world power in the aftermath of the Civil
War, and then to an imperialist power after the Spanish-American War. Amidst these events, U.S. statesmen and citizens constantly debated the country's
proper diplomatic role and struggled to construct and propagate a unique American ideology, as well as an advantageous geo-strategic position, on the global
stage. Debates about foreign relations were imbued with questions of race, nation, independence, religion, economy, law, gender, and geographic expansion;
indeed, defining U.S. foreign relations was a means of defining the nation itself. Through a variety of primary sources and scholarly books and articles, this
course will examine U.S. relations with external powers as well as the interactions that occurred between U.S. domestic and foreign policy during this period.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, two 5- to 7-page papers, quizzes, and a midterm exam.
Prerequisites: none; open to all. Enrollment limit:40 (expected: 15-25).
Group F
CHAPMAN
HIST 263 The United States and the World, 1914 to the Present (Not offered 2011-2012)
World War I altered the world's geostrategic balance and ushered in a new era for U.S. foreign relations. The self-identified isolationist power would emerge as
a hegemon, no longer able or content to rely upon its geographic position to protect it from global entanglement. Some have called this the "Wilsonian Centu-
ry," as Woodrow Wilson led the charge to involve the United States in a new international order. This new order did not materialize immediately after the Treaty
of Versailles in 1919, especially as the world descended into economic depression. During and after World War II, though, the U.S. adopted activist methods of
spreading self-determination, democracy, and capitalist models of development and free trade around the world. This became all the more critical as European
empires disintegrated and decolonizing countries looked to the adversarial superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union, for competing models of
development and modern forms of government. Through a variety of primary sources and scholarly books and articles, this course will explore U.S. relations
with the world from World War I to the current war in Iraq. In addition to official U.S. policy, it will consider how international events have shaped American
society and culture and, in turn, how domestic factors have influenced American foreign policy.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, a midterm exam., several short papers, a 4- to 5- page paper, and a 6- to 8-page paper.
Prerequisites: none; open to all. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 25-30).
Group F
CHAPMAN
HIST 280(S) African American History: An Introduction (Same as Africana Studies 280) (D)
This course provides a survey of African American History from the earliest importation and migration of Africans to North American through the present day.
Our readings and discussions will take up the development, expansion, and organization of slavery, the coming and meaning of freedom, and the political and
cultural landscapes of African Americans over time. We will discuss slavery, freedom, civil rights, and racial ideologies. Finally, we will examine the post Civil
Rights era, the changing meaning of the designation "African American" in light of global migrations, and African American political power in the 21st century.
Our readings, which will include both primary and secondary sources, will help us to interrogate American history and gain an understanding and overview of
African American history. The course will be primarily discussion based. Given its focus on the workings of racial ideology and the development of slavery and
other forms of unfree labor in the U.S. economic system, this course fulfills the criteria of the Exploring Diversity Initiative.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on three short papers, a take-home final exam, and performance in in-class discussions and assignments.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 20-30).
Group F
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR LONG
HIST 281 African-American History, 1619-1865 (Same as Africana Studies 281) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
This course provides an introduction to the history of African Americans in United States during the colonial, early republic, and antebellum eras. The course
demonstrates how economically, culturally, and politically, African Americans shaped and were shaped by the historical landscape of the nation. The experi-
ence of enslavement necessarily dominates this history, and it is the contours and nuances of slavery--and the development of racial classifications--that give
this course its focus. But with a attention centered on African Americans, the course also explores African cultural influences, the significance of gender, the
lives of free blacks, and the cultural and intellectual significance of the abolitionist movement. The course closes on the themes that emerge from the war
between the states, and on the meaning of freedom and emancipation. Our readings will include primary sources and secondary literature. Class meetings will
combine lecture and discussion. Informed participation in class discussion is essential.
This EDI course explores the experiences and expressions of the culturally diverse peoples of African descent in the New World (and the Old), as well as the
myriad ways in which they confront, negotiate, and at times challenge dominant U.S. and/or European hierarchies of race, culture, gender and class.
Format: lecture/discussion Evaluation will be based on the quality of three papers, performance in quizzes, and participation in class discussion. No prerequi-
sites. No enrollment limit (expected: 20-25).
Groups F and G
L. BROWN
HIST 282 African-American History From Reconstruction to the Present (Same as Africana Studies 282) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
This course introduces students to the significant themes and events that have shaped African-Americans' historical experiences from Reconstruction to the end
of the twentieth century. Course themes will include: the changing meanings of freedom, equality, and rights; the intersection of ideology and activism; the
disconnection between local and national perspectives. Additionally, the course explores the political nature and development of African-American protest
traditions, giving particular attention to the rise of Jim Crow, the franchise, black institutional and organizational life, black migration and urbanization, the black
freedom movement and its legacy, and the demise of the liberal coalition.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short papers, and a take-home exam.
This EDI course explores the experiences and expressions of the culturally diverse peoples of African descent in the New World (and the Old), as well as the
myriad ways in which they confront, negotiate, and at times challenge dominant U.S. and/or European hierarchies of race, culture, gender and class.
Prerequisites: none; open to all. No enrollment limit (expected: 20-25).
Group F
L. BROWN
HIST 284(F) Topics in Asian American History (Same as American Studies 284 and Asian Studies 284) (D)
This course serves as the introduction to Asian American history, roughly covering the years 1850 to the present. It examines the lives of Chinese, Japanese,
Koreans, Filipinos, Indians, and Southeast Asians in America, and the historical reasons why they came to the US and their subsequent interactions with other
ethno-racial groups in the United States. Topics include the anti-Asian exclusion movements, the wartime incarceration of Japanese Americans, the increase of
Asian immigration after the 1965 Immigration Act and the war in Viet Nam, and the impact of the events of September 11, 2001 on Asian American communi-
ties. These themes and others will be explored through the use of historical texts, primary documents, novels, memoirs, and films. This is an EDI course because it
examines how people from different Asian countries and cultures interacted with each other and those already here in the US. Theirs is a story of immigration,
exclusion, resistance, accommodation, and the process of "becoming American."
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on six response papers, two short critical essay (5-7 pages) and a final oral history/family history of an Asian
American (10-15 pages).
Prerequisites: none; open to all. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 30).
Group F
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF WONG
HIST 286 Latina/o History From 1846 to the Present (Same as Latina/o Studies 286) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
This course examines the formation of Latina/o communities in the United States from 1846 to the present. Formed through conquest, immigration, and migra-
tion, these communities reflect the political and economic causes of migration, U.S. foreign policies, the connections between the United States and the coun-
tries of origin, and economic conditions in the United States. People's migration to the United States has been mediated through labor recruitment, immigration
and refugee policies, and social networks. Mexicans, Puerto Ricans, Cubans, and Dominicans, as well as more recent immigrants from Central and South
American countries, then become racialized populations in the United States. This EDI course examines the racial dynamics at play in the formation of Latina/o
communities, as well as the impact of dominant U.S. hierarchies of race, gender and class on the economic incorporation of Latinas and Latinos.
171
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation and group presentations, short writing assignments, two short essays, and a final essay.
Prerequisites: none; open to all. No enrollment limit (expected: 20).
Group F
WHALEN
INTRODUCTORY SURVEY COURSES: TRANSNATIONAL/COMPARATIVE (292-299)
HIST 293(S) History of Medicine (Same as History of Science 320)
(See under HSCI 320 for full description.) D. BEAVER
Group G
HIST 294 Scientific Revolutions: 1543-1927 (Same as History of Science 224) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under HSCI 224 for full description.) D. BEAVER
Groups C and G
HIST 295(S) Technology and Science in American Culture (Same as History of Science 240)
(See under HSCI 240 for full description.) D. BEAVER
Group F
MAJOR SEMINARS (301)
Major seminars explore the nature and practice of history, are required for the degree in History, and are normally restricted to junior History majors. Although
these seminars vary in topic and approach, each focuses on the discipline of history itself--on the debates over how to approach the past, on questions of the status
of different kinds of evidence and how to use it, on the purpose of the study of history. Focusing on questions of methodology, epistemology, and historiography,
these courses ask: What kind of knowledge do historians claim to produce? What does it mean to study the past? How do historians approach the project of
studying the past? Each year several major seminars will be offered. Students who plan to study abroad during their junior year may take their Major Seminar in
the spring semester of their sophomore year, and those planning to be away for the whole of their junior year are encouraged to do so.
HIST 301A(F) Approaching the Past: History, Theory, Practice
This course will explore how the discipline of `History' has come to assume its present form and how a number of historians since the 1820s have understood
their craft. We will begin by discussing the work of three great nineteenth-century historians (Macaulay, Marx, and Ranke) who believed that historical "truth"
existed and could, with skill, be deciphered. Next we will explore the philosophy and practice of the cultural and social historians of the 1960s/1970s, comparing
and contrasting it with that of their nineteenth-century predecessors. We will then consider the work of those recent theorists who have tried to refute historians'
claims to be able to capture the "truth" of the past, focusing on the state of the field in the wake of challenges posed to its epistemological foundations by "post-
modernism." We will conclude with an assessment of the state of the discipline today. In general, we will be less concerned with "the past" than with what
historians do with "the past." Consequently, we will focus primarily on those abstract, philosophical assumptions that have informed the practice of history.
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, a 250-word position statement ("What is History?"), two 9- to 11-page interpretive essays,
and a take-home final exam.
Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15-19). Restricted to History majors.
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR WATERS
HIST 301B Approaching the Past: Documentary Practices (Not offered 2011-2012)
Comprised of photographs, oral history, narratives, folklore, films, fiction, music, poetry, art and other forms, documentary provides ways for audiences to
access stories that would go untold but for the work of the documentarian: Jacob Riis' turn of the century photographs of New York's Lower East Side, Agee
and Walker's study of white southern poverty, Danny Lyon's photos of the civil rights movement, or Spike Lee's film about the murder of four black girls in
Birmingham, Alabama. From its beginnings, documentary served to engender a progressive agenda by projecting the voices of the voiceless in order to illumi-
nate the need for social change and spur the audience to action. But documentary also provides a way to access history, both the setting where the document was
created and the subject it describes. This course examines the historical development of documentary forms, reviews and critiques the work of specific docu-
mentarians, facilitates historical research in non-traditional sources, and encourages students to develop a documentary skill.
Format: discussion. Requirements: Students write two short papers, and the course culminates with students creating their own documentary projects.
Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15-19). Restricted to History majors.
L. BROWN
HIST 301C Approaching the Past: Practices of Modern History (Not offered 2011-2012)
What is history? What is it that historians do? In this course, students will explore questions of how and why we historians practice our craft. The first section of
the course will examine how historians come to know, think about, and understand the past. Issues of the nature of historical "truth," objectivity and bias, types
of sources, and uses of theory will be discussed. Next, we will address the ways in which historians write about the past, considering the influence of postmod-
ernism on historical narratives, and historical film. Finally, we will examine the uses of history, including public history, history education, and the construction
of historical memory. The class will meet once a week, and each session will focus on some theoretical material as well as readings that concretely illustrate the
methodological issues at stake. These readings will be drawn from a broad range of topics, such as the Great Depression, the Nanking Massacre, and the
assassination of JFK.
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, response papers, short essays, and a final paper.
Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15-19). Restricted to History majors.
SINIAWER
HIST 301D Approaching the Past: Is History Eurocentric? (Not offered 2011-2012)
The modern historical profession is very much a European creation, originating in the Age of Enlightenment. Championing reason and challenging religious
views of the past, the Philosophes linked the new secular study of man and his society to a view of historical progress. Some have argued that the very nature of
the historical discipline is Eurocentric, based as it is on Western concepts of reason, science, and historical evolution which privilege European history at the
expense of its non-Western counterparts. In this course, we will study some of the important spokesmen for historical progress (Voltaire, Condorcet, Marx, von
Ranke) as well as some of their important critics. The first half of the course will survey the history of the historical profession from the Enlightenment to the
present. In the second half of the course, we will read some of the great works of history which have attempted to explain the rise of the west, grappling with
how and to what extent these interpretations are Eurocentric.
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, two 10- to 12-page papers, and a final exam.
Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15-19). Restricted to History majors.
SINGHAM
HIST 301F(S) Approaching the Past: Remembering American History
Much of what we know and understand about American history is rooted in the received narrative of our national history, a history that is constructed of individu-
al, collective, and a national memory of the past and its meanings. This course will examine some forms through which American historical memory is presented
and (re)presented, such as monuments, museums, novels, film, photographs, and scholarly historical writing, by considering a number of pivotal events, institu-
tions, or eras in American history. Potential topics are slavery, race, and the Civil War; westward expansion; the Great Depression; World War II; the Sixties; the
war in Viet Nam; and the events and aftermath of September 11, 2001.
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on weekly response papers, a book review, an exercise with the Williams College Museum of Art, and a final project
to be completed in consultation with the professor.
Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15-19). Restricted to History majors.
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W WONG
HIST 301G Approaching the Past: Writing the Past (Not offered 2011-2012)
"History" refers to the aggregate of past events as well as to the branch of knowledge that seeks to understand those past events. Whereas history courses often
take as their content the first of these two meanings of history, focusing on the politics, society, and culture of a particular place in a particular historical era, this
course will examine history's often concealed "other" meaning: the practices of historians, their methods and assumptions. In so doing, this course aims to
172
unsettle history majors' own assumptions about what history "is" and what historians "do". How do historians reconstruct the past, and how and why have their
approaches to sources, theories, and narrative strategies changed over time? And on a deeper level, how have historians' suppositions changed--if they have
changed--about the nature of historical truth, knowledge, and the value of history to the societies in which they wrote? Taking history-writing itself as our
object of study, over the course of the semester we will read the work of twelve, quite different historians from the classical to the modern era. Each week in our
seminar meetings, we will subject these texts to a careful reading in order to understand and assess these historians' theories and practices.
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, weekly critical response papers to the assigned reading, and a final paper.Enrollment limit:
19 (expected: 15-19). Restricted to History majors.
GARBARINI
HIST 301K(S) Approaching the Past: Varieties of Historical Thinking
This course is designed to acquaint students with some of the ways historians have thought about the past. Beginning with Thucydides' The Peloponnesian War
and ending with Simon Schama's exercise in historical imagination, Dead Certainties, the work of eleven historians will be studied closely and critically over the
course of the semester. In the process, students not only will become familiar with various important historical approaches but will also be encouraged to examine
their own assumptions about the past and about how and why--or even if--we know it. We will meet weekly to define, understand, and assess the different ways
historians considered in the course have thought about the past.
Format: discussion. Requirements: in preparation for class discussion, students are required to produce a 1-page critical response to the assigned reading each
week, which will form the basis for class discussion; in addition to writing ten critical responses, students are also required to make an oral presentation of
approximately twenty minutes on a professor they have had in a history course at Williams College.
Prerequisites: course enrollment is restricted to History majors; not open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15-19).
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W KOHUT
HIST 301M(F) Approaching the Past: Westward Expansion in American History
How does historical knowledge evolve? How do historians build on but also repudiate the work of historians that came before them? In this course, we will
explore the historiography that has developed over the last 150 years about the Anglo-American settlement of the West, using it as a lens to explore larger ques-
tions about shifting perspectives of the historian's craft. This historiography will also illuminate critical conflicts about the meaning of American history. Did the
frontier build American character, as Frederick Jackson Turner argued in 1893? Did it establish patterns of conquest that have shaped American policy toward
other parts of the world, as later historians would argue? Has the West been an "exceptional" place or representative of the nation at large? The class will meet
once a week, and each session's discussion will focus intensively on one book, examining the theoretical and historical assumptions of the author; how these
assumptions shaped the historian's search for evidence and his or her claims; and the impact they have had on our understanding of the American West.
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, weekly critical writing, a midterm paper, and a final, book review essay.
Prerequisites: course enrollment is restricted to History majors; not open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15-19).
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W MERRILL
ADVANCED ELECTIVES (302-396)
These advanced, topical courses are more specialized in focus than are the introductory survey courses (202-299) and are intended to follow such courses.
Enrollment is often limited. Because these courses may presume some background knowledge, the instructor may recommend that students enroll in an appropri-
ate introductory course before registering for an advanced elective.
ADVANCED ELECTIVES: AFRICA AND THE MIDDLE EAST (302-311)
HIST 304(F) South Africa and Apartheid (Same as Africana Studies 304) (D)
This course introduces students to the spatial, legal, economic, social and political structures that created Apartheid in South Africa, and to the factors that led to
the collapse of the racist order. We will examine the many forms of black oppression and, also, the various forms of resistance to Apartheid. Some of the themes
we will explore include industrialization and the formation of the black working classes, the constructions of race, ethnicities and sexualities, land alienation and
rural struggles, township poverty and violence, Black education, and the Black Consciousness Movement. This EDI course explores the experiences and expres-
sions of the culturally diverse peoples of African descent in the New World (and the Old), as well as the myriad ways in which they confront, negotiate, and at
times challenge dominant U.S. and/or European hierarchies of race, culture, gender and class.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation and three short papers.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 20).
Group A
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR MUTONGI
HIST 305 Nation Building: The Making of the Modern Middle East (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
In 1932, or twelve years into his rule and twelve years after the establishment of Iraq, King Faysal I lamented that there were "no Iraqi people but only unimag-
inable masses of human beings, devoid of any patriotic idea, imbued with religious traditions and absurdities, connected by no common tie." This course will
consider how true the King's statement still holds by evaluating the various attempts at state and nation building in the modern Middle East and the challenges
of statecraft. After assessing some of the more influential theories of nationalism, we will explore the historical experience of nationalism and national identity
in Iraq, Israel, Turkey, Palestine, Iran, and Egypt. What has been at the basis of nationhood? How did European concepts of nation translate into the Middle
Eastern context? What was the role of religion in these modern societies? How did traditional notions of gender effect concepts of citizenship? We will also
explore some of the unresolved issues facing the various nations of the Middle East, such as unfulfilled nationalist aspirations, disputes over land and borders,
and challenges to sovereignty. Finally, we will evaluate the role of foreign powers in nation building in the Middle East and consider whether the modern
concept of the nation has any validity in the Middle Eastern context.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: evaluation will be based on several short papers and a "Magnus" Opus (a.k.a. final research paper).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 20-25). Preference given to History majors and students with a background in Middle Eastern studies.
Group E
BERNHARDSSON
HIST 307 Islam and Modernity (Not offered 2011-2012) (D) (W)
Is Islam compatible with modernity? And if so, how? This course in intellectual history will systematically address the vast corpus of writings by Muslim
activists and scholars on the role of Islam in today's world. Through this examination some of the central questions related to Islam's encounter with modernity
will be explored in detail, such as those related to post-colonialism, political authority, violence, the status of women, democracy, and war. Geographically, this
course will focus on Egypt and Iran as well as the ideas being developed by Muslim scholars in Europe and North America. Students will discuss these perti-
nent issues via videoconferencing with other university students in the Middle East on a regular basis.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: weekly online journal and commentaries and a final research paper (15-20 pages).
No prerequisites; open to first-year students with instructor's permission. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to History and Religion majors.
Group E
BERNHARDSSON
HIST 308 Gender and Society in Modern Africa (Same as Africana Studies 308 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 308) (Not
offered 2011-2012)
This course explores the constructions of feminine and masculine categories in modern Africa. We will concentrate on the particular history of women's experi-
ences during the colonial and postcolonial periods. In addition, we will examine how the study of history and gender offers perspectives on contemporary
women's issues such as female-circumcision, teen pregnancy, wife-beating, and "AIDS."
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation and three short papers.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students with instructor's permission. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 15-20).
Group A
MUTONGI
HIST 310(S) Iraq and Iran in the Twentieth Century (D)
Despite being neighbors, the historical experience of Iran and Iraq has been drastically different. In this course we will begin by exploring the creation of Iraq in
1921 and the Pahlavi government in Iran. We will evaluate the revolutions of 1958 and 1978-9 and compare the lives and careers of Saddam Hussein and Ayatol-
lah Khomeini. The tragic Iran-Iraq war of 1980-88 will also be discussed. Finally, the political future of these countries will be assessed.
173
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, short essays, and a final paper.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students with instructor's permission. No enrollment limit (expected: 20-40).
Group E
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF BERNHARDSSON
ADVANCED ELECTIVES: ASIA (312-321)
HIST 315 Cultural Foundations: The Literature and History of Early China (Same as Chinese 224 and Comparative Literature 220) (Not
offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under CHIN 224 for full description.) NUGENT
Groups B and G
HIST 316(S) Japan since 1945 (Same as Asian Studies 316)
Japan's path since 1945 has been jagged and unpredictable, sometimes exhilarating, sometimes full of anxiety. This course will examine that path in an effort to
understand the main themes in recent Japanese history and the forces that have propelled the nation across the last 65 years. The focus will be on reading primary
materials and secondary sources, watching films, and discussing what we have read and seen. Although the course will proceed in a chronological fashion,
several themes will be seen to thread their way across the decades: the lingering questions of militarism and World War II, the struggle between capitalism and
democracy, Japan's complicated relationships with both Asia and the United States, and the vicissitudes of economic growth and decline. We also will look at the
impact of popular culture in Japan and on the world.
Format: discussion and lecture. Students will be expected to write a combination of response papers and a longer (15- to 20-page) researchbased interpretive
paper. There will also be a final test or project.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit 25 (expectedt: 1520). If oversubscribed, preference will be given to History and Asian Studies majors.
Group B
Hour: 2:353:50 MR HUFFMAN
HIST 317(S) Urban Spaces of Modern South Asia (Same as Arabic 320, Asian Studies 320, International Studies 320 and Sociology 320)
(See under SOC 320 for full description.) VALIANI
Group B
HIST 318(S) Nationalism in East Asia (Same as Asian Studies 245 and Political Science 354)
(See under PSCI 245 for full description.) CRANE
Group B
HIST 319 Gender and the Family in Chinese History (Same as Asian Studies 319 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 319) (Not
offered 2011-2012) (D)
Although sometimes claimed as part of a set of immutable "Asian values," the Chinese family has not remained fixed or stable over time. In this course, we will
use the framework of "family" to gain insight into gender, generational, and sexual roles in different historical periods. Beginning in the late imperial period
(16th-18th Centuries), we will examine the religious, marital, sexual, and childrearing practices associated with the "orthodox" Confucian family. We will then
explore the wide variety of "heterodox" practices in imperial China, debates over and critiques of the family system in the twentieth century, and configurations
of gender and family in contemporary China. As an EDI course, this class makes use of anthropological and gender studies methods to analyze both the
specificities of Chinese ideas and practices regarding family, gender and sexuality as well as the considerable variety among these ideas and practices at different
points in time.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, several short papers, and a final paper
No prerequisites; open to first-year students with instructor's permission. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 20).
Groups B and G
A. REINHARDT
HIST 320(F) Cultures of Protest in Modern South Asia (Same as Arabic 337, Asian Studies 337 and Sociology 337)
(See under SOC 337 for full description.) VALIANI
Group B
HIST 321 History of U.S.-Japan Relations (Same as Asian Studies 321 and Japanese 321) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
An unabating tension between conflict and cooperation has been an undercurrent of U.S.-Japan relations in the past 150 years, at times erupting into clashes
reaching the scale of world war and at times allowing for measured collaboration. We will explore the U.S.-Japan relationship from the perspectives of both
countries with a focus on how culture, domestic concerns, economic and political aims, international contexts, and race have helped shape its course and nature.
This course will fulfill the requirements of the Exploring Diversity Initiative by examining not just the diplomatic relationship between the U.S. and Japan, but
also how various types of interactions have influenced the dynamics of power between these two countries and have shaped the ways in which each country has
understood and portrayed the other. Topics will include early U.S.-Japan encounters, the road to World War II, the politics and social history of the Occupation,
trade relations, and the U.S.-Japan security alliance. Contemporary topics will also be discussed and due attention will be given to the larger context of U.S.-East
Asia relations.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, response papers, two short papers (5 pages), and a self-scheduled final exam or
research paper.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students with instructor's permission. No enrollment limit (expected: 30).
Groups B and F
SINIAWER
ADVANCED ELECTIVES: EUROPE AND RUSSIA (322-341)
HIST 322 The Construction of Gender in Ancient Greece and Rome (Same as Classics 239 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies
239) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under CLAS 239 for full description.) CHRISTENSEN
Group C and G
HIST 323(S) Leadership, Government, and the Governed in Ancient Greece (Same as Classics 323 and Leadership Studies 323) (W)
Visionary, opportunist, reformer, tyrant, demagogue, popular champion: concise characterization of influential leaders is often irresistible. But placing leaders in
their much less easily encapsulated political, social, and religious contexts reveals them to be far more complicated and challenging subjects. Among the ques-
tions that will guide our study of Greek leadership: Was the transformative leader in a Greek city always an unexpected one, arising outside of the prevailing
political and/or social systems? To what extent did the prevailing systems determine the nature of transformative as well as of normative leadership? How did
various political and social norms contribute to legitimating particular kinds of leader? After studying such leaders as the "tyrants" who prevailed in many Greek
cities of both the archaic and classical eras, then Athenian leaders like Solon, Cleisthenes, Cimon, Pericles, Cleon, and Demosthenes, and Spartans like Cleo-
menes, Leonidas, Brasidas, and Lysander, we will focus on Alexander the Great, whose unique accomplishments transformed every aspect of Greek belief about
leadership, national boundaries, effective government, the role of the governed, and the legitimacy of power. Readings will include accounts of leadership and
government by ancient Greek authors (e.g. Homer, Solon, Herodotus, Thucydides, Plato, Aristotle, Demosthenes, all in translation) and contemporary historians
and political theorists.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on contributions to class discussions, three short papers (4-6 pages each), a midterm exam, and an oral
presentation leading to a significant final paper (15-20 pages).
No prerequisites; but a background and/or interest in the ancient world, political systems, and/or Leadership Studies is preferred; open to first-year students with
instructor's permission. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 12).
Group C and G
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR CHRISTENSEN
HIST 324(F) The Development of Christianity: 30-600 C.E. (Same as Religion 212) (W)
(See under REL 212 for full description.) BUELL
Group G
174
HIST 326(S) War in European History
From the ancient world to the twentieth century, war has always played an important part in European history. Europeans have not only constantly been at war
with other Europeans, but also with neighboring cultures and, indeed, most peoples around the globe. This course will introduce students to the history of Euro-
pean warfare from its origins in the classical and medieval periods to its maturation in the early modern period (1450-1815), and its disastrous culmination in the
nationalist struggles of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Has there been a distinctively "European Way of War" from the beginning? How do we explain
failure and success in European wars? What exactly happened at the strategic, operational, and tactical levels of war? And what caused changes in the organiza-
tion and waging of European war from one period to the next?
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, one short research paper, and midterm and final exams.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students with instructor's permission. No enrollment limit (expected: 30-40).
Groups C and G
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR WOOD
HIST 330(S) The Reformations in Early Modern Europe (Same as Religion 220)
(See under REL 220 for full description.) SHUCK
Groups C and G
HIST 331(S) Gnosis, Gnostics, Gnosticism (Same as Classics 218, Comparative Literature 218 and Religion 218) (W)
(See under REL 218 for full description.) BUELL
HIST 332(F) Gender and Intellectual Life in Seventeenth Century Europe (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 332)
The roots of our contemporary reflections on the human being, society, nature, knowledge, and religion derive in many respects from the intellectual life of the
seventeenth century. This was a time when phenomena like the notion of body and soul, the legitimacy of power, and the uses of knowledge were intensely
debated, reformulated, and reshaped in order to fit a changing world. The intellectual history of this period was turbulent and has often been debated. This course
will both broaden and deepen our understanding of these years through the prism of gender. It will introduce students to the major intellectual, political, and ethical
debates in seventeenth-century Europe through the work of women philosophers, scientists, artists, and rulers--women like Marie de Gournay, Margaret Ca-
vendish, Anne Conway, Princess Elisabeth, Queen Christina, Maria Sibylla Merian, and others. Canonical figures of the period, such as Francis Bacon, Ren
Descartes, Thomas Hobbes, Baruch Spinoza, and Isaac Newton, will be studied in relation to the questions put forward by these women in their own intellectual
work. Sources will include primary philosophical, scientific, artistic, and literary works, as well as secondary historical texts.
Format: discussion; the course will largely be run as a discussion course, focusing on the readings and depending on regular attendance, completion of the as-
signed readings before class meetings, and constructive and informed participation in discussion.
Evaluation will be based on class participation (20%), two 2-4 page commentaries on primary sources (40%), and a 10- to 12-page research paper or historio-
graphical essay (40%).
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 25; expected enrollment: 15-20. Preference given to History majors and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies
concentrators.
Groups C and G
Hour: 11:20-12.35 TR ROSENGREN
HIST 334(S) Sex and Psyche: A Cultural History of Fin-de-Sicle Europe (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 334)
This course will introduce students to some of the most significant and exciting social, artistic, intellectual, and political developments in fin-de-sicle Europe
(1870 to 1914). "Fin-de-sicle" is a concept that denotes not only a historical period--the end of a century--but refers to a consciousness of living in a time of
accelerated change and crisis. Intellectuals and artists of the decades we will be examining were preoccupied with "degeneration," loss of innocence, meaning,
morality, and the inner self. They were simultaneously fascinated and horrified by technological innovation, emergent political and ideological currents, and the
challenges to traditional values and identities posed by them. After a survey of political upheavals during the European fin-de- sicle, the course will focus on
three metropolises consecutively: Vienna, Paris, and St. Petersburg. Through analyses of historical literature, novels, music, visual art, and the seminal texts of
psychoanalysis we will explore how the self, public life, gender relations, sexuality, and aesthetics were conceived and re-imagined in each city, and bring to light
the sensibilities and culture they shared.
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, an oral presentation, two short critical essays based on class readings, and a final research
paper.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students with instructor's permission. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 20-25). Preference determined by instructor.
Group C
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR FISHZON
HIST 336(S) NationalSocialist Germany (D)
This course is a history of NationalSocialist Germany based to a considerable extent on primary documents. Students will use the documents to reconstruct the
history of the Third Reich and to articulate and assess some of the principal historiographical debates relating to NationalSocialist Germany. The course will
consider the following topics: the failure of the Weimar Republic and the rise of National Socialism; the consolidation of Nazi rule; the experiential reality of the
Volksgemeinschaft; the popularity of National Socialism; youth and women in the Third Reich; Nazi culture; Nazi racism and image of the Jew; Gestapo terror;
the prewar persecution of Jews; popular German antiSemitism; the regime's euthanasia program; the Nazi Empire; the experience of war in Russia; the imple-
mentation of the "Final Solution to the Jewish Problem"; German knowledge of and complicity in the "Final Solution"; the experience of "total war" on the home
front; resistance to National Socialism; and the collapse of the Third Reich. The course will focus especially on how ordinary Germans experienced and partici-
pated in the history through which they lived. We will take an empathic approach to NationalSocialist Germany and to the Germans who lived through this
period, attempting to understand why they felt, thought, and acted as they did. We will also consider the epistemological and ethical problems involved in attempt-
ing to empathize with Nazis.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: evaluation will be based on participation in class discussion, a research paper of between ten and fifteen pages and a
final examination.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 20-25).
Group C
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR KOHUT
HIST 338(F) The History of the Holocaust (Same as Jewish Studies 338 and Religion 296)
In twenty-first century United States, the murder of approximately six million European Jews by Nazi Germany remains a central event in our political, moral,
and cultural universe. Nevertheless, the Holocaust still confounds historians' efforts to understand both the motivations of the perpetrators and the suffering of the
victims. In this course, we will study the origins and unfolding of Nazi Germany's genocidal policies, taking into consideration the perspectives of those who
carried out mass murder as well as the experiences and responses of Jews and other victim groups to persecution. We will also examine the Holocaust within the
larger context of the history of World War II in Europe and historians' debates about Germany's exterminatory war aims. Course materials will include diaries,
speeches, bureaucratic documents, memoirs, films, and historical scholarship.
Format: mostly discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, a map quiz, four papers (4 pages) based on class readings, and a final research paper
(6-8 pages).
No prerequisites; open to first-year students with instructor's permission. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 20-25). Preference given to History majors and Jewish
Studies concentrators.
Group C
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR GARBARINI
HIST 340 Roman Cities in the Near East (Same as Anthropology 240 and Classics 340) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under CLAS 340 for full description.) RUBIN
Groups C and G
HIST 341 Envisioning Empire: Geography in the Graeco-Roman World (Same as ArtH 239 and Classics 341) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(D)
(See under CLAS 341 for full description.) RUBIN
Groups C and G
175
ADVANCED ELECTIVES: LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN (342-351)
HIST 345(F) "In Our Own Backyard?" U.S. and Latin American Relations (Same as Africana Studies 345)
This course examines the relations between the United States and Latin America during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. We will explore a variety of U.S.
military interventions in the region, including U.S. participation in the Spanish-Cuban-American War, the occupation of Haiti, and the CIA's role in the overthrow
of President Salvador Allende in Chile. We will look for consistencies and changes over time, weighing the role of ideology, national security, economic interests,
and cultural factors in the creation and outcomes of U.S. policy. Readings will consist of a variety of primary source materials, including letters and memoirs by
U.S. policy-makers. All of the course documents are in English, but students with a reading knowledge of Spanish will be encouraged to investigate sources in
Spanish. In addition to the actions and motivations of officials in Washington, the course will investigate how ordinary Americans like young soldiers, African
Americans, and women saw their roles as occupiers, allies, and the vehicle of modern civilization in the region. History 345 will also consider Latin American
initiatives and responses to U.S. intervention, from attempts by nationalist regimes in Chile, Cuba, Guatemala, and Nicaragua to find an alternative to dependence
on the United States, to critiques by Latin American intellectuals concerning U.S. cultural influences.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, short (2-3 page) weekly writing assignments, and a final research paper (15-20 pages
in length). The final paper will be based on primary source research about a particular U.S. intervention in Latin America.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students with instructor's permission. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Preference determined by instructor.
Groups D and F
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR BENSON
HIST 346(F) History of Modern Brazil (Same as Africana Studies 346) (D)
Brazil has been "the country of the future" far longer than it has been an independent nation. Soon after Europeans descended on its shores, Brazil was hailed as a
land of resources so rich and diverse that they would inevitably produce great wealth and global power for its inhabitants. Although this has often lent a booster-
ish quality to its descriptions of the country, it has also brought ambiguity--for if the label suggests Brazil's potential, it also underlies the country's failure to live
up to that promise. Being an eternal "country of the future" must be as much a troubling as a cheering designation. This course will examine the modern history of
that country of the future by taking up major themes from independence to the present. Beginning with what was by Latin American standards an easy transition
from colony to independent empire, we will analyze the hierarchies that have characterized Brazilian society and their relation to the political and economic
evolution of the Brazilian nation-state. The course will give particular attention to the themes of race, gender, and citizenship; national culture and modernity; and
democracy and authoritarianism in social and political relations. Combining cultural, political, and social analyses, this course fulfills the Exploring Diversity
Initiative requirement by examining a range of written texts and other sources to understand these and other themes in the lives of Brazilians of different social
identities and political standings since Independence.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short papers, and a longer (10-12 page) final essay.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students with instructor's permission. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 15-20).
Group D
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF KITTLESON
HIST 347 Democracy and Dictatorship in Latin America (Not offered 2011-2012)
The inability-or failure--of Latin American countries to establish stable and democratic governments has frustrated observers across the region and beyond
for almost 200 years. This course will examine the historical creation of both democratic and anti-democratic regimes in different national cases, seeking to
identify the conditions that have fostered the apparent persistence of dictatorial tendencies in Brazil, Argentina, Mexico, Peru, and the countries of Central
America. In this regard we will look at the social and economic forces as well as the political actors and ideologies that have contributed to distinct, if often
parallel, outcomes. At the same time, we will also question the criteria we use to label regimes "democratic" or "dictatorial" --and the implications of our
choice of criteria.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: evaluation will be based on class participation, response papers, two short papers, and a longer (10-12-page) final
essay.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 15-20). Preference given to History majors.
Group D
KITTLESON
ADVANCED ELECTIVES: UNITED STATES (352-387)
HIST 352(F,S) America and the Sea, 1600-Present (Same as Maritime Studies 352) (Offered only at Mystic Seaport.) (W)
(See under MAST 352 for full description.) GORDINIER
Groups F and G
HIST 354(F) The Revolutionary Generation: Galaxy of Leaders (Same as Leadership Studies 285 and Political Science 285)
(See under LEAD 285 for full description.) DUNN
Groups F and G
HIST 355(F) Perspectives on the American Revolution (Same as Leadership Studies 255)
The American Revolution remains one of the most-studied events in American history. Yet, agreement about its main causes, significance, and purpose remains
as distant as ever. Some historians argue that political ideas and principles brought about calls for Independence. Others emphasize the economic motives behind
revolutionary fervor. Still others argue that British political institutions failed to adapt to the needs of a growing empire, leading colonists to replace British imperi-
al rule with a form of government suited to their local exigencies. Some have told the story through the eyes of the Founding Fathers, while others have explored
what the American Revolution meant for the lived experience of average citizens, of women, of free and enslaved African Americans, of Native Americans, and
of peoples living beyond North America. Collectively, such a range of studies speaks to the significance of the American Revolution. Individually, however, these
varying perspectives provide a fragmented picture of the era and its people. Through readings, lectures, and primary sources, this class will explore these different
views of the Revolution and try to create some synthetic unity out of this historical kaleidoscope.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation (20%), mid-term (20%) and final (25%) exams, and a final project (35%).
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 20-25). Preference given to History majors and Leadership Studies concentrators.
Groups F and G
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR SPERO
HIST 356 Race, Gender, and Sexuality in U.S. History (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 356) (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course explores the shifting, contested, and intersecting meanings of race, gender, and sexuality in the United States. We will begin with three units de-
signed to introduce the theoretical and methodological literature (one each on gender, sexuality, and race), and then devote the rest of our sessions to analyzing a
series of specific historical topics examining the ways that race, sexuality, and gender have been imagined, policed, legislated, experienced, and performed in
modern U.S. History. Topics to be explored include the development of and challenges to categories of race, sex, and gender; laws and cultural norms regarding
sex and relationships; racial and sexual violence and organized resistance; and historical debates about family, immigration, work, and reproduction.
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short papers, and a final historiographical paper.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students with instructor's permission. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected 20-25).
Group F
DUBOW
HIST 358(S) The Roosevelt Style of Leadership (Same as Leadership Studies 325)
(See under LEAD 325 for full description.) DUNN
Group F
HIST 359(S) The Politics of Presidential Leadership, 1776-1860 (Same as Leadership Studies 259)
This course will trace the development of the presidency from George Washington to Abraham Lincoln. By focusing on the most consequential presidents of the
period, the class will explore presidential successes and failures during times of peace and prosperity and during times of war and depression. As often as possible,
the class will also examine the tactics of these presidents' political rivals to understand how competing politicians tried to navigate the social and political terrain
of their day. Through the study of biography and primary sources, students will offer critical appraisals of presidents and leave the course with a historical under-
standing of the types of challenges that those who have held the office have often faced. The course will also provide an in-depth survey of United States political
history during the tumultuous early years of the nation.
176
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation (25%), class presentation (10%), group presentation (5%), two essay assignments (each 15%),
and a final project (30%).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 20-25). Preference given to History majors and Leadership Studies concentrators.
Groups F and G
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR SPERO
HIST 361 A Social and Cultural History of World War II (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
This course is not a military history of the war but an examination of the social and cultural impact of the war on the United States, and to a lesser extent, Europe
and Asia. Through primary documents including memoirs, oral histories, novels, photographs, and films, as well as the current scholarship on the war, we will
explore a range of experiences of Americans during the war, both on the American homefront and in combat. The course material will play special attention to
the racial, ethnic, gender, sexual, class, and regional relationships that were affected by the war. Themes include the mobilization of the war effort, women and
war production, the incarceration of Japanese Americans, the resistance of African Americans to segregation and inequality, the impact of combat on soldiers,
the decision to use the atomic bomb and responses to its use, the enduring legacy of the Holocaust, how the war enabled the United States to emerge as a
superpower in the postwar era, and various issues involving the historical memory of the war. This course fulfills the requirements for the Exploring Diversity
Initiative because it examines how different racial, ethnic, and gendered/sexualized groups were affected by the war, how they transformed American society,
and how America's status in the world changed after the war, bringing about new relations between Americans and those they fought with and against during
the war.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on six response papers, two short critical essay (5-7 pages), and a final research paper (15-20 pages).
No prerequisites; open to first-year students with instructor's permission. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Preference determined by instructor.
Group F
WONG
HIST 362 The 1980s (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course will consider whether and how the 1980s are coming into view as history. Conventional wisdom views the 1980s as being defined by selfishness,
greed, and materialism, but that decade also saw society engaged in serious debates about individual and social responsibility, the relationship between the state
and society, and about America's role in the world. Understanding this era involves tackling broader questions about liberalism, conservatism, the welfare state,
the cold war, globalization, the presidency, social movements, identity politics, popular culture, religion, and the media in modern U.S. history. This course will
address some of these questions, examine the varieties of ways in which individuals and social groups conceived and reconceived their personal and political
identities, and explore various methods used to assess contemporary history.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on several short writing assignments; two 4- to 5-page essays; and a research paper (12-15 pages).
No prerequisites; open to first-year students with instructor's permission. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Preference determined by instructor.
Group F
DUBOW
HIST 364(F) History of the Old South (Same as Africana Studies 364)
During the course of the semester, we shall investigate two broad, interrelated topics: slavery in the antebellum South, and the impact of slavery on Southern
civilization. Our approach will be primarily topical. In the first half of the course, we shall look at subjects like the foreign and domestic slave trade, patterns of
work and treatment, the nature of the master-slave relationship, resistance and rebellion, and slave cultural, social, and family life. The second half of the course
will concentrate on the influence of the institution of slavery on the mind, social structure, and economy of the Old South, and slavery's impact on Southern
politics and the decision for secession in 1860-61.
Format: discussion. Evaluation based on class participation, two papers of moderate length, and a final examination.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students with instructor's permission. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25).
Groups F and G
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF DEW
HIST 365 History of the New South (Same as Africana Studies 365) (Not offered 2011-2012)
A study of the history of the American South from 1877 to the present. Social, political and economic trends will be examined in some detail: the rule of the
"Redeemers" following the end of Reconstruction; tenancy, sharecropping, and the rise of agrarian radicalism; Southern Progressivism; the coming of racial
segregation and the destruction of the Jim Crow system during the years of the Civil Rights movement; Southern politics during the depression and post-World
War II years.
Format: discussion. Evaluation based on class participation, two papers of moderate length, and a final examination.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students with instructor's permission. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25).
Group F
DEW
HIST 367(S) Frontiers in Early American History, 1607-1846
This course will tackle one of the most hotly debated topics in American history: the significance of the frontier to the development of North America. The course
will have two core themes: the history and historiography of the early American frontier and the various conceptions of the frontier in popular culture and works
of fiction. It will explore the changing nature of the frontier (and scholarly interpretations of it) in early American history, tracing expansion, development, and
conflict from its earliest occurrences in Virginia and New England to the Mexican-American War of 1846. The course will be interdisciplinary in nature with
readings and assignments ranging from scholarly writings to fictional works and from contemporary movies to primary sources. This approach will help address
questions that historians and the public alike have struggled to answer: What was life really like on a frontier? How do popular conceptions comport with histori-
cal realities of frontier life? What exactly did the frontier mean to American history?
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation (20%), 2 short writing assignments (10% each), midterm exam/project (25%), and a final
project (35%).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 20-25). Preference given to History majors.
Groups F and G
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR SPERO
HIST 371 The History of U.S. Environmental Politics (Same as Environmental Studies 371) (Not offered 2011-2012)
The politics surrounding the environment today are a super-heated source of conflict, at the same time that most opinion polls show that Americans widely
embrace many environmental protections. While environmental concerns have long been a part of local politics in America, this course will "largely explore the
emergence and prominence of environmental issues in national politics" from the first organized conservation efforts in the late nineteenth century to the pres-
ent-day concerns with the global environment. Throughout the course, we will investigate both how changes in the environment have shaped American politics
and how political decisions have altered the American, as well as the global, environment, with particular attention to which groups of people have had, or have
not had, access to political processes and institutions.
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, weekly critical writing, an analytical essay, and a final exam.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 20-25). Preference will be given to History, Environmental Policy, and Environmental Science
majors or prospective majors if the course is overenrolled.
Group F
MERRILL
HIST 372(S) The Rise of American Business (Same as Leadership Studies 372)
An examination of the complex process that saw business enterprise move from a marginal position in the largely agrarian society of the early colonial period to
become, by the twentieth century, one of the principal forces shaping American culture. Subjects to be considered: the business and political activities of colonial
merchants, early-American attempts at industrialization, the business careers of John D. Rockefeller and Andrew Carnegie, and the growth, since 1900, of multi-
divisional corporations like DuPont and General Motors. Readings will include historical studies, biography, autobiography, and fiction.
Format: discussion. Requirements: a series of short analytical papers and the choice of either writing a longer, final essay or taking a final exam.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students with instructor's permission. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 20-25). Open to sophomores and also to first-year
students with Advanced Placement Credit in American History.
Group F
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR DALZELL
177
HIST 374 American Medical History (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course will cover major themes in American medical history and historiography from the colonial period through the twentieth century. Every aspect of
American "medicine" underwent tremendous transition during the period we will study. Medical education, the medical profession, and notions about cures
and care changed fundamentally, as did ideas about the nature of illness itself. Our course of study, in addition to charting ways in which the practice of medicine
in America has developed, will make an equal effort to understand how medicine has changed and affected American society. Topics that we will investigate
include cholera, TB, and childbirth in American society, as well as other medical phenomena.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short papers, reading quiz, and a final research paper.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students with instructor's permission. No enrollment limit (expected: 15-25).
Groups F and G
LONG
HIST 375 History of American Childhood (Same as Africana Studies 375) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
Over the course of American history both the experience of childhood and our understandings of childhood have changed radically. Children have been bought
and sold as slaves, hanged as convicted witches, and purchased slaves themselves. A century ago many children were sent "out to work" at ages that our society
now defines as too young even to be left alone in the house. Common experiences of modern middle-class American childhood--summer camp, secondary
school, and organized youth sports teams--are recent additions to American life. Through reading works of history and autobiography we will explore Ameri-
can childhood and what attitudes toward specific groups of children reveals about American society. This course is an EDI course; as such, we will consistently
study groups of children that differ by race and class. In addition, we will interrogate the category of childhood and debate its universality and usefulness. Does
the experience of childhood help to "unify" diverse groups of people?
Format: lecture/discussion. Students will be required to write three papers and be expected to contribute actively to class discussion.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students with instructor's permission. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 20-30). Preference determined by instructor.
Group F
LONG
HIST 378 The History of Sexuality in America (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 378) (Not offered 2011-2012)
Sex is often thought of as an unchanging need, behavior, or instinct--a form of experience without history. And yet even in the recent past, sexual desires, acts,
identities, attitudes, and technologies have undergone profound transformations. This course explores those transformations, tracing the shifting and contested
meanings and experiences of sex and sexuality from the pre-colonial period to the present, and examining how and why sexuality has become so central to
identities, culture, politics, and history. To understand how sexuality has been regulated by the state and what sexuality has meant to ordinary Americans in the
past, we will use a wide range of primary sources, including as private letters, law cases, photographs, films, and music. Many of the topics are relevant to
contemporary public debates, including controversies over censorship, sexual violence, gay and lesbian sexualities, transgender identities and politics, abortion,
and sexually transmitted diseases.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: evaluation will be based on class participation, a midterm examination, several short papers, and a 10- to 12-page
research paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 20-25). Preference given to History majors and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies majors.
Group F
DUBOW
HIST 379(S) Black Women in the United States (Same as Africana Studies 379 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 379) (D)
As slaves and free women, activists, domestics, artists and writers, African Americans have played exciting and often unexpected roles in U.S. political, social,
and cultural history. In this course we will examine black women's lives from the earliest importation of slaves from Africa and the Caribbean through to the
expansion of slavery, the Civil War, freedom, Jim Crow, the Civil Rights movements, and up to the present day. Consistent themes we will explore are the
significance of gender in African American history and the changing roles and public perceptions of black women both inside and outside the black community.
We will read and discuss a combination of primary and secondary sources; we will also consider music, art, and literature, as well as more standard "historical"
texts. This course meets the requirements of the Exploring Diversity Initiative in that it focuses on empathetic understanding, power and privilege, especially in
relation to class, gender, and race within a U.S. context.
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on student participation, three papers, and a brief oral presentation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25; expected enrollment: 15-20. Preference given to History majors and Africana Studies concentrators.
Group F
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR LONG
HIST 380 Comparative American Immigration History (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
This course examines the underlying tension between the notion of American pluralism and the desire for homogeneity through the study of the history of
immigration to the United States from Europe, Latin America, the Caribbean, Asia, the Middle East, and Africa. Special attention will be paid to the condition
in the sending countries and the historical ties of those countries to the United States, immigration and labor recruitment, anti-immigrant sentiments, and the
development of American immigration policy. This is an EDI course because it examines how people from different countries and cultures interacted with each
other and those already in the United States. Theirs is a story of immigration, exclusion, resistance, accommodation, labor and the creation of an American
image of pluralism, coupled with the desire for assimilated immigrants.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on six response papers, two short critical essay (5-7 pages) and a final oral history/family history 15-20
pages).
No prerequisites; open to first-year students with instructor's permission. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25).
Group F
WONG
HIST 381 From Civil Rights to Black Power (Same as Africana Studies 381) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
The Supreme Court decision Brown v. Board of Education (1954) ended an era of black activism that used the courts to overturn exclusionary practices of
American education, opening a new civil rights era that introduced new strategies and tactics of protest. This course introduces students to the themes and issues
of the black freedom movement as it transpired after 1954 and continued into the 1980s in the United States. Focusing on African Americans' demands for the
rights and responsibilities of citizenship, and placing their perspectives at the center, the course will follows a chronological format that covers the architecture of
racial segregation and the culture of Jim Crow; examines the persistence of activism and resistance in the form of direct action, articulations of black power, and
attempts at coalition building; explores the intersection of ideology and activism; assesses local, regional, and national perspectives; and uses the black freedom
movement as a window onto other social movements, including nationalist and feminist movements. In considering the modern civil rights movement, this
course necessarily examines the ways that racial power and privilege in the United States operated to disadvantage specific peoples. Asking how African
Americans have differently defined rights, the course also examines diversity among black activists. This course meets the EDI designation in that it examines
how "cultures, peoples, and societies have interacted and responded to one another in the past" specifically: by investigating differences and similarities--gen-
der, class, region--among nonwhite and white Americans; and by using African American experiences to examine the links between access, opportunity, and
inequality.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students with instructor's permission. No enrollment limit (expected: 20).
Group F
L. BROWN
HIST 382 Latina/o Politics (Same as Latina/o Studies 382 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 382) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under LATS 382 for full description.) WHALEN
HIST 383 History of Whiteness in the United States (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 383) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
If race is a social construct, then any historical study of race and race relations in the United States extends to the topic of American whiteness. Using the work
of scholar historians, the course follows a chronology that begins with colonial Virginia and end with the presidency of Barack Obama, framed by several
questions: What is whiteness, and what has it meant in the history of the United States? Who is (and is not) white? What about other analytical categories, like
gender and class (or region or ethnicity or sexuality): how have these experiences shaped and been shaped by the racial category of whiteness? What is white
culture and how has it developed over time? Because historically whiteness has carried overtones of power, privilege, and wealth in the United States, the
course necessarily reveals, examines, and critiques the historical roots of racial disparities. This class is not for the faint-hearted; informed participation is neces-
178
sary to its success. The reading can be described as intense. The course fulfills the requirements of the Exploring Diversity Initiative because it examines the
differences and similarities between white Americans and other American cultures and because it explores whiteness as a prism for understanding the opera-
tions of power and privilege in American society.
Format: discussion. Requirements: evaluation will be based on class participation, the leading of two class discussions related to the writing of two 3- to 5-page
review/response papers, and a final bibliographical research project.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 15-20).
Group F
L. BROWN
HIST 384 Comparative Asian-American History, 1850-1965 (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
This course will focus on the early history of Chinese and Japanese immigrants and their descendents in the United States. We will first look at the immigration
patterns of these two Asian groups to the United States, how they made a living here, and how other Americans reacted to their presence. From there, the course
will take an in-depth look at the anti-Asian movement in this country which culminated in the prohibition of most Chinese immigrants from entering the
country and later, the incarceration of Japanese Americans during World War II. This course fulfills the Exploring Diversity Initiative requirement because it
examines the history of the two Asian immigrant groups of this time period and their relationship to each other and to other ethno-racial groups, all within the
context of American history from the Antebellum period through World War II.
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on a series of writing assignments: six short response papers, two 5- to 7-page essays, and a 10- to 15-page
research paper.
No prerequisites; open to all students. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 10-15).
Group F
WONG
HIST 385 Contemporary Issues in Recent Asian-American History, 1965-Present (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
Since 1965, the Asian-American community has increased in number and diversity. This course will examine the Asian diaspora since 1965 in light of events in
both Asia and the United States and how Asians have come to populate the American landscape in terms of immigration and adjustment patterns, Asian-Amer-
ican identity and politics, and the Asian presence in American popular culture. Readings will include oral histories, novels, and contemporary historical and
sociological studies of the Asian-American experience.
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short papers (5-7 pages) and a personal or family immigration history (15 pages).
No prerequisites; open to first-year students with instructor's permission. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 15).
Group F
WONG
HIST 386 Latinas in the Global Economy: Work, Migration, and Households (Same as Latina/o Studies 386 and Women's, Gender and
Sexuality Studies 386) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
This course examines the impact of the global economy on Latinas from 1945 to the present, including Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, and Dominican women,
as well as more recent immigrants from Central and South American countries. Using the garment industry as an example of a labor intensive industry that has
gone global, we ask questions regarding the impact on Latinas in their countries of origin and in the United States. What impact has the global economy and
economic development had on Latinas' work and their households in their countries of origin? How have economic changes and government policies fostered
Latinas' migrations? How have Latinas been incorporated into the changing U.S. economy? How have Latinas confronted the challenges created by a globaliz-
ing economy? We will also explore the migration and the experiences of Latina domestics and farm workers, past and present. Focusing on the experiences of
Latinas as they become racialized populations in the United States, this EDI course explores the impact of dominant U.S. hierarchies of race, gender and class
on their economic incorporation, as well as the myriad ways in which they confront, negotiate, and at times challenge those dominant U.S. hierarchies.
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation and group presentations, short writing assignments, two short essays, and a final paper that
will be presented to the class.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students with instructor's permission. No enrollment limit (expected: 15).
Groups D and F
WHALEN
HIST 388 The Cold War, 1945-1991 (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course examines the Cold War from its origins in World War II to its end with the collapse of the Soviet empire in 1991. Lectures, readings, and discussions
will explore how and why the Cold War began, why it continued, what characterized it, how its foci changed over time, and how and why it ended. We will pay
particular attention to the ideological, diplomatic, technological, and military competitions that marked the bipolar Soviet-American rivalry. We will also ex-
plore the collapse of the European imperial order and the resulting process of Third World decolonization, which was a major factor in shaping, perpetuating,
and arguably ending the Cold War. Sources for the course will include primary documents, scholarly books and articles on a variety of international Cold War
topics, and documentary and feature film clips.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, two 5- to 7-page papers, quizzes, and a final exam.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students with instructor's permission. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 15-20).
Groups C and F
CHAPMAN
ADVANCED ELECTIVES: TRANSNATIONAL/COMPARATIVE (388-396)
HIST 389 The Vietnam Wars (Same as Asian Studies 389) (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course explores the Vietnam Wars from the perspectives of various Vietnamese, French, and American agents, and addresses the roles played by other
international actors. Lectures, readings, films, and discussions will place the Vietnam Wars in the broad context of the Cold War and the post-World War II wave
of decolonization, as well as the specific contexts of Vietnamese, French, and American history, politics, and culture. It will address everything from Cold War
geopolitical dynamics to the experiences of anti-war protestors and soldiers on patrol. Students will read a number of scholarly texts, primary sources, memoirs,
and novels. The course will also be accompanied by a mini-film series.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: evaluation will be based on class participation, several short essays, and a 10- to 12-page historiographical essay.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 15-20).
Group B and F
CHAPMAN
HIST 390 The 1930s in Comparative Perspective: Germany, Italy, and Japan (Same as Asian Studies 390 and Japanese 390) (Not offered
2011-2012) (D)
How did Germany, Italy, and Japan deal with the economic, political, and social crises of the 1930s? In what ways did each of these three countries navigate the
economic depression, challenges to democracy, and ascendance of totalitarianism that marked this pivotal and transformative decade? This course will take a
transnational approach to such questions, examining various aspects of the politics, economy, society, and culture of the 1930s in Germany, Italy, and Japan. It
will explore the origins and rise of Italian fascism, German National Socialism, and Japanese militarism; the political cultures of charisma, violence, terror,
collaboration, and resistance; racism and anti-Semitism; and fascist aesthetics. We will also consider how these phenomena shaped, and were shaped by, the
nature of everyday life in this decade with particular attention to issues of religion, family, and gender. To conclude the semester, we will discuss how the 1930s
have been remembered, and whether we can speak of fascisms at work in the present day. This course will fulfill the requirements of the Exploring Diversity
Initiative by comparing how global frustrations and challenges played out both similarly and differently in Germany, Italy, and Japan; and how these countries
that would become the axis powers negotiated their particular encounters with fascism.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, response papers, two short papers (5 pages), and a final paper.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students with instructor's permission. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 20-25).
Groups B and C
SINIAWER
HIST 391(F) Insurgencies: Revolts, Revolutions, Wars of National Liberation, and Jihads (Same as Anthropology 391 and INTR 391)
(See under ANTH 391 for full description.) JUST
Group G
179
HIST 393(S) Sister Revolutions in France and America (Same as Leadership Studies 212)
(See under LEAD 212 for full description.) DUNN
Groups C, F, and G
HIST 394 Divine Kingship in the Ancient Mediterranean (Same as Anthropology 258, Classics 394 and Religion 213) (Not offered
2011-2012)
(See under CLAS 394 for full description.) RUBIN
HIST 395 Fashioning Bodies: Dress, Consumption, and Gender from the Renaissance to the Present (Same as Women's, Gender and
Sexuality Studies 395) (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course explores costume and fashion as vehicles for the (re)creation and expression of gender, class, and sexual identities in Europe and the United States.
We will begin by looking at the relationship between fashion and the political and economic power of the courts of early modern Europe. Revolutionary
ideologies will be linked to sartorial politics, consumption of clothing to colonization, and changes in the style of clothing to shifting social norms. As our focus
turns to the fashion industry in the twentieth century, when mass-produced clothing increased the possibility for reflexivity and imaginative play in dress, we
will relate representations of the dressed body to the formation of diverse cultural communities, beauty ideals, and status hierarchies, examining both the norma-
tive and subversive potential of fashion. The course considers work in the fields of art history, cultural history, sociology and anthropology, feminist theory, and
fashion journalism to ask questions such as: What are the origins of consumer societies? When, why, and how were fashion and consumption feminized? Is
clothing alanguage? What cultural, political and social meanings do certain forms of dress generate? What is the relationship between prevalent understandings
of the body and fashion? How is clothing used to stigmatize or differentiate individuals and communities? Topics include: the origins of uniforms and sports-
wear, eroticism and androgyny in fashion, the cultural politics of ethnic" clothing, and the relationship between the fashion industry and cinema.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, an oral presentation, two short critical essays based on class readings, and a final
research paper.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students with instructor's permission. No enrollment limit (expected: 8-14).
Groups C, F, and G
FISHZON
HIST 396 Muslims and Europe: From the Conquest of Algeria to the Present (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
This course will explore Europe's tumultuous relationship with North Africa, focusing on French and British colonialism and its aftermath in the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries. Topics to be covered include Napoleon's Egyptian Campaign, the collapse of the Ottoman Empire, Anglo-French rivalry over the Canal
and the Suez crisis of 1956, the Algerian Revolution and the anti-Islamic coup in 1991-2, and the migration of North Africans and Indian/Pakistani Muslims to
Europe in the post 1945 period. Racial tensions, battles over headscarves, French hip-hop music, and Jewish-Muslim relations in contemporary France are
among the topics to be explored with an eye to examining how Europe is coming to terms with its new multicultural identity. By comparing and contrasting
Muslim and European societies, and by showing the ways in which colonial power and racial privilege affected these cultures, this course meets the EDI
requirement as it seeks to develop an empathetic understanding of the position of Muslims in Europe today.
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, a few short papers, and a longer research paper.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students with instructor's permission. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 15-20).
Groups A and C
SINGHAM
ADVANCED SEMINARS (402-479)
These are advanced courses normally limited in enrollment to fifteen students. Each seminar will investigate a topic in depth and will require students to
engage in research that leads to a substantial piece of historical writing. All History majors are required to complete either an advanced seminar (402-479) or a
tutorial (480-492). Instructors may recommend prior coursework in the area of the seminar. Preference is given to senior History majors, followed by junior
History majors.
ADVANCED SEMINARS: AFRICA AND THE MIDDLE EAST (402-411)
HIST 403(F) Making it in Africa (Same as Africana Studies 404 and Leadership Studies 403)
Although Africa has come to be known as a continent that relies heavily on foreign aid, that aid rarely reaches ordinary people. In fact, recent studies have
suggested that foreign aid has not helped develop Africa. In spite of the staggering problems that ordinary Africans face, many see Africa--now more than ever
before--as a place bursting with promise and opportunity, even if that opportunity may require challenges to conventional economic and political thinking.
Increasingly, an innovative class of entrepreneurs is emerging in Africa that is hustling in the formal and informal economy in order to accumulate capital. This
seminar will trace the social and cultural history of entrepreneurship in Africa from the 19th century to the present. We will explore the individual journeys of
several entrepreneurs, the values and objectives they nurtured, the changes in the strategy and structure of the businesses they created, and the dynamic environ-
ments in which they each lived and worked. The course will also examine the long-term impact of entrepreneurial innovation and market evolution on African
communities and governments. Readings will include histories, biographies, autobiographies, ethnographies, and novels.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on participation in discussion, several short papers, and a final research paper.
Prerequisites: previous courses in history. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 10-15). Preference will be given to History majors and Africana Studies concentrators.
Group A
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W MUTONGI
HIST 410(F) Kings, Heroes, Gods, and Monsters: Historical Texts and Modern Identities in the Middle East (Same as Arabic 410, Jewish
Studies 410 and Religion 405) (D) (W)
What role does ancient history play in modern societies? What is the role of myths and fables in the creation of national identities? This course will address the use
and abuse of ancient history and archaeology in the modern Middle East. The first part will focus on some of the primary ancient texts, with special focus on
Ferdowsi's epic Shahnameh (Book of Kings); we will compare its themes and world view with those of the Icelandic sagas that share many similarities with the
Iranian canon. In the second part of the course we will explore how ancient history, archaeology, and epic texts helped forge national identities in the modern
Middle East. Our primary attention will be Iran and its relationship with the Shahnameh. But we will also consider the relationship of Biblical history to the
establishment of modern Israel and Israeli nationalism, how contemporary Egypt relates to its Pharaonic past, the obsession with pre-Islamic history in modern
Turkey, and the relationship between archaeological artifacts and ancient Mesopotamian history and 20th century Iraqi politics. Because of its comparative focus,
this course is part of the Exploring Diversity Initiative.
Format: seminar. Requirements: a final, 25-page research paper on the relationship between ancient history and a modern Middle Eastern country, shorter papers,
and group work.
Prerequisites: previous upper division work in History or courses on the Middle East. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15). Preference given to History majors.
Jewish Studies concentrators, Arabic Studies majors, and other students with a strong background in Middle East studies.
Groups E and G
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W BERNHARDSSON
ADVANCED SEMINARS: ASIA (414)
HIST 414(S) Merchant Cultures and Capitalist Classes in China and India (Same as Asian Studies 414)
As the expression "Chindia" in the title of a recent book suggests, contemporary commentators find it difficult to resist conflating the rise of China and India as
economic powers in the early 21st century. There are, however, both significant parallels between the two national histories and important distinctions that shape
their contemporary viewpoints and futures. This seminar will examine various historical dimensions of entrepreneurial activity in China and India from the early
modern period through the twentieth century. It will focus on topics such as indigenous forms of merchant organization, the impact of nineteenth-century imperi-
alism, the adoption of Western business forms and methods, and the relationship of entrepreneurial elites to the modern state.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on participation in discussion, several short papers, a literature review, and a final research paper.
Prerequisites: upper division work in History or Asian Studies. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 10-15). Preference will be given to advanced History and Asian
Studies majors.
Group B
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W A. REINHARDT
ADVANCED SEMINARS: EUROPE AND RUSSIA (422-441)
HIST 430 Toward a History of the Self in Nineteenth- and Twentieth-Century Europe (Not offered 2011-2012)
The self may appear to us as a fixed and stable entity that all people have in common throughout time. However this course puts forward a different view,
suggesting that the self is context-specific and subject to the culture and society of particular places and historical eras. Using a range of sources that include
historical writing, social theory, psychological theory, literary scholarship, diaries, memoirs, film, and art, we will examine changing, coexisting, and sometimes
180
conflicting notions of selfhood in Europe in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. From the "individualism" seemingly legitimated by the French Revolution
to modern and postmodern conceptions of the fragmented or decentered self, different narratives of the self have been elaborated during the prior two centuries
which continue to influence how we think about identity and subjectivity. The goal of this course is to enable students to think historically about the concepts of
self, person, or individual and to explore a range of intellectual approaches to analyzing the nature of the self. Seminar meetings will be devoted to the discus-
sion of common readings. Students should develop research topics in consultation with the instructor.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class participation, weekly response papers (2 pages), an oral presentation, and a final research paper (12-15
pages).
Enrollment limit: 15 (expected :10-20).
Group C
GARBARINI
HIST 433(F) The Justice of Violence? Histories of Terrorism in Europe (Same as Jewish Studies 433)
The word "terrorism" entered the English language in 1795, an import from France that referred to the use of violence and intimidation by the ruling party during
one phase of the French Revolution. Over the ensuing two centuries, terrorism has come to refer to the employment of violence, not only as a means of governing,
but also and more often as a means of undermining the authority of those in power. This seminar examines a series of episodes of terrorism in Europe from the
"Terror" of the French Revolution to the late twentieth century. It also explores various interpretations of the legitimacy and ethics of political violence and the
phenomenon of terrorism in different historical contexts. In addition to common readings, students will conduct independent research on some aspect of the
history of terrorism that will culminate in a 20-page paper.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class participation, several short papers, oral presentations, and a 20-page research paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15). Preference will be given to History majors.
Group C
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W GARBARINI
HIST 439 Personality, Society, and Identity in Nineteenth- and Early Twentieth-Century Russian Thought (Not offered 2011-2012)
This seminar studies the movements and themes of Russian thought from the Enlightenment to 1917, situating works of Russian philosophy and literature,
when appropriate, within the broader context of Western intellectual traditions. We will explore how ideas about human nature and society inspired and gave
meaning to political reform, terrorism, and revolution in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, and ponder their relevance in Russia today. The course
covers themes such as the individual and society, morality and love, and time and eschatology, as well as topics like: the problem of national identity, conserva-
tism and radicalism, the forging of the intelligentsia" tradition, the commercialization of culture, and revolutionary language in 1917. Readings include texts by
Pushkin, Belinsky, Dostoevsky, Herzen, Tolstoy, Solvyov, Berdiaev, as well as modernist works (Bely, Blok, Ivanov) and Marxist writings (Plekhanov, Bogda-
nov, Lenin). We also will read secondary historical literature, watch films, and listen to music in order to gain a deeper understanding of the cultural environ-
ment in which our primary sources were written and the ways social ideals and types were disseminated.
Format: seminar. Knowledge of Russian is NOT a prerequisite for this course. Evaluation will be based on class participation, several oral presentations and
short preliminary writing assignments, and a final research paper.
No prerequisites. No enrollment limit (expected 8-12). Preference will be given to History and Russian Studies majors.
Group C
FISHZON
ADVANCED SEMINARS: LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN (442-451)
HIST 443 Slavery, Race and Ethnicity in Latin America (Same as Africana Studies 443) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
To historians, activists, and other observers, Latin America has often appeared either a racial paradise - where racial mixture and the absence of a "color bar" led
to more racially "democratic" societies--or a racial hell --where the seeming fluidity of race relations masked real, violent discrimination. This seminar will
explore the ways in which such views were both right and wrong in their judgments and the conditions that made such depictions possible and politically
significant. It will explore the historical roots of race relations and politics in Latin America from the beginnings of slavery through its abolition; the changing
constructions of indigenous ethnicities; and on to the emergence of new racial identities and political movements in Colombia, Brazil, Cuba, and throughout the
region. Concerned with radically different understandings of racial politics than those in the United States, this course fulfills the requirements of the Exploring
Diversity Initiative.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class participation, weekly reading responses, and a final paper.
Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 10-15).
Group D
HIST 444(S) The Black Republic: Haiti in History and Imagination (Same as Africana Studies 444) (D)
(See under AFR 444 for full description.) SINGHAM
HIST 448 Latin American and Caribbean Narratives: Testimonios, Historical Novels, and Travel Accounts (Same as Africana Studies
448) (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course will use three narrative genres--testimonios (memoirs), historical novels, and travel accounts--to explore the experiences and cultures of Latin
America and the Caribbean during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. As genres of literature and sources of historical writing, testimonios, novels, and
travel accounts are, of course, uneven in quality and utility. Yet, even as we analyze how issues of memory, perspective, and misrepresentation complicate the
use of these types of sources for historical inquiries, we will also explore what they reveal about ordinary Latin American and Caribbean citizens. HIST/AFR
400 will unpack what meanings readers can glean from these narratives and how the personal can be political. We will pay special attention to the methodology
of reading non-traditional sources and learn to read these narratives for insights into the daily experiences, social hierarchies, gender norms, and family relations
of the region. For the final research project, students will select one narrative to use as a starting point of analysis for a significant historical event or theme.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class attendance, short writing assignments, and final research paper (20-25 pages in length).
Prerequisites: some familiarity with Latin American and/or Caribbean history. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15).
Groups D
BENSON
ADVANCED SEMINARS: UNITED STATES (452-471)
HIST 452 Women in America, 1620-1865 (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 452) (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course will explore the diversity of American women's experiences from the colonial era through the Civil War. We will pay particular attention to the
roles women filled - as slaves, nuns, housewives, mothers, and workers, as well as depictions of women as witches, paragons of virtue, and urban consumers. In
our reading of historiography and primary texts we will analyze the ways in which literacy and artistic culture as well as geopolitical events shaped women's
lives. As we study works of history, we will also read modern works of feminist and race theory to further our understanding of connections between ideology
and practice, between narrative and argument.
Format: seminar. Requirements include a research paper (20-25 pages), based on reading and analysis of a set of primary sources, a literature review, class
participation, and an informal reading journal.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 10-15). Preference given to advanced History majors and to Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies majors.
Groups F and G
LONG
HIST 456(F) Civil War and Reconstruction (Same as Africana Studies 456)
An examination of one of the most turbulent periods in American history, with special emphasis on the changing status of Afro-Americans during the era. During
the war years, we shall study both the war itself and homefront conditions: military, naval, political, economic, and especially social aspects will be examined in
some detail. Our study of Reconstruction will concentrate on the evolution of federal policy toward the Southern states and the workings out of that policy in the
South, particularly as it relates to the freedmen.
Format; seminar. Evaluation based on class participation and a substantial research paper based at least in part on primary source materials.
Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15).
Group F
Hour 1:10-3:50 W DEW
181
HIST 457 Gender, Law, and Politics in U.S. History (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 457) (Not offered 2011-2012)
This seminar explores the legal history of the United States as a gendered system. It examines how women have shaped the meanings of American citizenship
through pursuit of political rights and obligations such as suffrage, jury duty, and military service; how those political struggles have varied across race, religion,
and class; and how the legal system has shaped gender relations for both women and men through regulation of such issues as marriage, divorce, work, repro-
duction, and the family. While we will read some court cases, the focus of the seminar is on the broader relationship between law and society. Readings will
address not only the history of statutory law, and of the lawsuits and trials testing those laws, but also the social history of the impact of the law and the political
history of efforts to change laws.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on an extensive (20-25 page) research paper that makes use of primary and secondary sources, brief papers on the
weekly readings, and class participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 10-15). Preference given to senior History majors.
Group F
DUBOW
HIST 459 Jim Crow (Same as Africana Studies 459) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
Between 1865 and 1965 white Americans developed and deployed a set of practices that sanctioned racial discrimination. Jim Crow--as this American system
of apartheid was called-- is one of the least studied aspects of U. S. History. This course explores the law, cultural, economics, and politics of Jim Crow; the
dynamics of racialized power; and the roles of media and history in sustaining racial inequality. Informed by how segregation operated to construct and sustain
differences, it qualifies as an Exploring Diversity Initiative course by linking the issue of diversity to the issue of power relations, investigating how American
institutions enabled and maintained racial disparities despite constitutional guarantees, and considering how the legacy of racial discrimination affects current
domestic issues like public education, affirmative action, and the persistence of poverty. In addition to covering race theory in historical context, the course
suggests that current scientific ideas about race--that there are no consequential biological differences among humans--is a recent discovery. Finally, the
course examines the discrete development of black communities, institutions, politics, and racial destiny.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class participation and two shorter assignments leading up to a longer research paper.
Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 10-15). Preference given to junior and senior History majors.
Group F
L. BROWN
HIST 464 The United States and the Vietnam War (Not offered 2011-2012)
U.S. involvement in Vietnam affected nearly every aspect of American life, including the country's overall foreign policy, its military strategy, the relationship
between various branches of government, the nation's political trajectory, the role of media in society, youth culture, race relations, and more. This seminar
explores America's war in Vietnam and its dramatic ramifications at home and abroad. We will evaluate the Vietnam War era as a turning point in U.S. histo-
ry--and in the role of the U.S. in the world--by reading and discussing a number of scholarly works on domestic and international aspects of the conflict.
Students will develop an original research topic and research and write a 20- to 25- page paper, based in primary sources, on one aspect of America's Vietnam
War.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class participation, several short papers, and a 20- to 25-page research paper.
Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 10-15). Preference given to advanced History majors.
Group F
CHAPMAN
HIST 466 Imagining Urban America, Three Case Studies: Boston, Chicago, and L.A. (Same as American Studies 364) (Not offered
2011-2012)
This course will explore the social, economic, and cultural lives of three cities, each of which at its zenith seemed to contemporaries to represent definitive
aspects of "American" development. We will begin with Boston--the country's first "big" city and the nominal capital of Puritan New England--in the colo-
nial and early national periods. From there we will move to Chicago, the transportation and commercial hub of the emerging national economy in the nineteenth
century. Finally we will turn to Los Angeles, "The City of Dreams" and the center of the popular entertainment industry in the twentieth century. In each case,
drawing on a variety of sources, we will examine the city's origins, the factors that promoted its growth, and the distinctive society it engendered. Then we will
consider some of the city's cultural expressions--expressions that seem to characterize not only changing the nature of urban life, but the particular meanings
each city gave to the nation's experience at the time. What made these cities seem simultaneously, as they did, so alluring and so threatening to the fabric of
national community and identity?
Format: seminar. Requirements: two short papers and a longer essay analyzing selected primary texts; there will be no hour test or final exam.
Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 15). Preference given to History majors.
Group F
DALZELL
HIST 469(F) Race, Class, and Gender in American Immigration History (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 469) (D)
Despite popular images of American immigration history as a story of people coming to this country in search of a better life, and Americans offering them a
chance at the "American Dream," this seminar will examine how American immigration policy and history have been shaped by issues of race, class, and gender.
We will examine topics such as the rise of nativism in the nineteenth century, the exclusion of Asian immigrants, the influence of food on immigrant communities,
the politics of taking in refugees, and the on-going debates over legal and illegal immigration. The seminar is also designed to aid students in the process of writing
a research paper utilizing primary and secondary sources. The course fulfills the criteria of the Exploring Diversity Initiative because it examines how people from
different countries and cultures interacted with each other and with those already here. In addition, it will focus on how the state came to control immigration
policy and immigrant communities through the power of policing notions of race, class, gender, and sexuality.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will based on weekly response papers, an annotated bibliography, a literature review essay, and a 20-25 page research paper. Stu-
dents will also be required to lead a class discussion.
Prerequisites: previous upper division courses in History. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 15-20). Preference given to senior History majors.
Group F
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W WONG
HIST 471(S) Comparative Latina/o Migrations (Same as Latina/o Studies 471) (D) (W)
(See under LATS 471 for full description.) WHALEN
ADVANCED SEMINARS: TRANSNATIONAL/COMPARATIVE (472-479)
HIST 476 Apocalypse Now and Then: A Comparative History of Millenarian Movements (Same as Religion 217) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(D)
"The end is near!" Millions of people around the world believe that the course of history and the sequence of events that will herald the end of the world are
foretold in their scripture, whether Judaic, Christian, or Islamic. These beliefs can have, and have had, widespread social ramifications. This seminar will ex-
plore various important political and religious movements that have responded to an apocalyptic message by calling for drastic societal change. Both the social
critique of these movements and why they felt that the end was imminent will be analyzed. Special attention will be paid to millenarian movements in the
Middle East, North America, and Asia. Students will also assess apocalyptic themes in music, literature and the visual arts.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on student presentations, group project, and a final paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 8-15). Preference given to History majors and students concentrating in African and Middle Eastern Studies.
Groups E, F, and G
BERNHARDSSON
HIST 478(S) Cold War Landscapes (Same as Environmental Studies 478)
The Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union set in motion dramatic changes to the natural and built environments of many nations between
1945 and 1991. Nuclear test and missile launch sites, naval installations, military production operations, and border securitizations are just a few of the most
obvious ways in which the stand-off between the two countries altered rural and urban landscapes. But one can also see the Cold War as setting in motion less
immediately direct but nonetheless profound changes to the way that many people saw and planned for the environments around them, as evidenced, for instance,
by the rise of the American suburb, the reconstruction of postwar Europe, and agricultural and industrial initiatives in many developing nations. We will begin this
seminar by exploring several distinct "Cold War landscapes" in the United States, then move on to examining others in Europe and the Soviet Union. We will
182
spend the final weeks of the semester discussing examples from other parts of the world. Our approach to our topics will be interdisciplinary, and students are
welcome to write their research papers on any geographical area of the world.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class participation, weekly critical writing, and a final research paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 10-15). Preference will be given to History, Environmental Policy, and Environmental Science majors if overen-
rolled.
Groups C and F
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W MERRILL
ADVANCED TUTORIALS (480-492)
These are advanced reading and writing courses that offer an in-depth analysis of a topic in a tutorial format. Tutorials are limited in enrollment to ten students
and preference is given to senior History majors. All History majors are required to complete either an advanced seminar (402-479) or a tutorial (480-492).
Instructors may recommend prior coursework in the area of the tutorial. The writing of five or six essays and the oral presentation of five or six critiques of another
student's essays are central to tutorials.
HIST 480T Historical Narratives of the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict (Not offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
This tutorial addresses the powerful, competing, and bitterly contested historical narratives that underpin the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Both Israelis and Pales-
tinians appeal to history to legitimize their territorial claims and to justify contemporary action. Special attention will be paid to the interpretations of key
historical moments (1948, 1967, 1994, and 2000) and on the contrasting views of some of the core issues of the conflict (Jerusalem, refugees, settlements,
terrorism).
Format: tutorial. Requirements: 5- to 7-page essays or 2-page critiques due each week and a final report (3-4 pages) at the end of the semester.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to History majors and to those who have taken History 207 or other courses on the
Middle East.
Group E
BERNHARDSSON
HIST 481T(S) Race and Revolution in Latin America (Same as Africana Studies 481) (W)
(See under AFR 481 for full description.) BENSON
HIST 482T(F) Fictions of African-American History (Same as Africana Studies 482) (W)
This course examines the form and function of African-American historical narratives with attention to written texts pertaining to the enslavement and freedom of
African Americans during the nineteenth and early twentieth century. The lack of documentary material pertaining to this history has made the task of reading and
interpreting African American experience particularly challenging. By crossing generic and disciplinary boundaries, students will take up the task of reading
African-American history while attending to the difficulties such a task raises. To do so, we will read both historical and fictional narratives that raise explicitly the
problems of writing African-American history. In the first part of the course, we will discuss selected texts (fiction, narrative, and historiography) from the ante-
bellum era in order to schematize the literature of slavery. In the second half of the course, we will take up the discourse of freedom that followed the Emancipa-
tion Proclamation. Readings will include works by Booker T. Washington, James Weldon Johnson, Charles Chesnutt, Harriet Wilson, Paul Laurence Dunbar,
Sutton Griggs. In addition, we will read historiography on African American slavery, freedom, and urbanization.
Format: tutorial.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to History majors and Africana Studies concentrators.
Group F
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. LONG
HIST 483T African Political Thought (Same as Africana Studies 483T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
This course examines the ideas of major figures in the progressive tradition of African political thought. This emancipatory tradition emerged in societies
shaped by racial, cultural, and economic exploitation, forcing both African men and women to address questions of identity and political action. Most members
of this tradition also considered the ways in which uneven power relations within African communities shaped the personal and political landscapes. The
Africans we will examine in this course drew on resources as varied as Pan-Africanism, Nationalism, Classical Liberalism, Social Democracy, Marxism, Black
Consciousness, Negritude and Gender theory, yet each participated, at least implicitly, in a common African intellectual project: the meaning of Africa and of
being African.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: students will meet with the instructor in pairs for an hour each week; a student either will write and present orally a 5- to 7-page
essay on the assigned readings or be responsible for offering an oral critique of the work of their partner each week. Evaluation will be based on the quality of
the biweekly papers and oral critiques and a final writing exercise.
Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to History majors.
Group A
MUTONGI
HIST 484T(F) Victorian Psychology (W)
Although the Victorian era has traditionally been considered a psycho-social model of emotional inhibition and sexual prudery, recent studies have demonstrated
that this characterization grossly oversimplifies the attitudes toward emotional and sexual life held by Europeans and Americans in the second half of the nine-
teenth century. This tutorial will investigate professional and popular ideas about human psychology during the Victorian era. We will attempt to define and
understand what people thought and felt about insanity, the unconscious, dreams, sexuality, the relationship between natural impulses and civilized society, child
development, the psychological differences between men and women, and the relationship between the physical and the psychical. The course will concentrate
on the close reading and analysis of primary documents from the era.
Format: tutorial. Students will meet with the instructor in groups of two once a week. Every other week each student will present a paper of approximately 5-7
pages on a topic determined by the instructor, due by 5pm the day before the tutorial meeting; the other student will function as a critic of the paper presented,
expected to be familiar with the assigned reading.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to History majors.
Groups C and F
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. KOHUT
HIST 485T Stalinist Terror and the New Man (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
The Bolsheviks strove to engineer a new type of person--socially active, cultivated, healthy, enthusiastic, and ready to build socialism. The methods used and
the results produced in the name of this goal included acts of monumental heroism and violence, narratives of human progress, and chronicles of arguably the
most egregious human rights violations of the 20th century. In this course we will look at the ways historians, memoirists, and filmmakers have approached the
period known as Stalin's Great Purge and Terror (1936-1939), attempting to answer questions to do with culpability, meaning, commitment, belief and disguise,
fear, and betrayal. Dualistic concepts and categories like state/society, resistance/collusion, and domination/submission have engendered much controversy
among scholars applying them to a time when victims and perpetrators were difficult to distinguish and often the same individuals. The course charts historical
analyses and disputes around topics such as: the crimes of communism,"revolution from above," Stalin's personality, popular participation in show trials, the
family and everyday life during the Terror, Stalinist science, and Soviet subjectivity.
Format: tutorial. Students will write and present papers every other week and will critique the papers of their tutorial partner in the weeks when they are not
presenting.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to History majors.
Group C
FISHZON
HIST 486T Historical Memory of the Pacific War (Same as Asian Studies 486T and Japanese 486T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Over six decades after Japan's surrender, the issue of how to remember the Pacific War continues to raise controversy both within Japan and between Japan,
Korea, and China. This tutorial will consider how individuals, groups of individuals, and nations construct and reconstruct historical memories by examining
how various Japanese, as well as Koreans and Chinese, have sought to remember the Pacific War. The course will begin with a discussion of theoretical
writings on the social and political construction of historical memory and the distinctions between official, collective, and historical memory. Then we will
consider Japan's unique position as both wartime aggressor and victim, focusing on how the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the Occupation, and
the Tokyo war crimes trial have shaped how the war has been remembered. We will also deal with how the war has been portrayed in literature, film, and other
183
media. Finally, the course will explore how Japanese, Korean, and Chinese memories of the war continue to influence relationships within East Asia. We will
examine the mnemonic sites contested by Chinese, Korean, and Japanese memories by discussing issues pertaining to military comfort women, the Nanking
massacre, Unit 731, history textbooks, and Yasukuni shrine. Themes will include how the construction of memory is linked to the nation, how the passage of
time influences the construction of historical memory, and the dilemmas of coming to terms with pasts contested both within and between countries.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: students will meet with the instructor in pairs for an hour each week. Each student will write and present orally a 5- to 7-page
essay every other week on the readings assigned for that week. In alternate weeks, students will be responsible for offering an oral critique of the work of their
partner. Students will be evaluated on their written work and their analyses of their partner's work. There will a final paper (15 pages) on the themes of the
course.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10).
Group B
SINIAWER
HIST 487T(S) The Second World War: Origins, Course, Outcomes, and Meaning (W)
1991 marked the fiftieth anniversaries of the Nazi invasion of Russia and the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. Though war had come to Europe as early as 1939,
when Germany invaded Poland, after 1941 the war became a truly global conflict of unprecedented extent, ferocity, and destructiveness. As late as 1943 it still
appeared that the Axis powers might win the war. But, by the end of the 1945, the bombed-out ruins of Germany and Japan were occupied by the Allies, who
were preparing to put the surviving Axis leaders and generals on trial for war crimes. This tutorial will concentrate on a number of important questions and issues
which arise from a study of World War II. What were the origins of this central event of the twentieth century? How and why did the war begin? Why did the war
take the course it did? What were the most crucial or decisive episodes or events? How did the Allies win? Why did the Axis lose? Could the outcome have been
different? Many of the topics examined will also have to deal with important questions of human responsibility and with the moral or ethical dimensions of the
war. Why did France, Britain, and the Soviet Union not stop Hitler earlier? Who was to blame for the fall of France and the Pearl Harbor fiasco? Why did the
Allies adopt a policy of extensive firebombing of civilian targets? How could the Holocaust have happened? Could it have been stopped? Did the Atomic bomb
have to be dropped? Were the war crime trials justified? By the end of the tutorial, students will have become thoroughly familiar with the general course the war
followed as well as acquiring in-depth knowledge of the most decisive and important aspects of the conflict. Students will also have grappled with the task of
systematically assessing what combinations of material and human factors can best explain the outcomes of the major turning points of the war. Students will also
have dealt with the problem of assessing the moral and ethical responsibility of those persons, organizations, and institutions involved in the war.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: each student will write and present orally an essay of approximately seven double-spaced pages every other week on a topic
assigned by the instructor. Students not presenting an essay have the responsibility of critiquing the work of their colleague. The tutorial will culminate in a final
written exercise.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Not available for the Gaudino option.
Group C
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. WOOD
HIST 489T(S) Hiroshima and Nagasaki: Remembrance (Same as Asian Studies 489T) (W)
To this day, few topics stir a greater variety of images and recollections, or more passionate debates, than the atomic bombs that were dropped on Hiroshima and
Nagasaki in 1945, at the end of World War II. This tutorial will focus on two matters: the nature of memory and the ways in which those events have been
remembered. Topics to be covered include the making of the bombs, the decision to drop them, their impact on Japan's surrender, the destruction that they
wrought, the experiences and treatment of victims, the debate over the bomb in postwar Japan and America, and the impact of those first two bombs on discus-
sions of nuclear weapons and energy today.
Format: tutorial. Students will prepare and present: (1) a paper on the assigned readings every other week, and (2) a written critique of the colleague's paper on the
weeks when they do not write a paper. A final, interpretive essay also will be required.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit 10 (expected: 10). If oversubscribed, preference will be given to advanced History and Asian Studies majors who have pre-
viously not enrolled in a tutorial.
Group B
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. HUFFMAN
HIST 490T Memory, History, and the Extermination of the Jews of Europe (Same as Jewish Studies 490T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
The atrocities committed by Nazi Germany during the Second World War continue to trouble historians in their attempts to understand and represent them in all
their magnitude and horror. Beyond historians, the complicity of segments of European societies in perpetrating those atrocities continues to raise thorny ques-
tions for postwar European nations about what their responsibilities are toward that past. This tutorial will focus on a series of questions relating to the histori-
cization and memorialization of the extermination of European Jews. They include: Is the Holocaust unique? Is it a Jewish story or universal story? Does the
Holocaust raise different issues for the historian than other historical events? How should the Holocaust be represented and what are the implications of different
means of representing it? What role, if any, did European Jews play in their own destruction? Has Germany faced up to its past? Were Germans also victims of
World War II? Who were the "bystanders" as compared to the "perpetrators"? Were the postwar trials of perpetrators a travesty of justice? How appropriate are
the different uses that Israel and the United States have made of the Holocaust? By the end of the course, students will have grappled with the ongoing contro-
versies that have arisen among scholars, governments, and lay people about the meaning (and meaninglessness) of the Holocaust for the postwar world. In a
world in which extraordinary acts of violence continue to be perpetrated and more and more nations' pasts are marked by episodes of extreme criminality
and/or trauma, exploring the manner by which one such episode has been remembered, avenged, and adjudicated should prove relevant for future consideration
of other societies' efforts to confront their own traumatic pasts.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: Class time consists of weekly one-hour sessions with the instructor and a fellow student. Every other week the student will
write and present orally a 5- to 7-page paper on the assigned readings of that week. On alternate weeks, the student will write a 2-page critique of the fellow
student's paper. A final written exercise, a thought piece on the issues raised in the tutorial, will cap off the semester's work.
Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference give to History majors and Jewish Studies concentrators. Not available
for the Gaudino option.
Group C
GARBARINI
HIST 491T Political Islam: Past, Present, Future (Not offered 2011-2012) (D) (W)
Why have Islamist movements become so powerful in the last 30 years? What are their real political goals? Is political Islam a rejection of modernity, a reaction
to Western culture, or an ideology aimed at specific political objectives? Does the rise of political Islam herald an inevitable "clash of civilizations" with the
West, or can Islam and the West peacefully co-exist? Questions such as these have become increasingly urgent since September 11. This course will examine
the emergence, development, and substantive content of Islamist political movements in the twentieth century. The tutorial focuses upon the emergence of
Islamist movements within distinctive political, economic, social and cultural conditions in the Middle East. It will juxtapose analytical readings on specific
states or aspects of the Islamic trend with the writings of Islamists and other primary sources. We will look both at Islamist movements active in single states, the
wider phenomenon of transnational Islamist politics, and the theoretical and philosophical issues raised by the rise of Islamist movements, to consider both
similarities and diversity in Islamic politics. The object of the course is to understand Islamist movements on their own terms, and to be able to make informed
judgments about the future of international politics. Because of its comparative approach and its concerns with power and privilege this course is part of the
Exploring Diversity Initiative.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: 5- to 7-page essays or 2-page critiques due each week and a final report (3-4 pages) at the end of the semester.
Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to History majors and to those who have taken History 207 or other courses on the Middle East.
Group E
BERNHARDSSON
HIST 492T Revolutionary Thought in Latin America (Not offered 2011-2012) (D) (W)
For much of Latin America's postcolonial history, political and business elites in the United States have viewed the region as a source of revolutionary threats.
Too often histories of actual revolutionary movements and the ideas they promulgated have followed either the self-serving narratives that the revolutionaries
have laid out or the similarly limited stories composed by their opponents. This tutorial, by contrast, will delve into the complex, contingent, and at times
counterintuitive history of revolutionary thought in modern Latin America. Our readings and discussions will carry us from the nineteenth century to the rise of
the "New Left" in the last few years. Throughout the course our principle goal will be to examine the internal logic of the most influential programs of revolu-
tionary thought as well as their relationship to circumstances external to them, both in their home regions and globally. At the same time, we will consider the
human or moral promise and price of revolutionary options: did the proposed or alleged aims of revolutionary ideals justify the costs they would impose? This
184
course will fulfill the requirements of the Exploring Diversity Initiative by comparing and analyzing divergent theorizations of history and society, as well as the
contexts in which such theories emerged and to which we might or might not choose to apply them. A central aim of the course will be to compare the forma-
tion of revolutionary initiatives across national and chronological boundaries.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: students will meet with the instructor in pairs for an hour each week. Each student will write and present a 5- to 7- page essay
every other week on the readings assigned for that week. In alternate weeks, students will be responsible for offering an oral critique of the work of their partner.
Evaluation will be based on written work and analysis of their partner's work.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to History majors. Not available for the Gaudino option.
Group D
KITTLESON
THE THESIS AND INDEPENDENT STUDY (493-499)
HIST 493(F) Senior Honors Thesis--Research Seminar
This seminar is intended solely for writers of honors theses. Although each student's major work for the year will be the writing of a thesis in consultation with an
individual advisor, students will gather for occasional meetings in order to present and critique each other's proposals and drafts and to discuss common problems
in research and the design of a long analytical essay. For students proceeding to W31 and HIST 494, performance in the fall semester will figure into the thesis
grade calculated at the end of the year. The quality of a student's performance in the seminar segment of History 493, as well as his or her performance in all
aspects of the May colloquium at which theses are presented and critiqued, will be figured into the overall grade the student is given for History 493-494 and the
departmental decision to award Honors or Highest Honors at Commencement.
Enrollment limited to seniors accepted into the Department's Honors Program.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF WATERS
HIST 494(S) Senior Honors Thesis--Writing Seminar
This seminar is a continuation of HIST 493 and is required of all senior honors thesis writers. Students will meet to discuss draft thesis chapters and prepare for the
departmental Honors colloquium in May at which theses will be presented and assessed. For students proceeding to W31 and HIST 494, performance in fall
semester will figure into the thesis grade calculated at the end of the year. The quality of a student's performance in the seminar segment of History 493, as well as
his or her performance in all aspects of the May colloquium at which theses are presented and critiqued, will be figured into the overall grade the student is given
for History 493-494 and the departmental decision to award Honors or Highest Honors at Commencement.
Prerequisites: successful completion of HIST 493. Enrollment limited to seniors accepted into the Department's Honors Program.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF WATERS
HIST 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
HISTORY OF SCIENCE
(Div. II & III, see course descriptions)
Chair, Professor DONALD deB. BEAVER
A major in the History of Science is not offered, but the occasional Contract Major in it or a related interdisciplinary field is possible. Courses in the History of
Science are designed primarily to complement and strengthen work in other major fields. Although any of the courses may be taken separately, studying related
courses in other departments will enhance their value, because by nature, History of Science is interdisciplinary.
The following will serve as examples: the 101 course is an introduction to science and technology studies, and concentrates on key aspects of contemporary
science and technology relevant to many issues of living in a technological society. Scientific Revolutions (HSCI 224) deals with the emergence of modern
science in the 1600s and 1700s, and with subsequent revolutions in scientific thought; as such it complements courses related to modern European history. History
of Science 240 traces the influential role of science and invention in the shaping of American culture, and complements offerings in American Studies and
American History. HSCI 320, an historical overview of the ideas, practice, and organization of medicine, provides context for related coursework in History,
Philosophy, and the Premed Program.
HSCI 101(S) Science, Technology, and Human Values (Same as Science and Technology Studies 101)
A study of the natures and roles of science and technology in today's society, and of the problems which technical advances pose for human values. An introduc-
tion to science-technology studies. Topics include: scientific creativity, the Two Cultures, the norms and values of science, the Manhattan Project and Big Science,
the ethics and social responsibility of science, appropriate technology, technology assessment, and various problems which spring from dependencies engendered
by living in a technological society, e.g., computers and privacy, automation and dehumanization, biomedical engineering.
Format: seminar. Requirements: two or three short exercises, two papers (3-5 pages and 5-7 pages), and two hour exams.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20. Preference to first-years and sophomores.
Satisfies one semester of the Division II requirement.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF D. BEAVER
HSCI 224 Scientific Revolutions: 1543-1927 (Same as History 294) (Not offered 2011-2012)
How much does science create the sensibilities and values of the modern world? How much, if any, technical detail is it necessary to know in order to under-
stand the difference between propaganda and fact?
This course investigates four major changes of world view, associated with Copernicus (1543); Newton (1687); Darwin (1859); and Planck (1900) and Einstein
(1905). It also treats briefly the emergence of modern cosmogony, geology, and chemistry as additional reorganizations of belief about our origins, our past, and
our material structure.
We first acquire a basic familiarity with the scientific use and meaning of the new paradigms, as they emerged in historical context. We then ask how those ideas
fit together to form a new framework, and ask what their trans-scientific legacy has been, that is, how they have affected ideas and values in other sciences, other
fields or thought, and in society. Knowledge of high-school algebra is presupposed.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on five problem sets, four short papers (3-5 pages), and two hour exams.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 30. Open to first-year students. Preference to seniors and juniors.
Satisfies one semester of the Division III requirement.
D. BEAVER
HSCI 240(S) Technology and Science in American Culture (Same as History 295)
Although technologically dependent, the American colonies slowly built a network of native scientists and inventors whose skills helped shape the United States'
response to the Industrial Revolution. The interaction of science, technology, and society in the nineteenth century did much to form American identity: the
machine in the garden, through the "American System of Manufactures" helped America rise to technological prominence; the professionalization and special-
ization of science and engineering led to their becoming vital national resources. Understanding these developments, as well as the heroic age of American
invention (1865-1914), forms the focus of this course: how science and technology have helped shape modern American life.
Format: seminar. Requirements: class discussion, six short reports (2-3 pages), and two hour exams.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15. Open to first-year students.
Satisfies one semester of the Division II requirement.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR D. BEAVER
HSCI 309(S) Environmental Policy (Same as Environmental Studies 309, Political Science 301 and Science and Technology Studies 309)
(See under ENVI 309 for full description.) LYNN
HSCI 320(S) History of Medicine (Same as History 293)
A study of the growth and development of medical thought and practice, together with consideration of its interaction with science and social forces and institu-
tions. The course aims at an appreciation of the socio-historical construction of Western medicine, from prehistory to the twentieth century. The course begins
with paleomedical reconstructions, and moves to Babylonian, Egyptian and Greek [not only Hippocratic] medicine, Greek and Roman anatomy and physiology,
Arabic medical thought, Renaissance medicine, and the gradual professionalization and specialization of medicine from the sixteenth century. Attention is paid to
theories of health and disease, ideas about anatomy and physiology, in addition to achievements such as anesthesia and internal surgery, and advances in instru-
185
ments such as obstetrical forceps and the stethoscope.
Format: seminar. Requirements: six short papers (3 pages), midterm, final hour exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15. Open to first-year students.
Satisfies one semester of the Division II requirement.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF D. BEAVER
HSCI 336 Science, Pseudoscience, and the Two Cultures (Same as Astronomy 336) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under ASTR 336 for full description.) J. PASACHOFF
HSCI 338 The Progress of Astronomy: Galileo through the Hubble Space Telescope (Same as Astronomy 338 and Leadership Studies 338)
(Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under ASTR 338 for full description.) J. PASACHOFF
HSCI 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
COURSES OF RELATED INTEREST
PHIL 209 Philosophy of Science
SOC 368 Technology and Modern Society
INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES
(Div. II, with some exceptions as noted in course descriptions)
Chair, Professor PETER JUST
Advisory Committee: Professors: DARROW, JUST, ZIMMERBERG**. Associate Professor: CRUZ. Assistant Professor: HAMMERSCHLAG.
This program is designed to facilitate and promote innovations in curricular offerings in relation both to interdisciplinary conceptual focus and experimental
pedagogical form. It provides support for faculty and student efforts to develop a curriculum that creatively responds to intellectual needs and modes of teaching/
learning that currently fall outside the conventional pattern.
EXPR 245 (Re)presenting Sex: Shakespeare on Page and Stage (Same as Theatre 245 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 245)
(Not offered 2011-2012)
This experimental course approaches the question of how sex and sexual identity are portrayed in Shakespeare from two different directions-close reading
focused on the page and acting centered on the stage. These two critical modes-reading the text versus performing the script-are often treated in compartmental-
ized fashion as separate, even incompatible activities. Our goal is to take up the challenge of bringing the two perspectives together within the framework of a
single, integrated course. The teaching method is to bridge the gap between the two modes not by magically dissolving, but by actively engaging, the tensions
between them. For example, no performance can include all the possible interpretations; performance decisions raise questions about what alternatives have
been left out. Similarly, when all interpretive possibilities are held in imaginative suspension, the specifics of bodily movement and face-to-face interaction
whose meanings emerge when enacted are lost.
We propose to put the two orientations in a productive and innovative dialogue that enables students to experience the tension from both sides, to articulate the
opportunities and limits of each side, and to combine their respective strengths.
The mix of assignments (papers and scene work) will vary depending on whether students designate themselves as primarily "scholars" or "actors," but some
overlap will be built in to ensure that "scholars" gain understanding of acting and "actors" gain access to scholarship. All students will be expected to demon-
strate versatility in traversing the full spectrum from interpretation through reading to interpretation through performance.
The specific topic that will bring these theoretical issues into focus is the matter of sex and sexual identity, as illuminated through the analysis of language,
psychology, and theatrical embodiment. Six plays will be studied in depth: The Merchant of Venice, Twelfth Night, Othello, King Lear, Antony and Cleopatra,
and The Winter's Tale.
Format: lecture/discussion,with additional periods set aside for scene presentation. Evaluation will be based on several short papers, plus a final exam. All
students will take the final: "scholar" students will have rigorous expectations in the writing of papers; "actor" students will have intensive (graded) perfor-
mance expectations.
No prerequisites; students wishing to enroll as Acting Students should consult with instructors. Enrollment limit: 15-20 (expected: 15).
Satisfies one semester of the Division I requirement.
BAKER-WHITE, ERICKSON
EXPR 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
INTR 150 Dimensions of Public Health (Not offered 2011-2012)
Public health is concerned with protecting and improving health at the level of a community or population. Although individual behavior is an essential element
of public health, collective, rather than individual, outcomes are the focus of public health study. The field of public health relies on contributions from multiple
disciplines, including economics, philosophy, biology, sociology and political science, among others. In this course we will survey the field of public health,
introducing students to core concepts and methods that highlight the interrelationship of individual and social choice with environmental and biological factors in
producing health outcomes at the population level. We will develop these concepts and methods within the context of signal cases and public health crises, both
historical and contemporary, including, for example, London's Broad Street cholera epidemic, tuberculosis control/eradication efforts, HIV/AIDS, lead poison-
ing, and obesity. Throughout our study of these cases, we will focus on key questions at the heart of public health. For example, what is effective public health
policy and how can we measure its effectiveness? How do we reconcile competing moral and economic claims in shaping such policy? How do our fundamental
beliefs and understanding of mortality determine our approach to public health decisions? How are these decisions made?
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based upon five mid-length papers (5-7 pages each) and the quality of contributions to class discussion.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 20). Preference given to first-year students and sophomores.
PEDRONI and SHORE-SHEPPARD
INTR 160 Mathematical Politics: Voting, Power, and Conflict (Same as Mathematics 175) (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
(See under MATH 175 for full description.) PACELLI
Satisfies one semester of the Division III requirement.
INTR 210(F) Culture and Incarceration (Same as Africana Studies 210, American Studies 210, Political Science 210 and Women's,
Gender and Sexuality Studies 210)
(See under PSCI 210 for full description.) JAMES
INTR 219T(F) Women in National Politics (Same as Politcal Science 219 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 219) (W)
This tutorial focuses on the writings and memoirs of women who have shaped national political and electoral/campaign culture in the 20th and early 21st centu-
ries. Women studied include: Fannie Lou Hamer, Barbara Jordan, Shirley Chisholm, Lani Guinier, Madeleine Albright, Hillary Clinton, Condoleeza Rice, Sarah
Palin, Nancy Pelosi.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: brief analytical papers and response papers for each week's readings.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10. Preference given to juniors and seniors, or sophomores with permission of instructor.
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. JAMES
INTR 221T RacialSexual Violence (Same as Africana Studies 221 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 221) (Not offered
2011-2012) (W)
This tutorial focuses on the prosecutions of race and rape during the 19th and 20th centuries. It examines historical scholarship, legal case studies, and cultural
studies. The tutorial begins with Ida B. Wells, 19th century journalist and antilynching crusader and ends with contemporary cases based on allegations/con-
victions of interracial assaults. Students will contribute critiques of legal cases and their cultural implications to a digital repository.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: alternating 5page analytical papers with 2page response papers.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10. Preference given to juniors and seniors, or sophomores and first-year students with permission of instructor.
JAMES
186
INTR 223(F) Image, Imaging and Imagining: The Brain and Visual Arts (Same as Neuroscience 318 and Psychology 318)
(See under PSYC 318 for full description.) ZIMMERBERG
INTR 252 The Human Image: Photographing People and Their Stories (Same as ArtS 252) (Not offered 2011-2012)
The single most photographed subject is the human form. The motivations and strategies for imaging faces and bodies, both individual and aggregate, are as
varied as the subjects themselves. In this course, we will examine some of the many approaches used to photograph people. We'll start by exploring self-portrai-
ture, and progress to photographing others--both familiars and strangers, in the studio and in less controlled environments. We'll end with a consideration of
"documentary" photography and other visual narratives. In each case, we'll examine our reasons for making an image, and the methods available for achieving
these goals. Thus, the class will have a significant technical component, dealing with the creative use of camera controls, the properties and uses of light, and
digital capture and processing. We will also examine the conceptual and scientific bases for how we perceive and evaluate images. Students will initially use
school-supplied digital cameras, and later have the option of using film. Lab fee: $100-150.
Format: Studio/lecture. Requirements: Students will be expected a) to photograph extensively outside of scheduled class hours b) to participate in class discussion
and in both oral and written critique, c) to present one paper, and d) to exhibit their work at the end of the semester.
Prerequisites: Students from all disciplines are welcome. Previous photography experience is desirable, but not essential. Students are strongly encouraged to
contact the instructor if they have questions about course requirements. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 12). Preference to upper class students.
Satisfies one semester of the Division I requirement.
B. GOLDSTEIN
INTR 287 African Music: Interdisciplinary Studies (Same as Music 233 and Africana Studies 250) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under MUS 233 for full description) E. D. BROWN
Satisfies one semester of the Division II requirement if taken as INTR 287.
INTR 315 Computational Biology (Same as Computer Science 315 and Physics 315) (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
(See under PHYS 315 for full description.) AALBERTS
Satisfies one semester of Division III requirement.
INTR 324(F) The Documentary Photography Project (Same as ArtS 324)
(See under ARTS 324 for full description.) GOLDSTEIN
INTR 371 Women Activists and Social Movements (Same as Africana Studies 371, Political Science 371 and Women's, Gender
and Sexuality Studies 370)
This seminar examines the role of women in "liberation movements," it focuses on their contributions to civil and human rights, democratic culture, and theo-
ries of political and social change. Students will examine multidisciplinary texts, such as academic historical narratives, memoirs, political analyses, in critical
and comparative readings of midlate 20th century struggles. Women studied include: Mamie Till Mobley, Anne Moody, Ella Baker, Gloria Steinem, Angela
Davis, Bettina Aptheker, Assata Shakur, Yuri Kochiyama, Denise Oliver, Domitilia Chungara.
Format: seminar. Requirements: attendance and participation in discussions (10%); collective/group report (30%); 15pg double spaced research paper (60%).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19. Preference given to juniors and seniors, or sophomores and first-year students with permission of instructor.
JAMES
INTR 391(F) Insurgencies: Revolts, Revolutions, Wars of National Liberation, and Jihads (Same as Anthropology 391 and History 391)
(See under ANTH 391 for full description.) JUST
INTR 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
INTR 461T Writing about Bodies (Same as ArtH 461 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 461) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under ARTH 461 for full description.) OCKMAN
INTERNATIONAL STUDIES
(Div. II)
Chair, Associate Professor MAGNUS T. BERNHARDSSON
Advisory Committee: Professors: CAPRIO, CASSIDAY, CRANE, DARROW, D. GOLLIN, KUBLER, MAHON, MUTONGI, A. V. SWAMY. As-
sociate Professors: BANTA, BERNHARDSSON.
In this era of cultural, technological and economic globalization and also of pressing international crises including environmental degradation, poverty and
underdevelopment, terrorism and pandemics, knowledge of the world beyond the United States is an essential part of the liberal education that is the goal of the
Williams experience. Both within and outside the classroom the College provides a rich array of opportunities to pursue that goal. The International Studies
Program is designed to increase awareness of those opportunities and to provide a centralizing mechanism to encourage gaining such knowledge with perspec-
tives that are cross disciplinary and comparative.
The program administers a number of tracks that provide students with the opportunity to pursue study of one area of the world or theme as a way of comple-
menting the work they have done in their majors. Students will be expected to take courses in at least two departments to fulfill the requirements of a track. In
addition to completing International Studies 101, they will be expected to do five courses in a track including an approved senior exercise. Students may not count
a course toward more than one track in the program.
TRACKS
Tracks are of two kinds. The first type focuses either on a particular region of the world or a contact zone where several cultural traditions encounter each other.
The second type is organized thematically and will explore a cultural, political, economic or technological issue globally. Each track will be administered by
faculty teaching in that track in consultation with the steering committee. Each track may set an additional requirement of a level of language competency for its
concentrators. Each track may also require one of the elective courses to be comparative, i.e. course that might not cover material directly dealing with their area,
but would enrich the student's experience with tools for comparative inquiry. At present the program consists of the following tracks:
Area Tracks Thematic Tracks
African Studies Borders, Exile and Diaspora Studies
East Asian Studies Economic Development Studies
Latin American Studies Global Health
Middle Eastern Studies Urbanizing World
Russian and Eurasian Studies
South and Southeast Asia Studies
To complete a track, students must take a section of International Studies 101, complete five additional approved courses within the track, attend the weekly
International Studies colloquium and complete a senior exercise. Credit for work done on study abroad will likely provide one or more of the electives for many
concentrators.
International Studies 101
All students wishing to pursue the program should take a section of International Studies 101 early in their careers. These courses will usually be team taught.
The topics and regions covered will vary and be selective, but all will be designed to place cultural, political, economic and technological issues in conversation
with one another to illustrate the necessity of having a broad range of disciplinary tools available to pursue an individual track. On occasion students may
petition to substitute a course equivalent in scope to International Studies 101 to meet this requirement.
Study Abroad and Internships
Study abroad and/or overseas internships are an essential component of International Studies. The program in coordination with the Study Abroad Advisor and
the Office of Career Counseling will advise students on opportunities in these areas. One or more courses completed on an approved study abroad program can be
counted toward the five elective courses requirement.
187
Colloquium
Concentrators will be expected to attend fifteen sessions of the International Studies colloquia in their senior year, and are urged to do so throughout their
careers at Williams. We hope that it will become a regular event for all concentrators. The colloquium meets weekly at the Center for Foreign Languages and
Cultures and is designed to feature faculty, students, CDE fellows and outside speakers addressing issues of wide interest to those in International Studies.
Senior Exercise
All concentrators must also complete a senior exercise. This will be a substantial piece of writing (20-25 pages) that would allow a student to draw together
both their disciplinary skills and expertise in a particular area. It might be work done either in the context of a senior capstone course in a relevant department or in
the context of a shared seminar sponsored by the International Studies program. In both cases it would culminate in a public presentation by each concentrator of
his/her work in class or in the context of the International Studies Colloquium.
Honors
A candidate for honors in International Studies must maintain at least a B+ average in the concentration and be admitted to candidacy by the program faculty.
An honors candidate must complete her/his project in a semester (and Winter Study). An honors candidate will prepare a forty page thesis or its equivalent while
enrolled in the senior thesis course, 491 or 492 (and Winter Study). This course will be in addition to the courses required to fulfill the concentration.
A student wishing to become a candidate for honors in International Studies should secure a faculty sponsor and inform the program chair in writing before
spring registration of her/his junior year.
INST 101(S) Is the World Flat? An Introduction to International Studies
The economic, technological, political and cultural processes that have been gathered together under the term `globalization' have been championed by many as
the inevitable face of the future of the world. Some have eloquently questioned the overlooked inequalities that arise from these processes, while still others have
questioned the inevitability of the processes that the term signals. This course will approach these issues with five sustained case studies that will attend especially
to the areas of international trade in cotton and textiles, economic development strategies in microfinance, global health focusing on controlling tuberculosis,
democracy promotion with a focus on corruption and ethnic conflict and finally the ideology of intervention in the name of human rights. We will conclude then
with a critical examination of the notion of 'globalization' as an economic, political, and cultural phenomenon as a way of thinking about the shape of the world in
the coming decades.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on three 3- to 5-page response papers and one oral presentation and one final 8- to 10-page paper.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 30). Preference given to first-year students.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF DARROW
INST 101 Asia and the World (Same as Asian Studies 201 and Political Science 100) (Not offered 2011-2012)
Asia looms large in contemporary world politics: Japan is gradually assuming an expanded regional national security role; The People's Republic of China is
emerging as a multifaceted Great Power; India is challenged by rising ethno-nationalism. This course will explore both the historical background and current
dynamics of political and economic issues in these three countries, drawing on themes of imperialism, nationalism, and globalization. It is an introductory class
and, therefore, no prior coursework in political science or Asian studies is necessary.
Format: predominately lecture. Requirements: two short papers and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 60 (expected: 60).
CRANE
INST 320(S) Urban Spaces of Modern South Asia (Same as Arabic 320, Asian Studies 320, History 317 and Sociology 320)
(See under SOC 320 for full description.) VALIANI
INST 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
INST 491(F)-W30, W30-492(S) Senior Honors Project
Students can check with the department coordinator to see if other courses not listed here might count as
electives.
AREA TRACKS
African Studies
AFR 140/COMP 218/ENGL 250 Revolutionary African Literature
AFR 200 Introduction to Africana Studies
[AFR 403/COMP 361/WGST 364 Women Writing Africa--last offered fall 2007]
AFR 377/COMP347/ENGL 348 Imagining Africa
[ANTH 252/AFR 252 Cultures and Societies of SubSaharan Africa--last offered spring 2009]
[ANTH/AFR 253 Popular Culture in Africa--last offered spring 2008]
[ANTH/WGST 370 Gender and Social Change in Modern Africa--last offered spring 2008]
[ARTH 200/AFR 201 Modern and Contemporary African Art--last offered fall 2007]
[ARTH /AFR 214 Arts of Africa last offered spring 2008]
BIOL/ENVI 134 The Tropics: Biology and Social Issues
ECON 204/ENVI 234 Economic Development in Poor Countries
HIST 103 The City in Africa: Accra, Nairobi, and Johannesburg
[HIST 203 SubSaharan Africa Since 1800--last offered spring 2007]
HIST 304 South Africa and Apartheid
HIST/WGST/AFR 308 Gender and Society in Modern Africa
HIST 483T African Political Thought
MUS 233/AFR 250/INTR 287 African Music: Interdisciplinary Studies
MUS/AFR 235 African Rhythm, African Sensibility
PSCI/AFR 256 Politics of Africa
PSCI/AFR 350 Government and Politics in Zimbabwe
RLSFR 203/AFR 204 Introduction to Francophone Studies
East Asian Studies
ARTH 103 Asian Art Survey: From the Land of the Buddha to the World of the Geisha
ARTH/JAPN 270 Japanese Art and Culture
ARTH 274 Chinese Calligraphy: Theory and Practice
ARTH 376 Zen and Zen Art
CHIN 219 Popular Culture in Modern China
CHIN/ANTH 223 Ethnic Minorities in China: Past and Present
CHIN 224/COMP 220/HIST 315 Cultural Foundations: The Literature and History of Early China
CHIN/COMP 235 China on Screen
CHIN 251T/COMP 256T/HIST 215T Crises and Critiques: The Literature and Intellectual History of Early 20th Century China
HIST/ASST 117 Clash of Empires: China and the West, 18001900
HIST 119 The Japanese Empire
HIST/ASST 212 Transforming the "Middle Kingdom": China, 2000 BCE1600
HIST/ASST 213 Modern China, 1600Present
HIST/ASST/JAPN 218 Modern Japan
HIST/WGST 319 Gender and the Family in Chinese History
HIST/JAPN/ASST 321 History of U.S.Japan Relations
[HIST/LEAD 389 The Vietnam War--last offered fall 2008]
JAPN/COMP 252 The Masks of Japanese Literature
JAPN 254/COMP 264 Japanese Literature and the End of the World
JAPN 255/COMP 255 Love and Death in Modern Japanese Fiction
JAPN 256/COMP 266 Confession and Deception in Japanese Literature
JAPN 260/COMP 261 Japanese Theatre and its Contemporary Context
188
JAPN 276/COMP 278 Premodern Japanese Literature and Performance
MUS 126 Musics of Asia
PSCI 100/ASST 201/INST 101 Asia and the World
PSCI 354/ASST 245/HIST 318 Nationalism in East Asia
PSCI 247 Political Power in Contemporary China
PSCI 345 Political Leadership in Ancient Chinese Thought
REL/ASST 250 Scholars, Saints and Immortals: The Religious Life in East Asia
REL 251 Zen Buddhism: History and Historiography
REL/ANTH/ WGST 256 Engendering Buddhism: How Women and Men Shape and Are Shaped by Buddhism
REL 257 Gods and Demons in East Asian Religion
REL 259/HIST 214 Japanese Religions and the State
Latin American Studies
ANTH 215 The Secrets of Ancient Peru: Archaeology of South America
ANTH 216 Indigenous Peoples of Latin America
HIST/WGST 147 Women and Men in TwentiethCentury Latin America
HIST 148 The Mexican Revolution: 1910 to NAFTA
HIST 242 Latin America From Conquest to Independence
HIST 243 Modern Latin America, 1822 to the Present
HIST/AFR 248 History of the Caribbean: Race, Nation, and Politics
HIST 342 Creating Nations and Nationalism in Latin America
HIST 346 History of Modern Brazil
HIST443 Slavery, Race, and Ethnicity in Latin America
PSCI 222 The United States and Latin America
PSCI 346 Mexican Politics
PSCI 349T Cuba and the United States
PSCI 351 The New Left and Neoliberalism in Latin America
RLSP 200 LatinAmerican Civilizations
RLSP 203 From Modernismo to El Boom de la Novela
RLSP 204 Icons and Imaginaries: Culture and Politics in Latin America
RLSP/COMP 205 The LatinAmerican Novel in Translation
RLSP/COMP 230T Violent States, Violent Subjects: NationBuilding and Atrocity in 19th Century Latin America
RLSP 308 Foundations of Latin American Literature: Colonialism and PostColoniality
[RLSP 403 Literature and the Body Politic: Space, Power and Performance in Latin America  last offerd fall 2008]
Middle Eastern Studies
ARAB/COMP 228 Introduction to Modern Arabic Literature in Translation
ARAB/COMP 233 Introduction to Classical Arabic Literature
ARAB/COMP 262 Outlaws and Underworlds: Arabic Literature of the Margins
ARAB/COMP 353 Writing the City: Beirut and Cairo in Contemporary Arabic Literature
ARTH 220 The Mosque
ARTH 278 The Golden Road to Samarqand
ARTH 472 Forbidden Images?
HIST111/LEAD 150 Movers and Shakers in the Middle East
HIST 207 The Modern Middle East
HIST/ASST 212 Transforming the "Middle Kingdom": China, 2000 BCE1600
HIST 310 Iraq and Iran in the Twentieth Century
HIST 311 The United States and the Middle East
HIST 408 Archaeology, Politics, and Heritage in the Middle East
HIST 480T Historical Narratives of the IsraeliPalestinian Conflict
[HIST 489T The Rise and Fall of the Ottomans and the Emergence of Modern Turkey--last offered fall 2008]
HIST 491T Political Islam: Past, Present, Future
REL 230/COMP 260 Reading Reading: Introduction to the Qur'an and Islam
REL 231/HIST 209 The Origins of Islam: God, Empire and Apocalypse
REL234 Shi'ism Ascendant?
[PSCI 277 Political Islam--last offered spring 2008]
RLSP271/COMP 265 The Interaction of Three Religions and Cultures in Early Modern Spain
Russian and Eurasian Studies
HIST 240 Muscovy and the Russian Empire
HIST 241 The Rise and Fall of the Soviet Union
REL 236/HIST 216/INST 101 The Greater Game? Central Asia and Its Neighbors: Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow
RUSS/COMP 203 Nineteenth Century Russian Literature in Translation
RUSS/COMP 204 Revolution and Its Aftermath: Russian Literature Since 1900
RUSS 206 Topics in Russian Culture: Feasting and Fasting in Russian History
RUSS/COMP 275 Russian and Soviet Film in Retrospect
RUSS 303 Russia in Revolution
RUSS/COMP 305 Dostoevksy and His Age
RUSS/COMP 306 Tolstoy and His Age
RUSS 307 Music and Nineteenth Century Russian Literature
[RUSS 402 Soviet Satire--last offered fall 2008]
South and Southeast Asia Studies:
ANTH/ASST 233/REL 249 Spiritual Crossroads: Religious Life in Southeast Asia
ECON 240T Colonialism and Underdevelopment in South Asia
REL 245 Tibetan Civilization
[REL 302/ANTH 392/WGST 325 Religion and Reproduction--last offered spring 2008]
ANTH/REL/WGST 272 Sex in Society: The Cultural Construction of Reproduction
SOC/ASST 327 Violence, Terrorism and Collective Healing
SOC/ASST 345/HIST 392 Producing the Past
THEMATIC TRACKS
Borders, Exile and Diaspora Studies:
AFR 160/COMP 214/ENGL 251 Defining the African Diaspora
[AMST 236 South Asians in America--last offered spring 2009]
AMST/LATS 405 Home and Belonging: Comparative Explorations of Displacements, Relocations, and Placemaking
[ANTH 365 Citizens and Civil Societies--last offered spring 2008]
[ENGL 146 Literature and Decolonization--last offered spring 2008]
ENGL 332 Colonial Subjects
ENGL 379/COMP 329 Contemporary World Novel
COMP 346 Questioning the Cultural Self in Literature
COMP/JWST 252 Writing after the Disaster: The Literature of Exile
HIST/AFR 292 Africans in Europe: Slaves, Abolitionists, Artists, Intellectuals and Migrants in the Modern Era
[HIST 333 TwentiethCentury Europe from the Margins: Regions, Local Cultures and Borderlands in Comparative Perspective--last offered fall 2008]
HIST 380 Comparative American Immigration History
HIST/LATS/WGST 386 Latinas in the Global Economy: Work, Migration and Households
HIST/AFR 396 Europeans and Muslims From the Conquest of Algeria to the Present: Arab Nationalism, Islamic Fundame
189
HIST 443 Slavery, Race and Ethnicity in Latin America
LATS 203/ARTH 203 Chicano/a Film and Video
LATS/HIST 286 Latina./o History, 1848-Present
LATS/COMP 338 Popular Culture and the Dynamics of the Everyday
LATS/AMST 409 Transnational Lives in Global Context
LATS/HIST 471 Comparative Latina/o Migrations
PSCI 225 International Security
PSCI 324 Genocide, Exile and Famine
RLFR 203/AFR 204 Introduction to Francophone Studies
RLSP 201 The Cultures of Spain
[SOC 209 Social Stratification in a Changing World--last offered fall 2007]
[SOC 336 Global Migration--last offered fall 2007]
SOC/ASST 345/ HIST 392 Producing the Past
Economic Development Studies
ECON 204/ENVI 234 Economic Development in Poor Countries
ECON 215 International Trade, Globalization and Its Effects
ECON 235 Urban Centers and Urban Systems
ECON 358 International Economics
ECON 360 International Monetary Economics
ECON 362 Global Competitive Strategies
[ECON 212/512/INST 201/ENVI 212 Agriculture and Development Strategy--last offered spring 2009]
ECON 467T Development Successes
ECON 501 Development Economics I
ECON 502 Institutions and Governance
ECON 503 Public Economics
ECON 505 Finance and Development
ECON 507 International Trade and Development
[ECON 508 Development Finance--last offered spring 2009]
ECON 509 Developing Country Macroeconomics
ECON 513 OpenEconomy Macroeconomics
ECON 516 International Financial Institutions
PSCI 401 Politics of International Economy
PSCI 102 Religion and Capitalism
PSCI 229 Global Political Economy
[PSCI 327 The Global Politics of Development and Underdevelopment--last offered spring 2009]
REL 287 The Dynamics of Globalization: Society, Religion and the Environment
Global Health
ANTH/REL/WGST 272 Sex in Society: Cultural Constructions of Reproduction
[ANTH 321 Visualizing Health and Illness: Medical Ways of Knowing--last offered fall 2007]
BIOL 133 The Biology of Exercise and Nutrition
BIOL 313 Immunology
BIOL 315 Microbiology: Diversity, Cellular Physiology, and Interactions
CHEM 111 Fighting Disease: The Evolution and Operation of Human Medicines
CHEM 112 Chemistry of Tropical Diseases: Charting the Course from Traditional to Modern Medicines
CHEM 115 AIDS: The Disease and Search for a Cure
CHEM/ENVI 341 Toxicology and Cancer
ECON 230 The Economics of Health and Health Care
ECON/WGST 307 The Economics of HIV/AIDS
HSCI 320 History of Medicine
INTR 150 Dimensions of Public Health
PHIL 213 Biomedical Ethics
PHIL/WGST 228 Feminist Bioethics
PHIL 229 Ethics and Genetics
PHIL 337 Justice in Health Care
SOC 265 Drugs and Society
WGST/PHIL 212 Ethics and Reproductive Technologies
Urbanizing World
AFR/WGST 400/ COMP 369/ENGL 365 Race, Gender, Space
ARAB/COMP 253 Writing the City: Beirut and Cairo in Contemporary Arabic Literature
COMP 243/WGST 252 Modern Women Writers and the City
ECON 235 Urban Centers and Urban Systems
ECON 383 Cities, Regions and the Economy
ECON/ENVI 388/ ECON 521 Urbanization and Economic Development
ENVI 101 Humans in the Landscape
GERM 202 Vienna 19002000 and Beyond
HIST/AFR 103 The City in Africa
HIST 136 Before the Deluge: Paris and Berlin in the Interwar Years
LATS 220/AMST 221 Introduction to Urban Studies
RLFR 316/WGST 315 Paris on Fire: Incendiary Voices from the City of Light
SOC 268 Space and Place
SOC/ASST 269 Imagining Spaces of the British Empire in the Twentieth Century
SOC 270 Cities and Citizenship
SOC 315 Culture, Consumption, and Modernity
SOC/ARAB/ASST/INST 320/HIST 317 Urban Spaces of Modern South Asia
JEWISH STUDIES (Div. II)
Chair, Professor ALEXANDRA GARBARINI
Advisory Committee: Professor: GERRARD. Associate Professors: BERNHARDSSON, DEKEL, S. FOX, GARBARINI, HAMMERSCHLAG*.
THE PROGRAM IN JEWISH STUDIES
Jewish Studies is an interdisciplinary field that encompasses the texts, history, languages, philosophy, and culture of Jews and Judaism as they have changed
over three millennia and throughout the world. The program offers courses in multiple disciplines including but not limited to Religion, Classics, History, Philoso-
phy, Anthropology, Sociology, and Comparative Literature. Across these disciplines, the program examines topics such as religious belief and practice, textual
interpretation, the development of Zionism, life in the Diaspora, the historicization and memorialization of the Holocaust, and historical, political and philosophi-
cal questions surrounding Jewish identity. Investigating the foundations and development of these various Jewish topics, as well as their interaction with and
influence on other traditions, provides an opportunity to explore the continuities and diversity of Jewish life and thought. Students will gain exposure to a common
body of knowledge and scholarly approaches through which to engage in their own rich and varied intellectual explorations of Jewish and related topics.
CONCENTRATION IN JEWISH STUDIES
The concentration in Jewish Studies requires five courses with at least two different prefixes: one gateway course, two core courses, one elective, and one
capstone course. Senior concentrators should consult with the chair about arrangements for a capstone course.
Gateway Courses:
JWST 101/REL 203 Judaism: Innovation and Tradition
JWST/COMP/REL 201 The Hebrew Bible
190
Core Courses
COMP/JWST 352 Writing after the Disaster: The Literature of Exile
HIST/JWST 230 Modern European Jewish History 17891948
HIST/JWST/REL 338 The History of the Holocaust
HIST/JWST 433 The Justice of Violence?: Histories of Terrorism in Europe
HIST/JWST 490T Memory, History, and the Extermination of the Jews in Europe (W)
REL/JWST 202/COMP 214 Moses: Stranger in a Strange Land
REL/JWST/PHIL 204 Endtimes: Messianism in Modernity (W)
REL/JWST/CLASS 205/COMP 217 Ancient Wisdom Literature
REL/JWST/COMP 206 The Book of Job and Joban Literature
REL/JWST 207/COMP 250 From Adam to Noah: Literary Imagination and the Primeval History in Genesis
REL/JWST/COMP 209 The Legend of the Wandering Jew
REL 303/REL 280/ PHIL 282 The Turn to Religion in PostModern Thought (W)
ARTH/JWST 463 The Holocaust Visualized
Students can check with the department coordinator to see if other courses not listed here might count as
electives.
Electives
Students may meet the elective requirement with a course partially related to Jewish Studies or another core course. In an elective course partially related to
Jewish Studies, a student will normally focus at least one of the major writing assignments on a topic relevant to Jewish Studies or approximately one-third of the
course will be devoted to Jewish subjects. The list of relevant electives changes regularly, so the course catalog should be checked for details. Listed below are
examples of courses partially related to Jewish Studies. Students may meet the elective requirement with a course not listed here, subject to the approval of the
Chair of Jewish Studies.
GERM 301T German Studies, 17701830
GERM 202 German Politics
GERM 302/COMP 304 German Studies, 18301900
HIST 111/LEAD 150 Movers and Shakers in the Middle East
HIST 129 Blacks, Jews, and Women in the Age of the French Revolution
HIST 207/JWST 217 Modern Middle East
HIST 225/REL 216 The Middle Ages
HIST 226 Europe from Reformation to Revolution 15001815
HIST 239 Modern German History 18701989
HIST 311 The United States and the Middle East
HIST/JWST 410 Kings, Heroes, Gods, and Monsters: Historical Texts and Modern Identities in the Middle East
HIST 480 Historical Narrative of the IsraeliPalestinian Conflict
REL 212/HIST 324 Development of Christianity 30600 CE
REL/JWST 270T Father Abraham; The First Patriarch
REL/COMP/ENGL 271 Religion and the Modern Literary Imagination
RLSP 271/COMP 265 The Interaction of Three Religions and Cultures in Early Modern Spain
Capstone Course
JWST/HIST 433 The Justice of Violence? Histories of Terrorism in Europe
Croghan Professorship
Each year, in addition to the regular course offerings listed above, Williams sponsors the Croghan Bicentennial Visiting Professor in Religion who offers one
course in Judaism and/or Christianity. Past Croghan Professors have taught courses on the Mishnah (Shaye Cohen), the historical Jesus (John Dominic Crossan),
and Ancient Mediterranean Religions (Ross Kraemer), among others.
Overseas Studies
Studying in Israel is highly recommended for students interested in Jewish Studies. Many students have spent a semester or year at Hebrew University. With
the approval of the Jewish Studies program chair, students may count a study-abroad program towards up to two core requirements.
Funding
The Bronfman Fund for Judaic Studies was established in 1980 by Edgar M. Bronfman '50, Samuel Bronfman II '75, and Matthew Bronfman '80. The
Bronfman Fund provides opportunities for the Williams community to learn about Jewish history and culture, both within the College's formal curriculum and
through the planning of major events on Jewish themes.
The Morris Wiener and Stephen R. Wiener '56 Fund for Jewish Studies was established in 1997 through the estate of Stephen R. Wiener '56. The Wiener gifts
have provided an endowment to support a faculty position in modern Jewish thought, and are used to underwrite an annual lecture, forum or event relevant to
contemporary Jewish life.
JWST 101 Judaism: Innovation and Tradition (Same as Religion 203) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under REL 203 for full description.) HAMMERSCHLAG
JWST 201(F) The Hebrew Bible (Same as Comparative Literature 201 and Religion 201)
(See under REL 201 for full description.) DEKEL
JWST 202(S) Moses: Stranger in a Strange Land (Same as Comparative Literature 214 and Religion 202)
(See under REL 202 for full description.) DEKEL
JWST 204 Endtimes: Messianism in Modernity (Same as Philosophy 204 and Religion 204) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under REL 204 for full description.) HAMMERSCHLAG
JWST 205 Ancient Wisdom Literature (Same as Classics 205, Comparative Literature 217 and Religion 205) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under REL 205 for full description.) DEKEL
JWST 206 The Book of Job and Joban Literature (Same as Comparative Literature 206 and Religion 206) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under REL 206 for full description.) DEKEL
JWST 207 From Adam to Noah: Literary Imagination and the Primeval History in Genesis (Same as Classics 207, Comparative Literature
250 and Religion 207) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under REL 207 for full description.) DEKEL
JWST 209 The Legend of the Wandering Jew (Same as Comparative Literature 209 and Religion 209) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under REL 209 for full description.) DEKEL
JWST 217(F) The Modern Middle East (Same as History 207 and Religion 239) (D)
(See under HIST 207 for full description.) BERNHARDSSON
JWST 230 Modern European Jewish History, 1789-1948 (Same as History 230) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under HIST 230 for full description.) GARBARINI
JWST 270T(F) Father Abraham: The First Patriarch (Same as Religion 270) (W)
(See under REL 270 for full description.) DARROW
191
JWST 280 The Turn to Religion in Post-Modern Thought (Same as Philosophy 282 and Religion 303) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under REL 303 for full description.) HAMMERSCHLAG
JWST 338(F) The History of the Holocaust (Same as History 338 and Religion 296)
(See under HIST 338 for full description.) GARBARINI
JWST 352 Writing after the Disaster: The Literature of Exile (Same as Comparative Literature 352) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under COMP 352 for full description.) S. FOX
JWST 410(F) Kings, Heroes, Gods, and Monsters: Historical Texts and Modern Identities in the Middle East (Same as Arabic 410, History
410 and Religion 405) (D) (W)
(See under HIST 410 for full description.) BERNHARDSSON
JWST 433(F) The Justice of Violence? Histories of Terrorism in Europe (Same as History 433)
(See under HIST 433 for full description.) GARBARINI
JWST 463 The Holocaust Visualized (Same as ArtH 463) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under ARTH 463 for full description.) GRUDIN
JWST 490T Memory, History, and the Extermination of the Jews of Europe (Same as History 490) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under HIST 490 for full description.) GARBARINI
JWST 491T Exile, Homecoming and the Promised Land (Same as Comparative Literature 309T and Religion 289T) (Not offered
2011-2012) (W) (D)
(See under REL 289 for full description.) HAMMERSCHLAG
JWST 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
LATINA/O STUDIES (Div. II)
Acting Chair, Professor CARMEN WHALEN
Advisory Committee: Professor: WHALEN. Associate Professors: CEPEDA**, CHAVOYA, FRENCH, KITTLESON, RA*. Assistant Professors:
BENSON, HIDALGO , VARGAS.
Latina/o Studies is an interdisciplinary and comparative field of study that explores the histories and experiences of Latinas and Latinos in the United States.
Latinas and Latinos include peoples who come from or whose ancestors come from Latin America and the Spanish-speaking Caribbean. The program seeks to
cover the widest range of experiences, encompassing Mexican-Americans, Puerto Ricans, Cubans, and Dominicans, as well as more recent migrations from a
wide variety of Central and South American countries. Courses, most of which use a comparative approach, seek to provide students with the tools to continue
their work in areas of their particular interest. Focusing on a diverse group with a long history in the United States, which is also one of the fastest growing
populations in the contemporary era, provides an opportunity to explore complex dynamics globally and within the context of the United States. The program
examines topics such as the political and economic causes of migration, the impact of globalization, economic incorporation, racialization, the formation and
reformulations of identities and communities, the uses of urban spaces, inter-ethnic relations, artistic expression, aesthetics, and visual and popular culture.
THE CONCENTRATION
The concentration in Latina/o Studies requires five courses. Students are required to take the introductory course (LATS 105), one 400-level Latina/o Studies
seminar, and three electives. Two electives must be core electives, and one elective can be a related course in Comparative Race and Ethnic Studies or in Coun-
tries of Origin and Transnationalism. The three electives must include two different areas of study, and at least one elective must be at the 300 or 400 level.
Additional courses may be approved by the Chair. Students, especially those considering graduate work or professional careers in the field, are encouraged to
enroll in Spanish language courses at Williams.
Required Courses
LATS 105 Latina/o Identities: Constructions, Contestations, and Expressions
One of the following 400-level seminars:
LATS/AMST 405 Home and Belonging: Displacements, Relocations, and Place-making
LATS/AMST 408 Envisioning Urban Life: Objects, Subjects, and Everyday People
LATS/AMST 409 Transnational Lives in Global Contexts
LATS/ARTH 464 Latina/o Visual Culture: Histories, Identities, and Presentation
LATS/HIST 471 Comparative Latina/o Migrations
Students can check with the department coordinator to see if other courses not listed here might count as
electives.
Two of the following core electives:
HIST/LATS 286 Latina/o History From 1846 to the Present
HIST/LATS/WGSS 386 Latinas in the Global Economy: Work, Migration, and Households
LATS/ARTH/WGSS 203 Chicana/o Film and Video
LATS/RLSP 209 Spanish for Heritage Speakers: Introduction to Latina/o Cultural Production
LATS 220/AMST 221 Introduction to Urban Studies: Shaping and Living the City
LATS/AMST/REL 224 Latina/o Religions
LATS/AMST 240/COMP 210/LING 254 Latina/o Language and Literature: Hybrid Voices in Contemporary Context
LATS/ARTH 258 Latina/o Installation and Site-Specific Art
LATS/AMST 308 California: Myths, Peoples, Places
LATS/HIST 382 Latina/o Politics
LATS/AMST 310 Latino Cityscapes: Mapping Place, Community, and Latinidad in U.S. Urban Centers
LATS/AMST 332 Latinos and Education: The Politics of Schooling, Language, and Latino Studies
LATS/COMP 338/AMST 339 Popular Culture and the Dynamics of the Everyday
LATS/AMST 346/COMP 359 Latinos in/and the Media: From Production to Consumption
REL/LATS/AMST 227 Utopias and Americas
REL/LATS 309 Scriptures and Race
One additional related course from either of the following subcategories OR from the core electives above:
Countries of Origin and Transnationalism
COMP/LATS/RSLP 272/AMST 256 Literature of the Americas: Transnational Dialogues on Race, Violence and Nation-Building
ENVI/COMP 239 Introduction to Ecocriticism: Transnational Dialogues on Nature and Culture
HIST 147 Women and Men in Twentieth-Century Latin America
HIST 148 The Mexican Revolution: 1910 to NAFTA
HIST/AFR 149 The 1959 Cuban Revolution: Precedents, Processes and Legacies, 1898-2009
HIST 243 Modern Latin America, 1822 to the Present
HIST 248 History of the Caribbean
HIST 342 Creating Nations and Nationalisms in Latin America
HIST/AFR/LEAD 345 "In Our Own Backyard?" U.S. and Latin American Relations
HIST 346 History of Modern Brazil
HIST 347 Democracy and Dictatorship in Latin America
HIST/LEAD 360 The Spanish-American Wars
HIST/AFR 448 Latin American and Caribbean Narratives: Testimonios, Historical Novels, and Travel Accounts
192
HIST 481 Race and Revolution in Latin America
HIST 492T History of Revolutionary Thought in Latin America
MUS 127 Cuban Music and Popular Culture
PSCI 222 The United States and Latin America
PSCI 346 Mexican Politics
PSCI 349T Cuba and the United States
[RLSP 200 (formerly 112) Latin-American Civilizations - last offered spring 2008]
RLSP/COMP 230T Violent States, Violent Subjects: Nation-Building and Atrocity in 19th Century Latin America
RLSP 306T/COMP 302T Latino Writing: Literature by U.S. Hispanics
RLSP 402 Trauma, Memory and Nation
Comparative Race and Ethnic Studies
AFR 200 Introduction to Africana Studies
AMST/ENGL 144 American Ethnic Detective Fictions and Variations
AMST/AFR/LATS 403/COMP/ENGL 375 New Asian American, African American, Native American and Latina/o Writing
ARTH/LATS/AMST 462 Art of California: "Sunshine or Noir"
HIST/AMST 368 Cultural Encounters in the American West
HIST 380 Comparative American Immigration History
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS
Honors in Latina/o Studies may be granted to concentrators after an approved candidate completes an honors project, delivers a public presentation of the
work, and is awarded an honors grade by her/his advisor and two other faculty readers. In consultation with the advisor and the chair, faculty readers may be from
outside the Latina/o Studies Program.
The honors project will be completed over one semester plus winter study. It may consist of a conventional research thesis of 40-70 pages or of other forms of
presentation (e.g., video, art, theater). It may also combine a shorter research thesis with another medium.
To be accepted as a candidate for honors in Latina/o Studies, a student must meet these criteria:
1) Submit and earn approval of a project proposal in April of the junior year. The proposal should be no longer than 5 pages and should lay out the project's
aim and methodology, identify the student's advisor for the work, and include evidence of competence in the necessary media for projects that include
non-thesis forms.
2) Achieve a grade point average generally of at least 3.33 in LATS courses at the time of application.
Students admitted to the honors program must submit a 5-8 page revised proposal, with an annotated bibliography, by the second week of classes in the fall
semester of her/his senior year. They should register either for LATS 493 in the fall semester and LATS 031 in Winter Study, or for LATS 031 in Winter Study and
LATS 494 in the spring semester. These courses will be in addition to the 5 courses that make up the regular concentration.
STUDY ABROAD
Study abroad and other off-campus programs offer excellent opportunities for students to build on, and expand, the intellectual interests they develop as part of
the Latina/o Studies concentration. Through their connections to various institutions in the U.S. and other nations, Latina/o Studies faculty can help place students
in U.S. borderlands programs as well as programs in Mexico, Cuba, and other "countries of origin." Any student seeking to include courses as part of a concentra-
tion in Latina/o Studies should feel free to contact the Program chair or other faculty. A maximum of 1 course taken away from Williams can count (as an elective)
toward the completion of the concentration.
LATS 105(F) Latina/o Identities: Constructions, Contestations, and Expressions
What, or who, is a Hispanic or Latina/o? At present, individuals living in the United States who are classified as such number approximately 40 million, constitut-
ing the country's largest "minority" group. In this course, we will study the interdisciplinary field that has emerged in response to this growing population, as we
focus on the complex nature of "identity." Viewing identities as historically and socially constructed, we begin with a brief assessment of how racial, ethnic, class,
and gendered identities take shape in the Hispanic Caribbean and Latin America. We then examine the impact of (im)migration and the rearticulation of identities
in the United States, as we compare each group's unique history, settlement patterns, and transnational activity. Identity is also a contested terrain. As immigrants
and migrants arrive, the United States' policymakers, the media, and others seek to define the "newcomers" along with long-term Latina/o citizens. At the same
time, Latinas/os rearticulate, live, assert, and express their own sense of identity. In this light, we conclude the course with an exploration of these diverse expres-
sions as they relate to questions of class, race, ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, and national origins.
Format: discussion. Evaluation to be based on student participation and several short papers (1-5 pages) throughout the semester.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 20-25). Required course for the concentration in Latina/o Studies. Preference given to Latina/o Studies concen-
trators.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR CHAVOYA and HIDALGO
LATS 203(F) Chicana/o Film and Video (Same as ArtH 203 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 203)
Hollywood cinema has long been fascinated with the border between the United States and Mexico. This course will examine representations of the U.S.-Mexico
border, Mexican Americans, and Chicana/os in both Hollywood film and independent media. We will consider how positions on nationalism, race, gender,
identity, migration, and history are represented and negotiated through film. We will begin by analyzing Hollywood "border" and gang films before approaching
Chicana/o-produced features, independent narratives, and experimental work. This course will explore issues of film and ideology, genre and representation,
nationalist resistance and feminist critiques, queer theory and the performative aspects of identity.
Format: film screenings will be scheduled as a lab. Evaluation will be based on one short paper, mid-term exam, final exam and take home essays.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 20).
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR and 7:00-9:40 p.m. M CHAVOYA
LATS 209 Spanish for Heritage Speakers: Introduction to Latina/o Cultural Production (Same as Spanish 209) (Not offered 2011-2012)
This lecture and discussion course focuses on the acquisition and improvement of critical communication and analytical skills in Spanish for use both in and
outside of the United States. We address all four of the primary language skills (listening, reading, writing, and speaking), with particular attention to the unique
needs of students who have received a majority of their exposure to the Spanish language in an informal/domestic environment. Through the use of materials
and vocabulary taken from a variety of real-life contexts, but with primary emphasis on the diverse U.S. Latina/o communities, this course aims to sharpen
heritage speakers' sociolinguistic competency and ability to interpret musical, cinematic, and literary texts in Spanish.
Format: seminar. Evaluation to be based on student participation, grammar homework, 2 oral exams, and 3-4 written essays.
No prerequisites, however, students who have completed the majority of their formal education in a Spanish-speaking country are not permitted to enroll in this
course without prior permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 14 (expected: 14). If class is overenrolled, preference will be given to senior Latina/o Studies
concentrators or Spanish majors.
CEPEDA
LATS 220 Introduction to Urban Studies: Shaping and Living the City (Same as American Studies 221 and Environmental Studies 221) (Not
offered 2011-2012)
Generally, cities have been described either as vibrant commercial and cultural centers or as violent and decaying urban slums. In an effort to begin to think
more critically about cities, this course introduces important topics in the interdisciplinary field of Urban Studies. Specifically, we will discuss concepts and
theories used to examine the peoples and structures that make up cities: In what ways do socio-cultural, economic, and political factors affect urban life and
development? How are cities planned and used by various stakeholders (politicians, developers, businesses, and residents)? How do people make meaning of
the places they inhabit? We will pay particular attention to the roles of race, ethnicity, class, and gender in understanding and interpreting urban communities.
Texts include works by anthropologists, historians, sociologists, cultural critics, cultural geographers, and literary writers.
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on attendance and class participation, several short writing assignments (2 pages), two creative group projects and
presentations, a midterm essay (8-10 pages) and final essay (8-10 pages).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). Preference given to American Studies majors and Latina/o Studies concentrators.
RA
LATS 224(S) U.S. Latina/o Religions (Same as American Studies 224 and Religion 224) (D)
In this course, we will engage aspects of Latin@ religious experiences, practices, and expressions in the United States of America. Some attention will be given to
historical contexts in Iberia and Latin America, as well as questions of how one studies Latin@ religions. Most of the course, however, will examine moments
where religious expressions intersect with politics, popular culture, and daily life in the U.S.A. Given the plurality of Latin@ communities and religious lives in
193
the U.S.A., we will engage certain selected religious traditions and practices by focusing on particular moments of religious expression as elucidated in specific
historiographies, ethnographies, art, literature, and film. Rooting ourselves in the social, political, cultural, and historical contexts in which particular Latin@
religious formations arose, this Exploring Diversity Initiative course also examines issues of social and institutional power relations that influence particular
religious formations.
Format: discussion. Evaluation: based upon class participation, short writing exercises, a 5- to 8-page take-home midterm essay, and a 10- to 15-page final review
essay.
No prerequisites; open to first year students. Enrollment limit: none (expected 15).
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MW HIDALGO
LATS 227(S) Utopias and Americas (Same as American Studies 227, Environmental Studies 227 and Religion 227)
(See under REL 227 for full description) HIDALGO
LATS 240(S) Latina/o Language and Literature: Hybrid Voices (Same as American Studies 240 and Comparative Literature 210) (D)
This discussion course engages issues of language and identity in the contemporary literary production and lived experience of various Latina/o communities. We
will ask: How are cultural values and material conditions expressed through Latina/o language and literature? In what ways does Latina/o identity challenge
traditional notions of the relationship between language, culture, and nation? How might Latina/o literary and linguistic practices serve as tools for social change?
Departing from an overview of common linguistic phenomena such as code-switching (popularly known as "Spanglish") and Latina/o English, we will examine
bilingual education, recent linguistic legislation, and the English Only movement. We will also survey texts from a variety of literary and performance genres,
including theatrical pieces, autobiography, novels, poetry, and short stories by writers such as Junot Daz, Martn Espada, Vctor Hernndez Cruz, Dolores Prida,
Richard Rodrguez, and Michele Serros, among others. Both directly and/or indirectly, these texts address Latina/o language politics, as well as the broader
themes of identity, power, community, race/ethnicity, gender, sexuality, class, and hybridity.
Format: seminar. Evaluation to be based on student participation, 2-3 written essays of 5-7 pages each, and a final take-home examination.
No prerequisites, however, LATS 105 is strongly encouraged. Enrollment limit: 14 (expected: 14). If class is overenrolled, preference will be given to senior
Latina/o Studies concentrators, American Studies majors, or Comparative Literature majors.
Hour: TBA CEPEDA
LATS 258(S) Latina/o Installation and Site-Specific Art (Same as ArtH 258)
This course will explore the various forms of installation and site-specific artworks created by Latina/o artists for both museums and public space. We will
examine the ways in which Latina/o artists have used space as a material in the production of artworks and how this impacts the works' meanings and the
viewer's experience. Within the context of U.S. Latina/o culture and history, we will connect notions of space with ideas about cultural citizenship, civil rights,
and social justice. A variety of art forms will be studied, from traditional to experimental, including murals, sculpture, performance, video, and several multime-
dia, interactive, or participatory projects. While establishing a historical lineage and theoretical frameworks for analyzing this growing genre, we will pay particu-
lar attention to how these works engage urban space and often challenge the institutional assumptions of museums and curatorial practice. Likewise, we will
examine the important debates associated with various public art and museum installation controversies.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: two short papers, periodic research reports, final research paper, and presentation.
Prerequisites: Latina/o Studies 105 or ArtH 101-102 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 12). Core elective for Latina/o Studies concentra-
tion. Preference to Latina/o Studies concentrators and to Art majors.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W CHAVOYA
LATS 272 Literature of the Americas: Transnational Dialogues on Race, Violence and Nation-Building (Same as American Studies 256,
Comparative Literature 272 and Spanish 272) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D) (W)
(See under COMP 272 for full description.) FRENCH
LATS 286 Latina/o History From 1846 to the Present (Same as History 286) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under HIST 286 for full description.) WHALEN
Core elective for Latina/o Studies concentration.
LATS 306 Latinos and Cultural Citizenship (Same as American Studies 306) (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course explores the intersecting relationship between Latinos, culture, and citizenship by examining how Latinos are represented within the national imag-
inary. Considering citizenship from various points of difference such as race, ethnicity, age, (dis)ability, gender, sexuality, and class, this course will interrogate
how multiple forms of citizenship (e.g., legal, cultural, social, and economic) are constructed and constituted through various institutions such as law, media,
education, and the economy. Throughout the semester we will keep the following fundamental questions at the core of our inquiry: What does it mean to be a
citizen in the 21st century? How does culture shape our contemporary ideas of citizenship? How do Latinos make cultural claims to membership in the nation,
in addition to or apart from legal notions of citizenship? What are the implications of Latinos' practices of cultural citizenship? Topics include language,
representation, multiculturalism, dual citizenship, hybridity, immigration, and consumption, with readings by Suzanne Oboler, Renato Rosaldo, Leo Chavez,
and Vicki Mayer among others. Analysis of various popular culture forms such as music, film, television, and art will accompany theoretical readings.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, one student-led discussion, one 2- tp 3-page book review, and two 5- to 7-page
essays.
No prerequisites. No enrollment limit (expected: 15).
BEZ
LATS 308 California: Myths, Peoples, Places (Same as American Studies 308) (Not offered 2011-2012)
"Now Iwish you to know about the strangest thing ever found anywhere in written texts or in human memory...I tell you that on the right-hand side of the Indies
there was an island called California, which was very close to the region of the Earthly Paradise."
As far as we know, the name "California" was first written in this passage by Garc Rodrguez de Montalvo, ca. 1510. Within a few decades, it came to be
placed first on the peninsula of Baja California and then upon a whole large region stretching along the Western coast of North America. What aspects of this
early myth still inform how we imagine California today? What are the different images that come to mind when you think of California and how might those
images relate to other myths placed on California since 1510? In this course, we will examine some of the myths that surround California by looking at specific
moments of interaction between the peoples who have come to make California home and the specific places in which they have interacted with each other.
Format: discussion. Evaluation: based upon class participation, short writing exercises, two 3- to 5-page book review essays, and a final project or a 10- to
15-page comparative review essay.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: none (expected 15).
HIDALGO
LATS 309 (formerly 273) Scriptures and Race (Same as Africana Studies 309 and Religion 309) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under REL 309 for full description.) HIDALGO
LATS 310 Latino Cityscapes: Mapping Place, Community, and Latinidad in U.S. Urban Centers (Same as American Studies 310) (Not
offered 2011-2012) (D)
This interdisciplinary course examines the emergence of Latino cities in the US. We begin by exploring urban centers that came to be identified with certain
Latino groups--Puerto Ricans in New York, Mexicans in Los Angeles, and Cubans in Miami. We then turn to other Latino cities that have been historically
overlooked given the popular and scholarly attention placed on New York, Los Angeles, and Miami. In our study of Latino cities, we will analyze the diverse
histories of migration and settlement, ethnoracial relations, community building and identity formation, and the racialization of urban spaces. Finally, we will
consider the situatedness of latinidad in these urban environments contemplating how Latinos are shaped by and in turn shape the experience of the city in the
US.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class participation, field research, 4 response papers (2 pages), a short field narrative (4 pages), a midterm essay
(5-7 pages), and a final review essay (8-10 pages).
Prerequisites: Latina/o Studies 220/American Studies 221 recommended. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 12). Core elective for Latina/o Studies concentration.
Preference given to Latina/o Studies concentrators and American Studies majors.
RA
194
LATS 311(F) Ethnographies of Diaspora and Popular Culture (Same as American Studies 311)
For many contemporary diasporic communities, popular culture is central to the creation and maintenance of a transnational, imagined community. Using a
comparative approach, this course will explore the ways in which popular culture (i.e., film, music, television, travel writing, food) fosters the creation and main-
tenance of diasporic communities such as Indian youth in London, Latina teens in the South, and Greek Cypriots in London and New York among others. The
course will also consider how popular culture might encourage distinctions within diasporas and in relation to other ethnic and racial communities. Central to the
course is an ethnographic approach to studying popular culture. As such, students will gain an introduction to qualitative methods that seek to understand the role
of popular culture in everyday life. We will focus on the following questions: How does popular culture cultivate "imagined communities" for diasporas? How
do diasporic communities not only consume, but produce popular culture? How does the process of migration impact one's consumption of popular culture?
How do second-plus generation members participate in diasporic media, if at all? Topics will include youth, family, gender, race, hybridity, the city, and consumer
culture in sites as varied as the home, work, bars/nightclubs, shopping malls, and museums.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, 1 student-led discussion, two 3- to 4-page ethnographic writing exercises, and one
final essay of 5-7 pages.
No prerequisites. No enrollment limit (expected: 15).
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR BEZ
LATS 312(S) Chicago (Same as American Studies 312 and Environmental Studies 313)
"The city of big shoulders has plenty of room for diversity," reads the official visitor's website for the City of Chicago. Focusing on this claim, this course asks
students to think critically about what kind room has been made for diversity--social, spatial, and ideological. Additionally we examine the ways in which
diverse social actors have shouldered their way into the imagined and physical landscape of the city. Working with ethnography, history, literature, critical essays,
and popular culture, we will explore the material and discursive constructions of Chi-Town and urban life among its residents. Appreciating these constructions
we also consider how Chicago has served as a key site for understandings of urbanity within a broader national and global context.
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on attendance and class participation, group presentations and discussions, 5 critical briefs ( 2-pages) and a book
review essay (12-15 pages).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). Core elective for Latina/o Studies concentration. Preference given to American Studies majors, Latina/o
Studies concentrators, and students who have taken LATS 220/AMST 221/ENVI 221.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR RA
LATS 313 Gender, Race, Beauty, and Power in the Age of Transnational Media (Same as American Studies 313, Comparative Literature 313
and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 313) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
This lecture and discussion course focuses on the politics of personal style among U.S. women of color in an era of viral video clips, the 24-hour news cycle,
and e-commerce sites dedicated to the dermatological concerns of "minority" females. With a comparative, cross-cultural emphasis on the ways in which
gender, sexuality, ethno-racial identity, and class inform standards of beauty, we will examine a variety of materials ranging from documentary films, commer-
cial websites, poetry and sociological case studies to classic feminist theory. Departing from the assumption that personal aesthetics are intimately tied to issues
of power and privilege, we will engage the following questions: What are the everyday functions of personal style among women of color? Is it feasible to
assert that an easily identifiable "African-American," "Latina," or "Asian-American" female aesthetic exists? What role do transnational media play in the
development and circulation of popular aesthetic forms? How might the belief in personal style as a tactic of resistance challenge traditional understandings of
what it means to be a "feminist" in the first place? Readings include works by Julie Bettie, Rosalinda Fregoso, Tiffany M. Gill, Margaret L. Hunter, Linda
Leung, Lisa Nakamura, Catherine Ramrez, Felicity Schaefer-Grabiel, and Sandra K. Soto, among others.
Fornat: seminar. Evaluation to be based on student participation, 1 student-led discussion period, and 2-3 written essays of 5-7 pages each.
Prerequisites: LATS 105, AFR 200, AMST 201, WGST 101 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 14 (expected: 14). If class is overenrolled,
preference will be given to senior Latina/o Studies concentrators, American Studies majors, Africana Studies concentrators, and Women's, Gender and Sexual-
ity Studies majors.
CEPEDA
LATS 332 Latinos and Education: The Politics of Schooling, Language, and Latino Studies (Same as American Studies 332) (Not offered
2011-2012) (W) (D)
Schools have often become the focal point for debates over the relationship between cultural identity, intellectual abilities, and the production of knowledge.
What should be taught, who should be taught, and how they should be taught frame the politics of schooling. Language has often taken center stage in these
debates. This course examines the effects of educational policies and practices on the development of Latina/o students and communities. We will also consider
how these students and communities have resourcefully carved out spaces and made demands to meet their educational needs. Topics include school desegre-
gation, bilingual education, student walk-outs and sit-ins, as well as the origins and advancement of Chicano Studies, Puerto Rican Studies, and more recently
Latino Studies programs on college campuses. Students will critically engage the major themes of the course in two essays as they also engage each other in the
form of peer-reviews and other in-class writing workshop exercises. This course explores the experiences and expressions of racially and culturally diverse
Latinas and Latinos, focusing on the myriad ways in which they confront, negotiate, and at times challenge dominant U.S. hierarchies of race, culture, gender
and class.
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, writing workshop participation (and related assignments), group presentations, and two
essays (12-15 pages).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 12). Preference given to Latina/o Studies concentrators and American Studies majors.
RA
LATS 338 Popular Culture and the Dynamics of the Everyday (Same as American Studies 339 and Comparative Literature 338) (Not offered
2011-2012) (D) (W)
Via critical analysis of select musical, cinematic, and popular media texts, this discussion and lecture course investigates the primary approaches to the study of
popular expression and identity, with particular emphasis on Latina/o popular cultural production. Together we will pose the following questions: How is
Latina/o identity expressed through the "popular" or the everyday? In which ways does the study of Latina/o popular culture illuminate our understanding of the
Latina/o community's history and culture? What methodologies and theories are best suited to the analysis of the "here and now"? Employing a broad range of
Cultural Studies core concepts and approaches, students will conduct an original semester-long research project and complete various experiential exercises in
this analysis of the historical, socio-political, and artistic uses of popular culture among Latinas/os.
Format: seminar. Evaluation to be based on student participation, 2 ethnographic essays, and an original 12- to 15-page research paper conducted in stages
(abstract, annotated bibliography, outline, and multiple drafts).
Prerequisites: LATS 105, AMST 201, or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 14 (expected: 14). If class is overenrolled, preference will be given to
senior Latina/o Studies concentrators, or American Studies majors.
CEPEDA
LATS 346(S) Latinas/os and the Media: From Production to Consumption (Same as American Studies 346 and Comparative Literature 359)
(D) (W)
This interdisciplinary lecture and discussion course centers on advertising, print media, radio, internet, television programming, and audience studies for, by, and
about Latinas/os. How do Latinas/os construct identity (and have their identities constructed for them) through domestic and transnational media outlets? How are
Latina/o stereotypes constructed, reflected, and ultimately circulated via mass media? Where do issues of consumer agency come into play? How might media
provide a means for affecting social change? And finally, which research methodologies best capture the complex relationship between consumer, producer, and
media text? Readings include works by scholars including Mari Castaeda, Dolores Ins Casillas, Arlene Dvila, Isabel Molina-Guzmn, Yeidy Rivero, Amrica
Rodrguez, and Angharad Valdivia, among others.
Format: seminar. Evaluation to be based on student participation, one 2- to 3-page close reading exercise, and an original 12- to 15-page research paper conducted
in stages (abstract, annotated bibliography, outline, and multiple drafts)
Prerequisites: LATS 105 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 14 (expected: 14). If class is overenrolled, preference will be given to senior Latina/o
Studies concentrators or American Studies majors.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR CEPEDA
LATS 382 Latina/o Politics (Same as History 382 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 382) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
This course explores Latina/o politics from World War II to the present. Defining politics broadly, we will examine everything from electoral politics to grass-
roots activism. We will explore the relationship between Latinas/os and the U.S. political system, as well as the ways in which dynamics internal to Latina/o
communities shape political issues and political participation. Specific topics include Mexican Americans and Puerto Ricans struggles for political inclusion in
195
the aftermath of World War II, Cuban exile politics and their impact, the political and social movements of the 1960s and 1970s, key electoral campaigns, the
recent appointment in 2008 of the first Latina as a Supreme Court justice, and on-going debates over immigration. With an assessment of power relations at its
core, this Exploring Diversity Initiative course explores the ways in which Latinos and Latinas have been excluded from or differentially included in the U.S.
political system, as well as how the U.S. political system reflects dominant hierarchies of race, class, and gender. We will also interrogate how Latinas/os have
sought to make U.S. politics more inclusive and at times have struggled to transform U.S. politics.
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation including short assignments in preparation for discussion; three short essays based on course
readings (3-5 pages each); and a final paper (7-10 pages).
No prerequisites; open to first-year students. Enrollment Limit: none (expected: 20). Preference given to Latina/o Studies concentrators and History majors.
WHALEN
LATS 386 Latinas in the Global Economy: Work, Migration, and Households (Same as History 386 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality
Studies 386) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under HIST 386 for full description.) WHALEN
Core elective for Latina/o Studies concentration.
LATS 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
LATS 403 New Asian American, African American, Native American, and Latina/o Writing (Same as Africana Studies 403, American
Studies 403, Comparative Literature 375 and English 375) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under AMST 403 for full description.) WANG
LATS 405 Home and Belonging: Displacements, Relocations, and Place-Making (Same as American Studies 405) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(W) (D)
The metaphor of "home" and idea of "belonging" bring insight to theories and investigations centered on community building and identity formation within
and across national borders. These constructions give us an indication of what people value, what is worth fighting for, as well as what is considered expend-
able. Our objective in this course is to interrogate constructions of home and belonging by studying how individuals, communities, and nations are transformed
by experiences of dislocation, migration, and renewed place-making. What are the ways a sense of belonging shapes these identities and the investments made
in these formations? Working with ethnography, history, memoir, literature, critical essays, and documentary film, we will consider the personal and political
uses and meanings of memory, nostalgia, and imagination in "rooting" migrating subjects in place and time. Among the many case studies we will examine are
the politics of homeland among Cuban-Americans, Native American and West Indian festive forms, and place-claiming and racial sincerity among African
Americans. This course explores the experiences and expressions of racialized populations in the United States, focusing on the myriad ways in which they
confront, negotiate, and at times challenge dominant U.S. hierarchies of race, culture, gender and class.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class participation, annotated bibliography, short essay (5 pages), writing workshop participation (and related
assignments), research paper related assignments, and a final research paper (20-25 pages) and presentation.
Prerequisites: prior courses in Latino Studies, American Studies, or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected 15). Preference given to senior
Latino Studies concentrators and American Studies majors.
RA
LATS 408 Envisioning Urban Life: Objects, Subjects, and Everyday People (Same as American Studies 408) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(W) (D)
What is the relationship between real life in urban communities and the multiple ways in which they are imagined? What does it mean to be "urban," to live in
an "urban community," or to be the product of an "urban environment"? Who do we think the people are who populate these spaces? This course takes a critical
look at specific populations, periods, and problems that have come to dominate and characterize our conceptions of the quality, form, and function of U.S. urban
life. A few of the topics we will cover include historical accounts of the varied ways in which poverty has been studied; race, class, and housing; the spatial
practices of urban youth and the urban elderly; and gendered perspectives on social mobility and community activism. Finally, this course will explore how
diverse social actors negotiate responses to their socio-spatial and economic circumstances, and, in the process, help envision and create different dimensions of
the urban experience. The course fulfills the Exploring Diversity Initiative requirement as it explores how various forms of urban inequality affect the collective
experience of social actors in diverse race and class categories. It focuses on the complex and contradictory ways in which urban residents confront, negotiate,
and at times challenge social and structural inequalities and the changing political economy of U.S. cities.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on attendance and class participation, class presentations, 4 short essays (4-5 pages), and a final paper (18-20 pages).
Prerequisites: prior course(s) in American Studies, Latina/o Studies, or permission of instructor; not open to first year students. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected:
19). Preference given to senior Latina/o Studies concentrators and to senior American Studies majors.
RA
LATS 409(F) Transnational Lives in Global Context (Same as American Studies 409) (W) (D)
In the age of satellite television, e-mail, Skype, and readily available international phone cards, transnational identities have rapidly become the norm as opposed
to the exception. However, what does it really mean to "be transnational"? How do the lived experiences of transnational individuals and communities mirror
(and diverge from) theoretical notions of the transnational? How do the practices and concepts of diaspora, globalization, and transnationalism compare? How do
the growing number of transnational citizens and residents in this country shape "American" identity on the local, national, and global scales? In this comparative
discussion course we will analyze contemporary theories regarding the origins and impacts of transnationalism, key critiques regarding the field of transnational
studies itself, and transnationalism's role in the "New" American Studies. Case studies examined in this course include China, Colombia, the Dominican Repub-
lic, Haiti, Mexico, the Philippines, Puerto Rico, and Syria; we will read works by Arjun Appadurai, Ginetta E.B. Candelario, Luis Eduardo Guarnizo and Michael
Peter Smith, Aihwa Ong, Gina M. Prez, Ella Shohat and Robert Stam, and Robert C. Smith, among others.
Format: seminar. Evaluation to be based on student participation, individual writing conferences, and an original 15-20 page research paper conducted in stages
(abstract, annotated bibliography, outline, and multiple drafts).
Prerequisites: LATS 105 or AMST 201 and junior/senior standing, or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 9). If class is overenrolled,
preference will be given to senior Latina/o Studies concentrators or American Studies majors.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W BAEZ
LATS 462 Art of California: "Sunshine or Noir" (Same as American Studies 462 and ArtH 462) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under ARTH 462 for full description.) CHAVOYA
LATS 464 Latina/o Visual Culture: Histories, Identities, and Representation (Same as ArtH 464) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
(See under ARTH 464 for full description.) CHAVOYA
LATS 471(S) Comparative Latina/o Migrations (Same as History 471) (D) (W)
Since the 1970s, policymakers, scholars, the media, and popular discourses have used the umbrella terms "Hispanic" and "Latina/o" to refer to Mexicans, Puerto
Ricans, Cubans, Dominicans and more recent immigrants from Central and South American countries. As a form of racial/ethnic categorization, however, these
umbrella terms can mask widely divergent migration histories and experiences in the United States. In this course, we develop theoretical perspectives and com-
parative analyses to untangle a complicated web of similarities and differences among Latino groups. How important were their time of arrival and region of
settlement? How do we explain differences in socioeconomic status? How fruitful and appropriate are comparative analyses with other racial/ethnic groups, such
as African Americans or European immigrants? Along the way, we explore the emergence of Latina/o Studies as an interdisciplinary and comparative field of
study, as well as methods used in Latino and Latina history, specifically oral histories, government documents, newspapers, and interdisciplinary approaches. In
this EDI course, we ask whether the history and processes of racialization in the United States has created similarities and/or differences in each group's experi-
ences, and to what extent the field of Latina/o Studies offers an alternative to racial biases embedded in the dominant academic discourses.
Format: seminar/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation and presentations, a proposal, an annotated bibliography, a short historiographical
essay, and a research paper based in part on primary sources.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 8-15). Preference given to History majors and to Latina/o Studies concentrators.
Group F
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W WHALEN
196
LATS 493(F) Senior Honors Thesis
Students beginning their thesis work in the fall must register for this course and subsequentially for LATS 031 during Winter Study.
Prerequisite: approval of program chair. Enrollment limited to senior honors candidates.
LATS 031 Senior Honors Thesis
Students must register for this course to complete an honors project begun in the fall or begin one to be finished in the spring.
Prerequisite: approval of program chair. Enrollment limited to senior honors candidates.
LATS 494(S) Senior Honors Thesis
Students beginning their thesis work in Winter Study must register for this course.
Prerequisites: approval of program chair and LATS 031.
Enrollment limited to senior honors candidates.
LEADERSHIP STUDIES (Div. II)
Chair, Professor NICOLE MELLOW
Advisory Committee: Professors: DUNN, MCALLISTER***, WOOD. Associate Professors: BERNHARDSSON, MELLOW***. Assistant Profes-
sors: CROWE, SPERO. Stanley Kaplan Visiting Professors: GREEN, LAWRENCE. Visiting Lecturers: G. CHANDLERЁ, SWIFT.
Leadership Studies focuses on the universal phenomenon of leadership in human groups. Leadership Studies asks what leadership means within a wide variety
of social contexts-whether in a family, a team, a theatre company, a philanthropy, a university, a multinational corporation, or a nation state waging war. It seeks to
understand the dynamics of the relationships between leaders and followers. It studies authority, power, and influence. It seeks to grasp the bases of legitimacy that
leaders claim, and followers grant, in all of these relationships.
Through a wide range of courses in the social sciences and the humanities, a number of questions are addressed through the curriculum. How have men and
women defined leadership and what are the bases of leaders' legitimacy in different historical contexts? How do leaders in different contexts emerge? Through
tradition, charisma, or legal sanction? How do different types of leaders exercise and maintain their domination? What are the distinctive habits of mind of leaders
in different historical contexts? What are the moral dilemmas that leaders in different contexts face? What are the typical challenges to established leadership in
different historical contexts? How does one analyze the experiences of leaders in widely disparate contexts to generate systematic comparative understandings of
why history judges some leaders great and others failures. How and why do these evaluations about the efficacy of leaders shift over time?
To meet the requirements of the concentration, students must complete one of the two sequences outlined below (6 courses total).
LEADERSHIP STUDIES--TRADITIONAL TRACK
The Introductory Course:
LEAD/PSCI 125 Power, Leadership and Legitimacy: An Introduction to Leadership Studies
One Required Course on Ethical Issues Related to Leadership:
PSCI 203 Introduction to Political Theory
Students can check with the department coordinator to see if other courses not listed here might count as
electives.
Two Core Courses Dealing with Specific Facets or Domains of Leadership:
CLAS 258 Divine Kingship
[ENGL 137 Shakespeare's Warriors and Politicians - last offered fall 2008]
HIST/CLAS/LEAD 323 Leadership, Government, and the Governed in Ancient Greece
HIST 111/LEAD 150 Movers and Shakers in the Modern Middle East
HIST/LEAD 157 From Powhatan to Lincoln: Discovering Leadership in a New World
HIST 158 Thicker than Water: American Political Dynasties
HIST 326 War in European History
HIST 355/LEAD 255 Perspectives on the American Revolution
HIST 359/LEAD 259 The Politics of Presidential Leadership, 1776-1860
HIST/AFR 381 From Civil Rights to Black Power
HIST 475 Modern Warfare and Military Leadership
LEAD/RLFR 212/HIST 393 Sister Revolutions in France and America
LEAD 250 Political Leadership
LEAD 402 The Art of Presidential Leadership
LEAD/PSCI 285/HIST 354 The Revolutionary Generation: Galaxy of Leaders
LEAD 295 Leadership and Management
PSCI/LEAD 218 The American Presidency
PSCI 345 Cosmology and Rulership in Ancient Chinese Political Thought
SOC 387 Propaganda
One Leadership Studies Winter Study course (listed separately in the catalogue)
Capstone Course:
LEAD 402 The Art of Presidential Leadership
LEADERSHIP STUDIES--KAPLAN PROGRAM IN U.S. FOREIGN POLICY TRACK
An Introductory Course:
HIST 262 The U.S. and the World, 1776-1914
PSCI 120 America and the World After September 11 or
LEAD/PSCI 125 Power, Leadership and Legitimacy: An Introduction to Leadership Studies
One Required Course on Issues Related to American Domestic Leadership:
HIST/LEAD 157 From Powhatan to Lincoln: Discovering Leadership in a New World
HIST 158 Thicker than Water: American Political Dynasties
HIST 355/LEAD 255 Perspectives on the American Revolution
HIST 359/LEAD 259 The Politics of Presidential Leadership, 1776-1860
HIST 360 The Spanish-American Wars (D)
LEAD 250 Political Leadership
LEAD/PSCI 285/HIST 354 The Revolutionary Generation: Galaxy of Leaders
LEAD 402 The Art of Presidential Leadership
PSCI/LEAD 205 Leaders in Contemporary Conservative Political Thought
PSCI/LEAD 218 The American Presidency
PSCI 230 American Political Thought
PSCI 309 Problems/Progress in American Democracy
Three Required Courses Dealing with Specific Facets of American Foreign Policy Leadership:
HIST 262 The United States and the World, 1776 to 1914
HIST 263 The United States and the World, 1914 to the Present
HIST/LEAD/AFR 345 "In Our Own Backyard?" U.S. and Latin American Relations
HIST 388 The Cold War, 1945-1991
HIST 464 The United States and the Vietnam War
PSCI 222 The United States and Latin America
PSCI 225 International Security
PSCI 242 America and the Vietnam War
PSCI 262 America and the Cold War
PSCI 323T Henry Kissinger and the American Century
PSCI 326 Empire and Imperialism
197
PSCI 420/440 Senior Seminar in International Relations: The War in Iraq
SOC 202 Terrorism and National Security
Capstone Course(s):
PSCI/LEAD 365 U.S. Grand Strategy (W)
LEAD 402 Domains of Leadership: The Roosevelt Style of Leadership
PSCI 420 Henry Kissinger: Detente and the End of the Cold War
(There is no winter study component to the American Foreign Policy Leadership track.)
LEAD 125(F) Power, Leadership and Legitimacy: An Introduction to Leadership Studies (Same as Political Science 125)
Leadership has long been a central concept in the study of politics. Philosophers from Plato to Machiavelli have struggled with the question of what qualities and
methods are necessary for effective leadership. Social scientists throughout the twentieth century have struggled to refine and advance hypotheses about leader-
ship in the areas of economics, psychology, and sociology, among others. Nevertheless, despite all of this impressive intellectual effort, the study of leadership
remains a contested field of study precisely because universal answers to the major questions in leadership studies have proven to be elusive. This course is
designed to introduce students to many of the central issues and debates in the area of leadership studies.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: class participation and several brief (1 page) response papers, a short mid-term paper, and a longer final paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Preference given to first-year students and sophomores.
Subfield open
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF C. CHANDLER
LEAD 135T(F) The Great War, 1914-1918 (Same as History 135T) (W)
(See under HIST 135 for full description.) WOOD
LEAD 150 Movers and Shakers in the Middle East (Same as History 111) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
(See under HIST 111 for full description.) BERNHARDSSON
LEAD 157(F) From Powhatan to Lincoln: Discovering Leadership in a New World (Same as History 157) (W)
(See under HIST 157 for full description.) SPERO
LEAD 212(S) Sister Revolutions in France and America (Same as History 393)
In the late-eighteenth century, two revolutions burst forth-they were the most striking and consequential events in modern history, decisive turning-points that
transformed society and politics. This course takes an interdisciplinary approach to the study of the overarching ideas and visions of the sister revolutions.
Through correspondence, political essays and speeches, we will seek to understand the fundamental theories, goals and accomplishments of both revolutions.
Who were their leaders and according to what principles did they govern? Did revolutionaries in France find a model in America for their Revolution? What is the
meaning of the "Terror" in France and what light does it shed on modern revolutionary movements? Why was the American Revolution followed by decades of
stability while the French Revolution bequeathed a turbulent succession of failed governments? Have America and France continued to conceive of themselves
as revolutionary nations? We will read works by Washington, Jefferson, Madison, Hamilton, Adams, Rousseau, Robespierre, Saint-Just, Tocqueville, Burke and
others..
Format: seminar. Requirements: two papers, several class presentations, and active participation in class discussions.
Prerequisites: course background in French history or early American history or Political Theory. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15). Preference given to stu-
dents with backgrounds in American history, French history or Political Science.
Satisfies one semester of the Division II requirement.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 R DUNN
LEAD 218 The American Presidency (Same as Political Science 218) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under PSCI 218 for full description.) MELLOW
LEAD 242(F) America and the Vietnam War (Same as Political Science 242) (W)
(See under PSCI 242 for full description.) MCALLISTER and LAWRENCE
LEAD 250(S) Political Leadership
This course will examine the leadership strategies of American political leaders with an emphasis on the importance of communication strategies for public sector
leaders. We will study these issues by examining local, state and federal political leaders and by answering key questions specific to the political realm. We will
read and watch significant speeches of American political leaders, be visited by guests with deep knowledge and insight into the world of politics and read a
variety of writings by academics and practitioners on the subject. We will explore questions such as "What characteristics mark successful communication and
how do leaders craft a unique and effective communications style?" and "What strategic considerations are there for female political leaders and do they have
different challenges in communicating?"
The first series of classes will focus on communication--taking a look at some of America's best political orators, the special requirements of crisis communica-
tion and the changes that new media has brought to the practice of politics and government. We will then explore the tenets of political strategy-- both in cam-
paigns and governing. This segment of the course will take a look at the tools used in crafting a strategy and how to put together a winning coalition. The final
classes in the course will explore the unique challenges and opportunities facing select sub-groups of political leaders: women, celebrity candidates and office-
holders and high-achieving young political leaders--operatives and elected officials.
Format: seminar. Requirements: three short papers and a final research paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to Leadership Studies concentrators and Political Science majors.
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M SWIFT
LEAD 255(F) Perspectives on the American Revolution (Same as History 355)
(See under HIST 355 for full description.) SPERO
LEAD 257 Leaders in Africa: Prophets, Autocrats Tyrants (Same as Africana Studies 257 and Political Science 257) (Not offered
2011-2012)
(See under PSCI 257 for full description.) MUNEMO
LEAD 259(S) The Politics of Presidential Leadership, 1776-1860 (Same as History 359)
(See under HIST 359 for full description.) SPERO
LEAD 285(F) The Revolutionary Generation: Galaxy of Leaders (Same as History 354 and Political Science 285)
The American Revolution produced a galaxy of brilliant politicians and statesmen of extraordinary courage, intellect, creativity, and character. They succeeded in
drafting an unparalleled Constitution and establishing enduring democratic political institutions while nevertheless failing to grapple with the wrenching issue of
slavery and the rights of women. In this course, we will explore the lives, ideas, and political leadership of these men, most of whom belonged to the social elite of
their day: Washington, Madison, Jefferson, Adams, and Hamilton. We will study in depth their superb writings, such as the correspondence between Madison and
Jefferson and between Adams and Jefferson, and Madison's and Hamilton's Federalist essays. We will also read recent interpretations of the founding generation
by Gordon Wood, Joseph Ellis, Bernard Bailyn, and others.
Format: seminar. Requirements: two papers and four class presentations.
No prerequisites; courses in Leadership Studies or Political Theory or early American History are very helplful for admission to this seminar. Enrollment limit: 15
(expected: 15). Preference given to students with a background in American History or Political Science.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 R DUNN
LEAD 295(F) Leadership and Management
What are the differences between effective leaders and effective managers of complex organizations, or are they one and the same? If different, what are the key
elements making each successful, and are there any critical dynamics or interdependencies among these elements? Finally, are there important distinctions be-
tween the factors required for success by leaders/managers in different domains or cultures, and by leaders/managers of different genders or ethnicities? In this
198
course, we will wrestle with these questions by examining both successful and unsuccessful leadership and management of complex organizations in a number of
domains, including the worlds of business, non-profits, higher education, the military, government, and others. Our primary means of doing so will be through
case studies, supplemented by readings from noted leadership and management thinkers, and by the appearance of several distinguished guest speakers.
Format: seminar for the first half of the course and tutorial for the second half. Course requirements will include active class participation, several brief (1 page or
less) response papers, a short midterm paper, and a longer final paper, which will be written by a team of two students during the tutorial portion of the course. The
final paper will focus on two cases of each team's choice.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). Preference given to Leadership Studies concentrators.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR C. CHANDLER
LEAD 311 Congress (Same as Political Science 311) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under PSCI 311 for full description.) C. JOHNSON
LEAD 314T Leadership in American Political Development (Same as Political Science 314T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under PSCI 314 for full description.) MELLOW
LEAD 323(S) Leadership, Government, and the Governed in Ancient Greece (Same as History 323 and Classics 323) (W)
(See under HIST 323 for full description.) CHRISTENSEN
Satisfies one semester of the Division II requirement.
LEAD 325(S) The Roosevelt Style of Leadership (Same as History 358)
In this course we will study the lives, ideas, visions and, above all, the political and moral leadership of Theodore, Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt. The three
Roosevelts transformed the role of government in American society, bringing about fundamental and lasting change. What were their leadership strategies and
styles? Did they mobilize followers or did their followers mobilize them? How did they balance political compromise with bold, principled leadership? How did
their personalities affect their visions and their goals? To what extent did they offer ethical and moral leadership? In addition to studying histories and biographies,
we will do extensive research in primary source material.
Format: seminar. Evaluation based on participation in class discussions, oral reports, two research papers.
Prerequisites: Leadership Studies 125 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 12). Preference given to Leadership Studies concentrators and
students with a background in American history and political science.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 T DUNN
LEAD 338 The Progress of Astronomy: Galileo through the Hubble Space Telescope (Same as Astronomy 338 and History of Science 338)
(Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under ASTR 338 for full description.) J. PASACHOFF
LEAD 365(S) U.S. Grand Strategy (Same as Political Science 365) (W)
(See under PSCI 365 for full description.) LAWRENCE
LEAD 372(S) The Rise of American Business (Same as History 372)
(See under HIST 372 for full description.) DALZELL
LEAD 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
Permission of the chair of Leadership Studies required.
LEAD 402(F) The Art of Presidential Leadership
In this seminar, we will focus on the leadership of some of the greatest American presidents--Washington, Jefferson, Theodore Roosevelt, Franklin Roosevelt--
as well as some of the most controversial--Lyndon Johnson and Richard Nixon. We will investigate how these presidents developed as leaders before as well as
after their election to the presidency. How did they determine their goals, assemble their leadership teams, and mobilize followers? What challenges did they face
and what principles guided them? What failures did they meet and why? Can we relate these historical examples to the American presidency today? Readings
will include correspondence, speeches, biographies, and political analysis.
Format: seminar.
Prerequisites: Leadership Studies 125 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15). Preference given to Leadership Studies concentrators
and students with background in American history and political science.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 T DUNN
LEAD 403(F) Making it in Africa (Same as Africana Studies 404 and History 403)
(See under HIST 403 for full description.) MUTONGI
LEGAL STUDIES (Div. II)
Chair, Professor CHERYL SHANKS
Advisory Committee: Professors: GENTRY, KAPLAN, NOLAN, SHANKS. Assistant Professor: CROWE. Tranistional committee members also
include Professor MERRILL, Associate Professor BARRY, Assistant Professor DUBOW. Visiting Assistant Professor: A. HIRSCHЁ.
Legal Studies is an interdepartmental program designed to give students a background in and frameworks for understanding the law, usually understood as an
authoritative, or socially legitimate, set of rules for coordinating behavior and resolving conflicts, and its relation(s) to justice and power. This liberal arts program
provides the tools needed to think and argue critically about what law is, how it works, how laws evolve over time and in different parts of the world, what
compliance and enforcement mean, and what their relationship is to justice, conflict resolution, and legitimate authority .
THE CONCENTRATION
The concentration in legal studies consists of six courses, including an interdisciplinary introductory course, four electives taken from at least two departments,
and a senior seminar on a contemporary topic in the law. Electives vary from year to year according to course offerings. Students may declare program con-
centrations at any point during their academic career.
STUDY ABROAD
Students who choose to study abroad should consult with the program chair to insure that they can complete the requirements. Studying abroad may provide
exciting opportunities to learn about legal traditions and systems other than those of the United States. Students should check with the chair to be sure that courses
taken abroad will be counted toward completion of the program.
REQUIRED COURSES
LGST 101(F,S) Processes of Adjudication
This course offers an interdisciplinary overview of legal systems, including their historical and constitutional underpinnings, the jury system and the adversary
system; it raises questions about the psychology of law, law's complicated relationship to social institutions, and the nature of facts, evidence, and justice.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on a final exam, many short papers, and class participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 40). Preference to first-years and sophomores who are considering a concentration in Legal Studies.
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M First Semester: A. HIRSCH
8:30-9:45 TR Second Semester: A. HIRSCH
LGST 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
Legal Studies independent study. Open only under the supervision of a member of the Legal Studies Advisory Committee.
LGST 401(S) Senior Seminar: Trials and Transitions (W)
Before the 1990s, the world saw only occasional, discrete war crimes trials after majorpower cataclysms. In the last two decades, trials expanded dramatically in
number, scope, and philosophy. Separate Ad Hoc Tribunals for crimes in Yugoslavia and those in Rwanda, in Sierra Leone and in Cambodia are giving way to a
permanent International Criminal Court, which has begun to hand down indictments and refine its jurisdiction. At the same time, worries about residual impunity
199
or the effect that punishment might have on societies' futures has led to the development of national and social courts to complement those at the international
level. Models of transitional justice abound. This capstone seminar examines the intent, process, meaning and consequence of these new institutions, particularly
in terms of national constitutions, international law, and principles of justice.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active class participation, several short papers, and a substantially longer final paper.
Prerequisites: Legal Studies 101 and at least two Legal Studies electives, or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 18 (expected: 18). Preference: in order
of seniority, to students for whom this course completes the Legal Studies concentration.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR SHANKS
Students can check with the department coordinator to see if other courses not listed here might count as
electives.
ELECTIVES
Four elective courses are required to complete a concentration in Legal Studies. These courses must be taken from at least two departments. Other courses, not
listed here, may be approved by the Chair.
AFR/HIST 304 South Africa and Apartheid
AMST/PSCI 210 Culture and Incarceration
ANTH 342 Dispute and Conflict, Settlement and Resolution: The Anthropology of Law
CHEM 113 Chemistry and Crime: From Sherlock Holmes to Modern Forensic Science
ECON 371T Economic Justice
ENVI 307/PSCI 317 Environmental Law
HIST/WGST 152 The Fourteenth Amendment and the Rights Revolution
HIST 380 Comparative American Immigration History
HIST 381 Civil Rights and Black Power
HIST/WGST 457 Gender, Law and Politics in U.S. History
INTR/AFR 210/PSCI 302 Race, Culture, and Incarceration
LEAD/PSCI 285/HIST 354 The Revolutionary Generation: Galaxy of Leaders
PHIL 101 Introduction to Moral and Political Philosophy
PHIL 236 Contemporary Ethical Theory
PHIL 272T Free Will and Responsibility
PSCI 216 Constitutional Law I
PSCI 217 Constitutional Law II
PSCI 223 International Law
PSCI/AFR 318 The Voting Rights Act and Voting Movement
PSYC 347 Psychology and the Law
REL 203 Judaism
SOC 215 Crime
SOC 218 Law and Modern Society
SOC 270 Cities and Citizenship
SOC 265 Drugs and Society
MARITIME STUDIES
Chair, Professor RNADH COX
Advisory Committee: Professor: ART*, COX. Associate Professor: , TING. Assistant Professor: GILBERT. Associate Deans: GERRY, TOOMA-
JIAN.
Understanding the oceans and our interactions with them is of increasing importance in this era of climate change, sea-level rise, fisheries crises, and the
internationalization of the high seas. We encourage students to investigate our WaterWorld from the perspectives of the humanities, social sciences, and physical
sciences. Maritime Studies is an interdisciplinary, cross-divisional program that includes the literature, history, policy issues, and science of the ocean. Candidates
for the concentration in Maritime Studies must complete a minimum of seven courses: the interdisciplinary introductory course (Geosciences 104 Oceanogra-
phy), four intermediate core courses (at Williams-Mystic), an elective, and the senior seminar.
Students who have completed other study-away programs that emphasize marine studies should consult with the program chair about the possibility of com-
pleting the Maritime Studies concentration.
REQUIRED COURSES:
Introductory course:
Maritime Studies 104(S) Oceanography
Core courses (Williams-Mystic at Mystic Seaport):
MAST 231(F,S) Literature of the Sea
MAST 311(F,S) Marine Ecology
MAST 351(F,S) Marine Policy
MAST 352(F,S) America and the Sea, 1600-Present1
(NOTE: Students who take Maritime Studies 211 Oceanographic Processes at Mystic can substitute an extra elective in lieu of Geosciences 104)
Senior seminar:
MAST 402(F) Senior Seminar: Perspectives on Environmental Studies (Same as Environmental Studies 402)
Students can check with the department coordinator to see if other courses not listed here might count as
electives.
ELECTIVE COURSES:
Elective courses are listed based on either a clear maritime statement in the course description or broad practical/theoretical applicability to maritime studies.
Concentrators will take a minimum of one course from the list below. If concentrators find other courses in the catalog that they believe meet the requirements for
a MAST elective, they may bring them to the attention of the chair.
Maritime History
HIST 124 The Vikings
HIST 127 The Expansion of Europe
HIST/JAPN/ASST 321 History of U.S.Japan Relations
HIST 248 History of the Caribbean
Maritime Literature
CLAS 101/COMP 107 The Trojan War
CLGR402 The Odyssey
ENGL 450 Herman Melville and Mark Twain
Marine Policy
ECON/ENVI 213 Economics of Natural Resource Use
ECON 215 International Trade and Globalism
ECON/ENVI 386/ ECON 515 Environmental Policy and Natural Resource Management
ENVI 307/PSCI 317 Environmental Law
ENVI/PSCI 328 International Environmental Law
PSCI 223 International Law
PSCI 229 Global Political Economy
PSCI 320 Climate Change Law and Policy
Marine Science
200
BIOL 414 Life at Extremes
GEOS/BIOL 212 Invertebrate Paleobiology
GEOS/ENVI 215 Climate Changes
GEOS 218T The Carbon Life Cycle and Climate
GEOS/ENVI 253T Coral Reefs
GEOS 254T Baja California Field Geology
GEOS 302 Sedimentology
HONORS PROGRAM IN MARITIME STUDIES
Candidates for honors in Maritime Studies will complete a thesis in their senior year. The project will involve original research (archive, museum, field, or
laboratory) followed by on-campus analysis and writeup of results. This could be either a one-semester project, or a full year (two semesters plus winter study). In
either case, data collection during the summer before the senior year may be necessary. In some cases, the thesis project may be a continuation and expansion of
the student's Williams-Mystic research project. Honors will be awarded if the thesis shows a high degree of scholarship, originality, and intellectual insight.
MAST 104(S) Oceanography (Same as Geosciences 104 and Environmental Studies 104)
(See under GEOS 104 for full description.) COX
Satisfies one semester of the Division III requirement.
MAST 211(F,S) Oceanographic Processes (Same as Geosciences 210) (Offered only at Mystic Seaport.)
This course examines ocean and coastal environmental science issues including carbon dioxide and the ocean's role in climate, El Nio and other oceanatmo-
sphere oscillations that influence our weather, coastal erosion and other hazards, coastal pollution, and fisheries. The focus is on controlling processes with
regional comparisons. Blue water oceanography is conducted in the Atlantic and comparative coastal oceanography includes trips to southern New England
shores, and the West and Gulf coasts of the US as part of the WilliamsMystic program.
Format: lecture/laboratory, including coastal and near-shore field trips, 11 days offshore, and a laboratory or field research project. Requirements: two tests, a
research project, and a presentation.
Satisfies one semester of the Division III requirement.
Hour: TBA GILBERT
MAST 231(F,S) Literature of the Sea (Same as English 231) (Offered only at Mystic Seaport.) (W)
Taking advantage of our maritime museum, coastal setting, and three field seminars, we study canonical and lesserknown American novelists, travel writers,
and poets who set their works in the watery world, often in the exact places where we travel as a class. We read, for exampledepending on fall or spring
semesterHemingway when sailing on the Straits of Florida, Steinbeck when exploring Cannery Row on Monterey Bay, and Twain on a steamboat on the
Mississippi. We read Rachel Carson beside the Mystic River estuary, Chopin on the sands of the Gulf of Mexico, Kipling out on Georges Bank, and Melville's
masterpiece MobyDick aboard Mystic Seaport's historic whaleship, the Charles W. Morgan, a vessel nearly identical to the vessel he climbed aboard at age
twentyone. In the classroom we examine these works through a mixture of lecture, smallgroup discussion, and formal and creative writing. To further appreci-
ation and analysis, this interdisciplinary course uses students' emerging knowledge of maritime history and marine science. Other authors and poets include,
depending on fall or spring: Richard Henry Dana, Jr., Walt Whitman, Jack London, Joseph Conrad, T.S. Eliot, Langston Hughes, Elizabeth Bishop, Frederick
Douglass, Timothy Egan, and Ursula K. Le Guin.
Format: small group tutorials with weekly lectures, including coastal and nearshore field trips, and 10 days at sea.
Requirements: regular papers, class participation, journalwriting, and a final paper.
Satisfies one semester of the Division I requirement.
Hour: TBA KING
MAST 311(F,S) Marine Ecology (Same as Biology 231) (Offered only at Mystic Seaport.)
Using the principles of evolutionary biology and experimental ecology, this course examines the processes that control the diversity, abundance and distribution
of marine organisms. Major marine communities, including estuaries, the rocky shore, sandy beaches, salt marshes, coral reefs, and the deep sea are discussed in
detail.
Format: lecture/laboratory, including coastal and near-shore field trips, 10 days offshore, and a laboratory or field research project. Requirements: two tests, a
research project, and a presentation.
Prerequisites: Biology 101 or Geosciences/Maritime Studies 104, or permission of instructor.
Satisfies one semester of the Division III requirement.
Hour: TBA CARLTON
MAST 351(F,S) Marine Policy (Same as Environmental Studies 351 and Political Science 319) (Offered only at Mystic Seaport.)
This seminar utilizes the interdisciplinary background of the other Williams-Mystic courses to examine national and international contemporary issues in our
relationship with ocean and coastal resources. This seminar takes a topical approach to the study of marine law and policy, examining fisheries, harbor develop-
ment, coastal zone management, admiralty law, law of the sea, marine pollution, and shipping.
Format: lecture, discussions, guest lectures by active professionals, and includes coastal and near-shore field trips, and 10 days offshore. Requirements: an inde-
pendent research paper, a presentation, and a final exam.
Satisfies one semester of the Division II requirement.
Hour: TBA HALL
MAST 352(F,S) America and the Sea, 1600-Present (Same as History 352) (Offered only at Mystic Seaport.) (W)
This course focuses on the history of America's relationship to the sea from the age of discovery through the heyday of merchant sail to the triumph of steam and
the challenges of the twentieth century. Readings in primary sources and secondary works on the social, economic, and diplomatic implications of maritime
activities culminate in a research paper. Topics such as shipbuilding, whaling, and fisheries are studied through museum exhibits and artifacts in the material
culture component of the course.
Format: lecture/discussion, including coastal and near-shore field trips, 10 days offshore, and an independent, primary source research paper. Requirements: an
hour test, two papers, and a final exam. Student papers will be a 5-page minimum and a 15-page minimum essay. The 15-page paper will be critiqued in three
steps, as an outline, a draft, and a final paper, with attention to reasoning and style.
Satisfies one semester of the Division II requirement.
Hour: TBA GORDINIER
MAST 402(S) Senior Seminar: Perspectives on Environmental Studies (Same as Environmental Studies 402)
(See under ENVI 402 for full description.) LYNN
MAST 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
MAST 493(F)-031, 031-494(S) Senior Thesis
MATERIALS SCIENCE STUDIES
Advisory Committee: Professors: AALBERTS, S. BOLTON, KARABINOS, D. LYNCH*, L. PARK, STRAIT**. Associate Professors: S. GOH**.
Assistant Professor: LOPES.
Materials Science is an interdisciplinary field which combines microscopic physics and chemistry in order to understand and control the properties of materials
such as plastics, semiconductors, metals, liquid crystals, and biomaterials. Williams students with an interest in the properties of materials or in pursuing careers in
materials science or a variety of engineering disciplines would benefit from following the courses in this program.
Core Course in Materials Science:
CHEM 336 Materials Chemistry
Related Courses:
201
BIOL 101 The Cell
CHEM 016 Glass and Glassblowing
CHEM 156 Organic Chemistry: Introductory Level
and CHEM 251 Organic Chemistry: Intermediate Level
CHEM 255 Organic Chemistry: Intermediate Level Special Laboratory Section
CHEM 155 Current Topics in Chemistry
or CHEM 256 Foundations of Modern Chemical Science
CHEM 335 Inorganic/Organometallic Chemistry
CHEM 348 Polymer Chemistry
CHEM 361 Physical Chemistry: Structure and Dynamics
CHEM/ENVI 364 Instrumental Methods of Analysis
CHEM 366 Physical Chemistry: Thermodynamics
GEOS 202 Mineralogy and Geochemistry
MATH 209 Differential Equations and Vector Calculus
MATH 315 Groups and Characters
PHYS 014 Electronics
PHYS 201 Electricity and Magnetism
PHYS 202 Waves and Optics
PHYS/MATH 210 Mathematical Methods for Scientists
PHYS 301 Quantum Physics
PHYS 302 Statistical Physics
PHYS 405T Electromagnetic Theory
PHYS 411T Classical Mechanics
MATHEMATICS AND STATISTICS (Div. III)
Chair, Professor CESAR E. SILVA
Professors: ADAMS, O. BEAVER**, BURGER*, R. DE VEAUX, GARRITY, S. JOHNSON, LOEPP*, MORGAN, SILVA. Associate
Professor: DEVADOSS, KLINGENBERG*, PACELLI**, STOICIU. Assistant Professors: BEAZLEY, BOTTS, MILLER*. Visiting
Assistant ProfessorofStatistics:GLUBOKOV.VisitingLecturer:PEDERSEN.
MAJOR
The major in Mathematics is designed to meet two goals: to introduce some of the central ideas in a variety of areas of mathematics and statistics,
and to develop problem-solving ability by teaching students to combine creative thinking with rigorous reasoning. Mathematics is a gateway to many career paths
including statistics, teaching, consulting, business, engineering, finance, actuarial studies and applied mathematics. Students are strongly encouraged to consult
with the department faculty on choosing courses appropriate to an individualized program of study.
REQUIREMENTS (nine courses plus colloquium)
The major in Mathematics consists of nine courses plus the colloquium requirement. Mathematics is highly cumulative, and students should plan a
route to completing the major that ensures the proper sequencing and prerequisites for all needed courses. Note that not all upper level courses are
offered every year.
Calculus (two courses)
Mathematics 104 Calculus II
Mathematics 105 or 106 Multivariable Calculus
Applied/Discrete Mathematics/Statistics (one course)
Mathematics 209 Differential Equations and Vector Calculus or
Mathematics 210 Mathematical Methods for Scientists (Same as Physics 210) or
Mathematics 251 Discrete Mathematics or
Statistics 201 Statistics and Data Analysis or
Statistics 231 Statistical Design of Experiments or
a more advanced applied/discrete/statistics course with prior department approval
Core Courses (three courses)
Mathematics 211 Linear Algebra
Mathematics 301 Real Analysis or Mathematics 305 Applied Real Analysis
Mathematics 312 Abstract Algebra or Mathematics 315 Groups and Characters or Mathematics 317 Applied Abstract Algebra
Completion (three courses plus colloquium)
Two electives from courses numbered 300 and above, or Stat 231.
Any 400-level course taken in the senior year (excluding thesis work).
Participation in the Mathematics Colloquium, in which all senior majors present and attend talks on mathematical or statistical topics of their choice.
Advanced Placement: Students who come to Williams with advanced placement will be moved up in the Mathematics major, and should consult with
faculty to be placed in the best class reflecting their experience and background. A student who places out of a course substitutes another course
numbered 200 or above in Mathematics or Statistics to complete the nine course major (this starts with the class of 2014) . Students should select
courses best suited to their preparation and goals, and consult with the department faculty concerning appropriate courses and placement. The depart-
ment reserves the right to refuse registration in any course for which the student is overqualified.
CALCULUS PLACEMENT
Recommended placement for students who have taken an Advanced Placement Examination in Calculus (AB or BC) is
BC 1, 2 or AB 2, 3 Math 104
AB 4 or 5 Math 105
BC 3, 4 or 5 Math 106
Consult with department faculty for any Calculus or Statistics placement questions. Students who have had calculus in high school, whether or not
they took the Advanced Placement Examination, are barred from Mathematics 103 unless they obtain permission from the instructor.
NOTES
Substitutions, Study Abroad, and Transfer Credit: In some cases, and with prior permission of the Mathematics and Statistics Department,
appropriate courses from other institutions or a course from another Williams department may be substituted for electives. Programs like the
"Budapest Semester in Mathematics" are recommended for majors who wish to focus on mathematics away. The department, though, normally
accommodates students who select other study away programs. The department offers its core courses in both the fall and the spring to allow
students to spend more easily a semester away.
Double Counting: No course may count towards two different majors.
Early Senior Seminar: In exceptional circumstances, with the prior permission of the department, a student may be allowed to satisfy the Senior
Major Course requirement in the junior year, provided that the student has completed at least three 300-level mathematics courses before enrol-
ling in the Senior Major Course.
202
Planning Courses: Core courses Mathematics 301, 305, 312, and 315/317 and Statistics 346 are normally offered every year. Most other
300-level topics are offered in alternate years. Topology, Complex Analysis, and second courses in real analysis and abstract algebra are normally
offered at least every other year.
Each 400-level topic is normally offered every two to four years. Students should check with the department before planning far into the future.
Course Admission: Courses are normally open to all students meeting the prerequisites. Students with questions about the level at which courses
are conducted are invited to consult department faculty.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN MATHEMATICS
The degree with honors in Mathematics is awarded to the student who has demonstrated outstanding intellectual achievement in a program of
study which extends beyond the requirements of the major. The principal considerations for recommending a student for the degree with honors
will be: Mastery of core material and skills, breadth and, particularly, depth of knowledge beyond the core material, ability to pursue independent
study of mathematics or statistics, originality in methods of investigation, and, where appropriate, creativity in research.
An honors program normally consists of two semesters (MATH/STAT 493 and 494) and a winter study (WSP 031) of independent research,
culminating in a thesis and a presentation. Under certain circumstances, the honors work can consist of coordinated study involving a one semes-
ter (MATH/STAT 493 or 494) and a winter study (WSP 030) of independent research, culminating in a "minithesis" and a presentation. At least
one semester should be in addition to the major requirements, and thesis courses do not count as 400-level senior seminars.
An honors program in actuarial studies requires significant achievement on four appropriate examinations of the Society of Actuaries and giving
a second colloquium talk. Written work is a possible component.
Highest honors will be reserved for the rare student who has displayed exceptional ability, achievement or originality. Such a student usually will
have written a thesis, or pursued actuarial honors and written a mini-thesis. An outstanding student who writes a mini-thesis, or pursues actuarial
honors and writes a paper, might also be considered. In all cases, the award of honors and highest honors is the decision of the Department.
CAREER PATHS
Graduate School in Mathematics or Statistics: Students interested in continuing their study of mathematics in graduate school should take Math-
ematics 301 and 312. Topology, complex analysis, and second courses in real analysis and abstract algebra are strongly recommended. Many of
the 400-level courses would be useful, particularly ones that involve algebra and analysis. Honors theses are encouraged. Reading knowledge of
a foreign language (French, German, or Russian) is helpful.
Students interested in continuing their study of statistics in graduate school should take Stat 201, 231, 346, a 400 level statistics course and Math
301 and 341.
Other Graduate and Professional Schools: An increasing number of graduate and professional schools require mathematics and statistics as a
prerequisite to admission or to attaining their degree. Students interested in graduate or professional training in business, medicine, economics, or
psychology are advised to find out the requirements in those fields early in their college careers.
Statistics and Actuarial Science: Students interested in statistics or actuarial science should consider Mathematics 341, Statistics courses, and
Economics 255. Additionally, students should consider taking some number of the actuarial exams given by the Society of Actuaries, which can
constitute part of an honors program in actuarial studies (see section on honors above).
Teaching: Students interested in teaching mathematics at the elementary or secondary school level should consider courses on teaching, number
theory, geometry, statistics, and practice as a tutor or teaching assistant. Winter study courses that provide a teaching practicum are also highly
recommended. Consult the Program in Teaching (Professor Susan Engel) and the Office of Career Counseling.
Applied Mathematics or Other Sciences: Students interested in applied mathematics or other sciences should consider Mathematics 209, 210,
251, 305, 315/317, and other applied electives, Statistics courses, and additional appropriate courses from outside Mathematics and Statistics,
including appropriate courses in Chemistry, Computer Science, Economics, and Physics.
Business and Finance: Students interested in careers in business or finance should consider Mathematics 373 and Statistics courses. Since these
courses address different needs, students should consult with the instructors to determine which seem to be most appropriate for individuals.
Engineering: Students interested in engineering should consider the courses for applied mathematics above, with Mathematics 209 and
305 especially recommended. Williams has exchange and joint programs with good engineering schools. Interested students should consult the
section on engineering near the beginning of the Bulletin and the Williams pre-engineering advisor for further information.
MATHEMATICS COURSES
STATISTICS COURSE LISTINGS FOLLOW THE MATHEMATICS COURSE LISTINGS.
NOTE: Course Numbers--The first digit of the three-digit label for each course roughly denotes the difficulty level of the course. The
middle digit denotes the field (0=calculus/analysis, 1=algebra/number theory, 2=geometry/topology, 3=applied, 4=probability, 5=discrete,
6=computation, 7,8=miscellaneous). The last digit occasionally indicates the level within a field, but most often simply distinguishes
amongst the courses in the field. In particular, for example, Math 211 is not "easier" than Math 251; they are simply different mathe-
matical fields (algebra vs. discrete).
There are three types of 300-level courses. There are the core courses: Math 301, 305, 312, 315, 317. There are the "precore" courses,
which do not have the core courses as prerequisites. These include Math 313, 316, 327 and others. Finally there are those courses that
have a core course as a prerequisite, such as Math 302.
MATH 101T Mathematical Analysis with Descriptive Statistics (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course is intended to develop quantitative skills for non-science majors. We will cover basic algebra from an applied point of view, including working with
formulas and solving for unknowns. We will investigate a variety of ways to model real-world problems. For example, how many handshakes away are you
from the president and how is that related to a transportation network? We will cover basic finance, including loans and annuities. Finally, we will also cover
descriptive statistics, including data analysis, computing with mean/median/variance, data display and contingency tables.
Format: tutorial/computer lab. Evaluation will be based primarily on homework, quizzes and/or exams, and computer projects.
Prerequisites: placement by a Quantitative Studies Counselor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10).
S. JOHNSON
MATH 102 Precalculus (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course prepares students for Mathematics 103, first semester calculus. The course begins with a brief review of algebra followed by a thorough treatment
of algebraic, logarithmic, and trigonometric functions from a graphical, analytical and applied point of view.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based primarily on homework, quizzes, and/or exams.
Prerequisites: placement by a Quantitative Studies Counselor or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: (expected: 15).
PEDERSEN
MATH 102T(F) Foundations in Quantitative Skills
This course will strengthen a student's foundation in quantitative reasoning in preparation for the science curriculum and QFR requirements. The material will be
at the college algebra / precalculus level, and covered in a tutorial format with students working in pairs with the professor. At the beginning of the semester, each
student will work with the professor to define goals and establish a contract defining the course of study. Students work through their contract during the semester
203
with help from the professor, their tutorial partner, and other campus resources as needed.
Format: tutorial. Grades will be based on participation and the degree to which the student has fulfilled their contract.
Prerequisites: access to the course is limited to placement by a quantitative skills counselor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Access to the course is limited to
placement by a quantitative skills counselor.
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. S. JOHNSON
MATH 103(F,S) Calculus I (Q)
Calculus permits the computation of velocities and other instantaneous rates of change by a limiting process called differentiation. The same process also solves
"max-min" problems: how to maximize profit or minimize pollution. A second limiting process, called integration, permits the computation of areas and accu-
mulations of income or medicines. The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus provides a useful and surprising link between the two processes. Subtopics include
trigonometry, exponential growth, and logarithms. This is an introductory course for students who have not seen calculus before. Students who have previously
taken a calculus course may not enroll in Mathematics 103 without the permission of instructor.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based primarily on homework, quizzes, and/or exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 102 (or demonstrated proficiency on a diagnostic test; see Mathematics 101). No enrollment limit (expected: 30).
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF, 10:00-10:50 MWF First Semester: TOWNSEND BEAZLEY
9:00-9:50 MWF Second Semester: TOWNSEND BEAZLEY
MATH 104(F,S) Calculus II (Q)
Mastery of calculus requires understanding how integration computes areas and business profit and acquiring a stock of techniques. Further methods solve equa-
tions involving derivatives ("differential equations") for population growth or pollution levels. Exponential and logarithmic functions and trigonometric and
inverse functions play an important role. This course is the right starting point for students who have seen derivatives, but not necessarily integrals, before. Stu-
dents who have received the equivalent of advanced placement of AB 4 or BC 3 may not enroll in Mathematics 104 without the permission of instructor. Students
who have higher advanced placement must enroll in Mathematics 105 or above.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based primarily on homework, quizzes, and/or exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 103 or equivalent. No enrollment limit (expected: 30).
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF, 11:00-11:50 MWF First Semester: SILVA
9:00-9:50 MWF Second Semester: TBA
MATH 105(F,S) Multivariable Calculus (Q)
Applications of calculus in mathematics, science, economics, psychology, the social sciences, involve several variables. This course extends calculus to several
variables: vectors, partial derivatives, multiple integrals. There is also a unit on infinite series, sometimes with applications to differential equations. This course is
the right starting point for students who have seen differentiation and integration before. Students with the equivalent of advanced placement of AB 4, BC 3 or
above should enroll in Mathematics 105.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based primarily on homework, quizzes, and/or exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 104 or equivalent, such as satisfactory performance on an Advanced Placement Examination. No enrollment limit (expected: 45).
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF, 11:00-11:50 MWF, 12:00-12:50 MWF First Semester: DEVADOSS
9:00-9:50 MWF, 10:00-10:50 MWF Second Semester: MORGAN
MATH 106(F) Multivariable Calculus (Q)
Applications of calculus in mathematics, science, economics, psychology, the social sciences, involve several variables. This course extends calculus to several
variables: vectors, partial derivatives and multiple integrals. The goal of the course is Stokes Theorem, a deep and profound generalization of the Fundamental
Theorem of Calculus. The difference between this course and Mathematics 105 is that Mathematics 105 covers infinite series instead of Stokes Theorem. Stu-
dents with the equivalent of BC 3 or higher should enroll in Mathematics 106, as well as students who have taken the equivalent of an integral calculus and who
have already been exposed to infinite series. For further clarification as to whether or not Mathematics 105 or Mathematics 106 is appropriate, please consult a
member of the math/stat department. Mathematics 106 satisfies any Mathematics 105 prerequisite. Credit will not be given for both Mathematics 105 and Mathe-
matics 106.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based primarily on homework, quizzes, and/or exams.
Prerequisites: BC 3 or higher or integral calculus with infinite series. No enrollment limit (expected: 45).
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF, 10:00-10:50 MWF, 11:00-11:50 MWF ADAMS
MATH 175 Mathematical Politics: Voting, Power, and Conflict (Same as INTR 160) (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
Who should have won the 2000 Presidential Election? Do any two senators really have equal power in passing legislation? How can marital assets be divided
fairly? While these questions are of interest to many social scientists, a mathematical perspective can offer a quantitative analysis of issues like these and more.
In this course, we will discuss the advantages and disadvantages of various types of voting systems and show that, in fact, any such system is flawed. We will
also examine a quantitative definition of power and the principles behind fair division. Along the way, we will enhance the critical reasoning skills necessary to
tackle any type of problem mathematical or otherwise.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based primarily on projects, homework assignments, and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 100/101/102(or demonstrated proficiency on a diagnostic test) or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 30).
PACELLI
MATH 180 The Art of Mathematical Thinking: An Introduction to the Beauty and Power of Mathematical Ideas (Not offered 2011-2012)
(Q)
What is mathematics? How can it enrich and improve your life? What do mathematicians think about and how do they go about tackling challenging ques-
tions? Most people envision mathematicians as people who solve equations or perform arithmetic. In fact, mathematics is an artistic endeavor which requires
both imagination and creativity. In this course, we will experience what this is all about by discovering various beautiful branches of mathematics while learning
life lessons that will have a positive impact on our lives. There are two meta-goals for this course: (1) a better perspective into mathematics, and (2) sharper
analytical reasoning to solve problems (both mathematical and nonmathematical).
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based primarily on projects, homework assignments, and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 100/101/102 (or demonstrated proficiency on a diagnostic test--see Mathematics 100) or permission of instructor. Enrollment
limit: 30 (expected: 30). Not open to students who have taken mathematics courses other than Mathematics 100, 101, 102, 103, 170, Statistics 101 without
permission of the instructor.
BURGER
MATH 209(S) Differential Equations (Q)
Historically, much beautiful mathematics has arisen from attempts to explain physical, chemical, biological and economic processes. A few ingenious techniques
solve a surprisingly large fraction of the associated ordinary and partial differential equations, and geometric methods give insight to many more. The mystical
Pythagorean fascination with ratios and harmonics is vindicated and applied in Fourier series and integrals. We will explore the methods, abstract structures, and
modeling applications of ordinary and partial differential equations and Fourier analysis.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on problem sets, hour tests, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 105. No enrollment limit (expected: 25). Students may not normally get credit for both Mathematics 209 and Mathematics/Physics
210.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF JOHNSON
MATH 210(S) Mathematical Methods for Scientists (Same as Physics 210) (Q)
(See under PHYS 210 for full description.) TUCKER-SMITH
MATH 211(F,S) Linear Algebra (Q)
Many social, political, economic, biological, and physical phenomena can be described, at least approximately, by linear relations. In the study of systems of
linear equations one may ask: When does a solution exist? When is it unique? How does one find it? How can one interpret it geometrically? This course develops
the theoretical structure underlying answers to these and other questions and includes the study of matrices, vector spaces, linear independence and bases, linear
transformations, determinants and inner products. Course work is balanced between theoretical and computational, with attention to improving mathematical
style and sophistication.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based primarily on homework and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 105 or 209 or 210 or 251, or Statistics 201. No enrollment limit (expected: 35).
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF, 10:00-10:50 MWF First Semester: GARRITY
10:00-10:50 MWF, 11:00-11:50 MWF Second Semester: O. BEAVER
204
MATH 251(F,S) Discrete Mathematics (Q)
As a complement to calculus, which is the study of continuous processes, this course focuses on the discrete, including finite sets and structures, their properties
and applications. Topics will include basic set theory, infinity, graph theory, logic, counting, recursion, and functions. The course serves as an introduction not only
to these and other topics but also to the methods and styles of mathematical proof.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based primarily on homework, classwork, and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 104 or Mathematics 103 with Computer Science 134 or one year of high school calculus with permission of instructor. No enrollment
limit (expected: 20).
Hour: 12:00-12:50 MWF First Semester: PEDERSEN
12:00-12:50 MWF Second Semester: PEDERSEN
MATH 285 Teaching Mathematics (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
Under faculty supervision, student-teachers will prepare and conduct scheduled weekly extra sessions for Mathematics 105, for smaller, assigned groups of
students. For these sessions they will prepare presentations, assign and grade homework, and answer questions on the course material and on the homework.
They will be available to their students outside of class, attend and assist at Mathematics 105 lectures (3 hours a week), and visit and evaluate each other's
sessions. There is a weekly meeting, for an hour or two, including organizational matters, deeper study of the mathematics discussed, and practical teaching
skills. In addition, there will be other special meetings as needed. There will be assigned readings, discussion, drills, and weekly homework or papers. This is
not a seminar on education but rather a seminar on mathematics and the mechanics of teaching it.
Format: seminar/teaching. Evaluation will be based on the overall teaching activity, responsibility, participation in the seminar and other meetings, homework
and papers.
Prerequisites: permission of instructor, preferably early in the previous Spring. Enrollment limit: 6 (expected: 4).
MORGAN
MATH 301(F) Real Analysis (Q)
Real analysis is the theory behind calculus. It is based on a precise understanding of the real numbers, elementary topology, and limits. Topologically, nice sets are
either closed (contain their limit points) or open (complement closed). You also need limits to define continuity, derivatives, integrals, and to understand se-
quences of functions.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on homework, classwork, and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 105 and 211, or permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 30).
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF MORGAN
MATH 302 Complex Analysis (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
The calculus of complex-valued functions turns out to have unexpected simplicity and power. As an example of simplicity, every complex-differentiable func-
tion is automatically infinitely differentiable. As examples of power, the so-called "residue calculus" permits the computation of "impossible" integrals, and
"conformal mapping" reduces physical problems on very general domains to problems on the round disc. The easiest proof of the Fundamental Theorem of
Algebra, not to mention the first proof of the Prime Number Theorem, used complex analysis.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based primarily on homework, classwork, and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 301 or 305. No enrollment limit (expected: 10).
MILLER
MATH 305(S) Applied Real Analysis (Q)
Real analysis or the theory of calculus--derivatives, integrals, continuity, convergence--starts with a deeper understanding of real numbers and limits. Applica-
tions in the calculus of variations or "infinite-dimensional calculus" include geodesics, harmonic functions, minimal surfaces, Hamilton's action and Lagrange's
equations, optimal economic strategies, nonEuclidean geometry, and general relativity.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based primarily on homework, classwork, and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 105 and 211, or permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 35).
Hour: 12:00-12:50 MWF STOICIU
MATH 306 Chaos and Fractals (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
This course is an introduction to chaotic dynamical systems. The topics will include bifurcations, the quadratic family, symbolic dynamics, chaos, dynamics of
linear systems, and some complex dynamics.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based on performance on homework and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 211. No enrollment limit (expected: 15).
SILVA
MATH 308T Analysis and Number Theory (Same as Mathematics 406T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
Gauss said Mathematics is the queen of the sciences and number theory the queen of mathematics; in this class we shall meet some of her subjects. We will
discuss many of the most important questions in analytic and additive number theory, with an emphasis on techniques and open problems; students are strongly
encouraged to perform original research on these problems, which can range from numerical to theoretical investigations. Topics include Additive Number
Theory (especially Goldbachs Problem and the Circle Method, the 3x+1 Problem, and More Sum Than Difference Sets), the Riemann Zeta Function and
Random Matrix Theory, and Benfords law of digit bias; other topics will be chosen by student interest. We occasionally assume some advanced results for our
investigations, though we will always try to supply heuristics and motivate the material. No number theory background is assumed, and we will discuss what-
ever material we need from probability, statistics or Fourier analysis.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: evaluation will be based on scholarship, discussions, homework, examinations, papers and presentations.
Prerequisites: for those taking 308T: at least one of 301/305/312/315/317; for those taking 406T: one of 301/305 AND one of 312/315/317. Enrollment limit:
10 (expected: 10).
MILLER
MATH 309(F) Introduction to Complex Analysis (Q)
The complex numbers are amazingly useful in mathematics, physics, engineering, and elsewhere. We'll learn the meaning of complex multiplication and expo-
nentiation, as in Euler's famous e = -1. We'll study complex functions and their power series, learn how to integrate in the complex plane, including residue
calculus, and how to map one domain to another (conformal mapping). We'll see the easiest proof of the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra, which says that every
algebraic equation has a solution as long as you allow complex numbers.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based primarily on homework, classwork, and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 105. No enrollment limit (expected: 20).
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF MORGAN
MATH 312(S) Abstract Algebra (Q)
Algebra gives us the tools to solve equations. Sets such as the integers or real numbers have special properties which make algebra work or not work according to
the circumstances. In this course, we generalize algebraic processes and the sets upon which they operate in order to better understand, theoretically, when equa-
tions can and cannot be solved. We define and study the abstract algebraic structures called groups, rings and fields, as well as the concepts of factor group,
quotient ring, homomorphism, isomorphism, and various types of field extensions.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based primarily on problem sets and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 211 and one or more of the following: Mathematics 209, 251 or Statistics 201, or permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (ex-
pected: 25).
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF TOWNSEND BEAZLEY
MATH 313 Introduction to Number Theory (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
The study of numbers dates back thousands of years, and is fundamental in mathematics. In this course, we will investigate both classical and modern questions
about numbers. In particular, we will explore the integers, and examine issues involving primes., divisibility, and congruences. We will also look at the ideas of
number and prime in more general settings, and consider fascinating questions that are simple to understand, but can be quite difficult to answer.
Format: lecture. Requirements/Evaluation: evaluation will be based primarily on performance on homework, projects, and exams
Prerequisites: Mathematics 211 or 251, or permission of instructor. Students cannot enroll in both Mathematics 313 and 313T. No enrollment limit (expected:
20)
BURGER
205
MATH 314T(S) (formerly 414) Galois Theory (Q)
In the 1830's Evariste Galois developed a beautiful theory relating the structure of field extensions to the structure of a group. By understanding this relationship,
one can often translate a problem about field extensions to a question about groups that is easier to answer. In this course, we will study field extensions and Galois
Theory. We'll also see some famous applications including the insolvability of the quintic.
Format: tutorial. Evaluation will be based on homeworks, exams, and presentations.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 312 or Mathematics 317. Mathematics 315 is not a prerequisite. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). If course is oversubscribed
admission will be determined by questionnaire.
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. PACELLI
MATH 315(F) Groups and Characters (Q)
An introduction to group theory with emphasis on topics having applications in the physical sciences; greater attention is paid to examples and to the application
of theorems than to the more difficult proofs. Topics include symmetry groups, group structure (especially properties related to order), representations and charac-
ters over the real and complex fields, space groups (chemistry), matrix groups (physics).
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based primarily on performance on problem assignments and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 211. No enrollment limit (expected: 30).
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR STOICIU
MATH 316 Protecting Information: Applications of Abstract Algebra and Quantum Physics (Same as Physics 316) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(Q)
Living in the early decades of the information age, we find ourselves depending more and more on codes that protect messages against either noise or eaves-
dropping. We begin this course by studying the history of this subject, including, for example, the story of the enigma code from World War II. We then
examine some of the most important codes currently being used to protect information, including linear codes, which in addition to being mathematically
elegant are the most practical codes for error correction, and the RSA public key cryptographic scheme, popular nowadays for internet applications. Looking
ahead by a decade or more, we show how a "quantum computer" could crack any RSA code in short order, and how quantum cryptographic devices will
achieve security through the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
Evaluation will be based on homework sets and exams.
Prerequisites: Physics 210 or Mathematics 211 (possibly concurrent) or permission of instructors. (students not satisfying the course prerequisites but who have
completed Mathematics 209 or Mathematics 251 are particularly encouraged to ask to be admitted.)
LOEPP and WOOTTERS
MATH 317 Applied Abstract Algebra (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
The abstract algebraic structures called groups, rings and fields have proven to have surprisingly many applications. For example, groups have been used to
build secure cryptosystems and to study the symmetry of molecules. We will study the abstract properties of groups, rings and fields and then study several
applications of this theory. Possible topics include cryptography, puzzles, error correcting codes, computer software applications, symmetry, tiling, networks,
and grobner bases.
Evaluation will be based primarily on homework and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 211 and one or more of the following: Mathematics 209, 251 or Statistics 201 or permission of the instructor.
LOEPP
MATH 318T Numerical Problem Solving (Same as Computer Science 318T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
In the last twenty years computers have profoundly changed the work in numerical mathematics (in areas from linear algebra and calculus to differential equa-
tions and probability). The main goal of this tutorial is to learn how to use computers to do quantitative science. We will explore concepts and ideas in mathe-
matics and science using numerical methods and computer programming. We will use specialized software, including Mathematica and Matlab. Computer
programming skills are not required.
Format: Tutorial. Evaluation will be based on homework, classwork, and exams.
Prerequisite: Mathematics 105/106 and Mathematics 211 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). This tutorial is a quantitative/for-
mal reasoning course. Not available for the Gaudino option.
STOICIU
MATH 319(F) Integrative Bioinformatics, Genomics, and Proteomics Lab (Same as Biology 319, Chemistry 319, Computer Science 319 and
Physics 319) (Q)
(See under BIOL 319 for full description.) BANTA
This course does not count towards the major in Mathematics.
MATH 321(S) Knot Theory (Q)
Take a piece of string, tie a knot in it, and glue the ends together. The result is a knotted circle, known as a knot. For the last 100 years, mathematicians have studied
knots, asking such questions as, "Given a nasty tangled knot, how do you tell if it can be untangled without cutting it open?" Some of the most interesting
advances in knot theory have occurred in the last ten years.
This course is an introduction to the theory of knots. Among other topics, we will cover methods of knot tabulation, surfaces applied to knots, polynomials
associated to knots, and relationships between knot theory and chemistry and physics. In addition to learning the theory, we will look at open problems in the field.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based on problem sets, midterms, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 211 or permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 25).
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR ADAMS
MATH 322(F) Differential Geometry (Q)
It is easy to convince oneself that the shortest distance from equatorial Africa to equatorial South America is along the equator. This illustrates the fact that
"straight lines" on a sphere are described by so-called great circles. It is somewhat more difficult to describe the shortest path between two points on the surface of,
for example, a doughnut, reflecting the fact that a doughnut curves in space in a more complicated way than the sphere. Differential geometry is the mathematical
language describing these curvature properties. In this course we will learn this language and use it to answer many interesting questions. We will also develop the
tools needed to begin the more advanced study of "Riemannian" geometry, which describes (among other things) Einstein's Relativity Theory.
Topics: Curves in space, the Frenet-Serret Theorem, the first and second fundamental forms, geodesics, principal/Gaussian/mean/normal curvatures, the Theore-
ma Egregium, the Gauss-Bonnet formula and Theorem, introduction to n-dimensional Riemannian manifolds/metrics/curvature.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based primarily on problem sets, midterms and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 211. No enrollment limit (expected: 25).
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR STOICIU
MATH 324 Topology (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
Topology is the study of when one geometric object can be continuously deformed and twisted into another object. Determining when two objects are topologi-
cally the same is incredibly difficult and is still the subject of a tremendous amount of research, including current work on the Poincare Conjecture, one of the
million-dollar millennium-prize problems. The first part of the course on "Point-set Topology" establishes a framework based on "open sets" for studying
continuity and compactness in very general spaces. The second part on "Homotopy Theory" develops refined methods for determining when objects are the
same. We will prove for example that you cannot twist a basketball into a doughnut.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on homework, classwork, and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 301, or permission of instructor and Mathematics 305 or 312. Not open to students who have taken Mathematics 323. No enroll-
ment limit (expected: 20).
O. BEAVER
MATH 341 Probability (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
While probability began with a study of games, it has grown to become a discipline with numerous applications throughout mathematics and the sciences.
Drawing on gaming examples for motivation, this course will present axiomatic and mathematical aspects of probability. Included will be discussions of ran-
dom variables, expectation, independence, laws of large numbers, and the Central Limit Theorem. Many interesting and important applications will also be
206
presented, including some from coding theory, number theory and nuclear physics.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based primarily on homework, classwork, and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 211 or 251 or permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 20).
MILLER
MATH 354 Graph Theory (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
Graph theory is the theory of mathematical objects constructed by connecting a set of edges at a set of vertices. They have applications in a variety of fields
including biology, chemistry, physics, operations research, and computer science, including networks and the web. We will develop the theory of graphs, in-
cluding undirected and directed graphs, complete graphs, multipartite graphs, planar graphs, subgraphs, graph enumeration, colorings of graphs and embed-
dings of graphs. We will also consider applications.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based primarily on homework and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 211. Enrollment limit: none (expected: 25).
ADAMS
MATH 357T(S) Phylogenetics (Q)
Phylogenetics is the analysis and construction of information trees based on shared characteristics. The foundational problem asks, given some data from objects,
how can a tree be constructed which shows the proper relationships between the objects? This is a beautiful subject with a tremendous amount of cutting-edge
research, relating powerful ideas from statistics, computer science, biology, and mathematics, having a wide range of applications, from literature, to linguistics, to
visual graphics. This course is designed to introduce fundamental ideas of this subject from a mathematical viewpoint, touching and expanding upon the interests
of the enrolled students.
Format: tutorial. Evaluation will be based on exams, participation, and projects.
Prerequisites: BIOL 202 or CSCI 256 or MATH 211 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference at the discretion of the instructor.
Not available for Gaudino option.
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. DEVADOSS
MATH 361(F) Theory of Computation (Same as Computer Science 361) (Q)
(See under CSCI 361 for full description.) MURTAGH
MATH 365 Set Theory (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
Set theory is the traditional foundational language for all of mathematics. We will be discussing the Zermelo-Fraenkel axioms, including the Axiom of Choice
and the Continuum Hypothesis, basic independence results and, if time permits, the Godel's Incompleteness Theorem. At one time, these issues tore at the
foundations of mathematics. They are still vital for understanding the nature of mathematical truth.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based primarily on performance on homework and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 105 or 106 and Mathematics 211. Enrollment limit: none (expected: 20).
GARRITY
MATH 373 Investment Mathematics (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
Over the years financial instruments have grown from stocks and bonds to numerous derivatives, such as options to buy and sell at future dates under certain
conditions. The 1997 Nobel Prize in Economics was awarded to Robert Merton and Myron Schloles for their Black-Scholes model of the value of financial
instruments. This course will study deterministic and random models, futures, options, the Black-Scholes Equation, and additional topics.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on homework, classwork, and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 211 or permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 20).
MORGAN
MATH 375(S) Game Theory (Q)
Game theory is the study of interacting decision makers involved in a conflict of interest. We investigate outcomes, dynamics, and strategies as players rationally
pursue objective goals and interact according to specific rules. Game theory has been used to illuminate political, ethical, economical, social, psychological, and
evolutionary phenomenon. We will examine concepts of equilibrium, stable strategies, imperfect information, repetition, cooperation, utility, and decision.
Prerequisites: two MATH/STAT courses at the 200 or higher level, or permission of the instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 30).
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF S. JOHNSON
MATH 397(F), 398(S), 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
Directed independent study in Mathematics.
Prerequisites: permission of the department.
Hour: TBA Members of the Department
MATH 402 Measure Theory and Probability (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
The study of measure theory arose from the study of stochastic (probabilistic) systems. Applications of measure theory lie in biology, chemistry, physics as well
as in economics. In this course, we develop the abstract concepts of measure theory and ground them in probability spaces. Included will be Lebesgue and Borel
measures, measurable functions (random variables). Lebesgue integration, distributions, independence, convergence and limit theorems. This material provides
good preparation for graduate studies in mathematics, statistics and economics.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based primarily on performance on homework assignments and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 301 or 305 or permission of instructor.
O. BEAVER
MATH 404(S) Ergodic Theory (Q)
Ergodic theory studies the probabilistic behavior of dynamical systems as they evolve through time. This course will be an introduction to the basic notions in
ergodic theory. The course starts with an introduction to measure theory: (sigma-algebras, measurable sets and measurable transformations and Lebesgue in-
tegration). Then we will cover ergodic, weak mixing, mixing, and Bernoulli transformations, and transformations admitting and not admitting an invariant
measure. There will be an emphasis on specific examples such as group rotations, the binary odometer transformations, and rank-one constructions. We will
also cover some notions from topological dynamics.
For the textbook: http://www.ams.org/bookstoregetitem/item=STML42
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based on presentations, problem assignments and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 301 or 305 or permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 10).
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF SILVA
MATH 406T Analysis and Number Theory (Same as Mathematics 308T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
(See under MATH 308T for full description.) MILLER
MATH 411 Commutative Algebra (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
Commutative algebra has applications ranging from algebraic geometry to coding theory. For example, one can use commutative algebra to create error cor-
recting codes. It is perhaps most often used, however, to study curves and surfaces in different spaces. To understand these structures, one must study polyno-
mial rings over fields. This course will be an introduction to commutative algebra. Possible topics include polynomial rings, localizations, primary decomposi-
tion, completions, and modules.
Evaluation will be based primarily on homework and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 312 or 317 or permission of the instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 15).
LOEPP
MATH 418 Linear Algebraic Groups (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
Linear algebraic groups lie at the heart of many pure and applied subfields of mathematics and have become fundamental tools in a wide variety of active areas
of research. They are both groups and algebraic varieties, and thus lie on the boundary between classical algebra and algebraic geometry in an obvious sense. As
we dig deeper into their structure, however, we will uncover surprising connections to representation theory, combinatorics, and the geometry of Euclidean
207
space. The course will begin with an introduction to affine algebraic varieties, their topology, and their morphisms (assuming no previous experience with
commutative algebra), using the linear algebraic groups as our main class of examples. Topics to be covered after laying the requisite algebro-geometric
groundwork may include Borel subgroups, Grassmannians and flag varieties, Weyl groups, the Bruhat decomposition, Lie algebras, root systems, Coxeter
groups, Dynkin diagrams, and reflection groups.
Format: lecture. Requirements: evaluation will be based primarily on homework and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 312 or 317 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: none (expected: 15).
BEAZLEY
MATH 419(S) Algebraic Number Theory (Q)
We all know that integers can be factored into prime numbers and that this factorization is essentially unique. In more general settings, it often still makes sense to
factor numbers into "primes," but the factorization is not necessarily unique! This surprising fact was the downfall of Lam's attempted proof of Fermat's Last
Theorem in 1847. Although a valid proof was not discovered until over 150 years later, this error gave rise to a new branch of mathematics: algebraic number
theory. In this course, we will study factorization and other number-theoretic notions in more abstract algebraic settings, and we will see a beautiful interplay
between groups, rings, and fields.
Format: lecture/seminar. Evaluation will be based primarily on projects, homework assignments, and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 312, or permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 15).
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR PACELLI
MATH 433(F) Mathematical Modeling and Control Theory (Q)
Mathematical modeling is concerned with translating a natural phenomenon into a mathematical form. In this abstract form the underlying principles of the
phenomenon can be carefully examined and real-world behavior can be interpreted in terms of mathematical shapes. The models we investigate include feedback
phenomena, phase locked oscillators, multiple population dynamics, reaction-diffusion equations, shock waves, morphogenesis, and the spread of pollution,
forest fires, and diseases. Often the natural phenomenon has some aspect we can control--such as how much pollution, electric charge, or chemotherapeutic
agent we put into a river, circuit, or cancer patient. We will investigate how to operate such controls in order to achieve a specific goal or optimize some interpreta-
tion of performance. We will employ tools from the fields of differential equations and dynamical systems. The course is intended for students in the mathemati-
cal, physical, and chemical sciences, as well as for students who are seriously interested in the mathematical aspects of physiology, economics, geology, biology,
and environmental studies.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based primarily on performance of problem sets and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 209 or Physics 210 and Mathematics 301 or 305 or permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 12).
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF S. JOHNSON
MATH 437(F) Electricity and Magnetism for Mathematicians (Q)
Maxwell's equations are four simple formulas, linking electricity and magnetism, that are among the most profound equations ever discovered. These equations
led to the prediction of radio waves, to the realization that a description of light is also contained in these equations and to the discovery of the special theory of
relativity. In fact, almost all current descriptions of the fundamental laws of the universe are deep generalizations of Maxwell's equations. Perhaps even more
surprising is that these equations and their generalizations have led to some of the most important mathematical discoveries (where there is no obvious physics) of
the last 25 years. For example, much of the math world was shocked at how these physics generalizations became one of the main tools in geometry from the
1980s until today. It seems that the mathematics behind Maxwell is endless. This will be an introduction to Maxwell's equations, from the perspective of a
mathematician.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based primarily on performance on homework and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 301 or Mathematics 305, and Mathematics 312 or Mathematics 315, or permission of instructor. Not open to students who have taken
Mathematics 337. No physics background required. No enrollment limit (expected: 20).
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF GARRITY
MATH W30 Senior Project
Taken by candidates for honors in Mathematics other than by thesis route.
MATH 493(F)-W31-494(S) Senior Honors Thesis
Each student carries out an individual research project under the direction of a faculty member that culminates in a thesis. See description under The Degree
with Honors in Mathematics.
MATH 499(F,S) Senior Colloquium
Meets every week for two hours both fall and spring. Senior majors must participate at least one hour a week. This colloquium is in addition to the regular four
semester-courses taken by all students.
Hour: 1:00-2:00 MW Members of the Department
STATISTICS COURSES
STAT 101(F,S) Elementary Statistics and Data Analysis (Q)
It is nearly impossible to live in the world today without being inundated with data. Even the most popular newspapers feature statistics to catch the eye of the
passerby, and sports broadcasters overwhelm the listener with arcane statistics. How do we learn to recognize dishonest or even unintentionally distorted repre-
sentations of quantitative information? How are we to reconcile two medical studies with seemingly contradictory conclusions? How many observations do we
need in order to make a decision? It is the purpose of this course to develop an appreciation for and an understanding of the interpretation of data. We will become
familiar with the standard tools of statistical inference including the t-test, the analysis of variance, and regression, as well as exploratory data techniques. Applica-
tions will come from the real world that we all live in.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based primarily on performances on quizzes and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 100/101/102 (or demonstrated proficiency on a diagnostic test; see Mathematics 100). Students who have had calculus, and potential
Mathematics majors should consider taking Statistics 201 instead. Enrollment limit: 50 (expected: 40). Not open for major credit to junior or senior Mathematics
majors.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF, 12:00-12:50 MWF irst Semester: GLUBOKOV
10:00-10:50 MWF Second Semester: GLUBOKOV
STAT 201(F,S) Statistics and Data Analysis (Q)
Statistics can be viewed as the art (science?) of turning data into information. Real world decision-making, whether in business or science is often based on data
and the perceived information it contains. Sherlock Holmes, when prematurely asked the merits of a case by Dr. Watson, snapped back, "Data, data, data! I can't
make bricks without clay." In this course, we will study the basic methods by which statisticians attempt to extract information from data. These will include
many of the standard tools of statistical inference such as the t-test, analysis of variance and linear regression as well as exploratory and graphical data analysis
techniques.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based primarily on performance on quizzes and exams.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 105 or equivalent. Students without any calculus background should consider Statistics 101 instead. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected:
40).
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR First Semester: DE VEAUX
9:00-9:50 MWF, 11:20-12:35 TR Second Semester: GLUBOKOV, DE VEAUX
STAT 231(F) Statistical Design of Experiments (Q)
What does statistics have to do with designing and carrying out experiments? The answer is, surprisingly perhaps, a great deal. In this course, we will study how to
design an experiment with the fewest number of observations possible to achieve a certain power. We will also learn how to analyze and present the resulting data
and draw conclusions. After reviewing basic statistical theory and two sample comparisons, we cover one and two-way ANOVA and (fractional) factorial de-
signs extensively. The culmination of the course will be a project where each student designs, carries out, analyzes, and presents an experiment of interest to him
or her. Throughout the course, we will use the free statistical software program R to carry out the statistical analysis.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based primarily on performance on exams, homework and the final project.
Prerequisites: a previous introductory course in statistics and no fear of simple computer programming and calculus. No enrollment limit (expected: 10).
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF GLUBOKOV
208
STAT 346(F) Regression and Forecasting (Q)
This course focuses on the building of empirical models through data in order to predict, explain, and interpret scientific phenomena. The main focus will be on
multiple regression as a technique for doing this. We will study both the mathematics of regression analysis and its applications, including a discussion of the
limits to such analyses. The applications will range from a broad range of disciplines, such as predicting the waiting time between eruptions of the Old Faithful
geyser, forecasting housing prices or modeling the probability of O-ring failure at Space Shuttle launches.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based primarily on performance on exams, homework, and a project.
Prerequisites: Statistics 101 or 201, and Mathematics 105 and 211; or permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 20).
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR DE VEAUX
STAT 355 Multivariate Statistical Analysis (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
In elementary statistics courses, one typically studies how to analyze data and make inferences when only one population variable is of interest. But what if one
wanted to make inferences about more than one variable in the population? In such cases, elementary statistical methods might not apply. In this course, we
study the tools and the intuition that are necessary to analyze and describe such data sets. Specific topics covered will include the multivariate normal distribu-
tion, multivariate analysis of variance, principal component analysis, factor analysis, canonical correlation, and clustering.
Format: lecture. Requirements: evaluation will be based on homework and exams.
Prerequisites: Statistics 201 and Mathematics 211. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 10).
BOTTS
STAT 397(F), 398(S), 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
Directed independent study in Statistics.
Prerequisites: permission of the department.
Members of the Department
STAT 442(S) Computational Statistics and Data Mining (Q)
In both science and industry today, the ability to collect and store data can outpace our ability to analyze it. Traditional techniques in statistics are often unable to
cope with the size and complexity of today's data bases and data warehouses. New methodologies in Statistics have recently been developed, designed to address
these inadequacies, emphasizing visualization, exploration and empirical model building at the expense of traditional hypothesis testing. In this course we will
examine these new techniques and apply them to a variety of real data sets using Silicon Graphics workstations.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based primarily on homeworks and projects.
Prerequisites: Statistics 346 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 10. (expected:10).
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR DE VEAUX
STAT 493(F)-W31-494(S) Senior Honors Thesis
Each student carries out an individual research project under the direction of a faculty member that culminates in a thesis. See description under The Degree with
Honors in Mathematics.
Members of the Department
MUSIC (Div. I)
Chair, Professor M. JENNIFER BLOXAM
Professors: BLOXAM, E. D. BROWN**, KECHLEY*, W. A. SHEPPARD*. Associate Professors: E. GOLLIN, M. HIRSCH, PEREZ VELAZ-
QUEZ. Visiting Assistant Professors: OKIGBO, ROBERTS. Lyell B. Clay Artist in Residence and Director of Jazz Activities/Senior Lecturer in
Music: JAFFE. Artist in Residence in Choral and Vocal Activities/Lecturer in Music: B. WELLS. Artist in Residence in Orchestral and Instrumental
Activities/Lecturer in Music: FELDMAN. Artists in Residence: STEVENSON (piano), KURKOWICZ** (violin). Instructors in Music: DIL-
THEY, EDWIN LAWRENCE, PRINDLE (musicianship skills labs) Ensemble Directors & Studio Instructors: BERGERON (Brass Ensemble,
trumpet), CAPRONI (Marching Band), GENOVARUDIAKOV (violin), GOLD (Percussion Ensemble, percussion), HEBERT (flute), JENKINS
(oboe), KIBLER (voice), EDWIN LAWRENCE (piano, organ, harpsichord), ERIK LAWRENCE (jazz saxophone), MARTULA (Clarinet Choir,
clarinet), MEEHAN (jazz drums), MORSE (harp), NAFZIGER (voice), NAZARENKO (jazz piano), PARKE (cello), PHELPS (classical and jazz
guitar), RYERPARKE (voice), SHARPE (jazz bass, jazz coach), SUNGARIAN (horn), M. WALT (voice), S. WALT (Woodwind Chamber
Music, bassoon) WHEELER (trombone, jazz coach), WOOLWEAVER (viola, violin), WRIGHT (piano), ZIMMERMAN (bass), Visiting En-
semble Directors: MICHELIN (Zambezi), MILLER (Symphonic Winds).
MAJOR
Sequence Courses
Music 103, 104 Music Theory and Musicianship I
Music 201, 202 Music Theory and Musicianship II
Music 207, 208, 209 Music in History I, Music in History II, and Music in History III
Music 402 Senior Seminar in Music
Elective Courses
An additional two semester courses in music, to be selected from the following:
Group A: any 106-134, 136, 138, 210T, 220, 230-234, 240, 241, and 246T courses. The department reserves the right to refuse registration in any course for
which the student is determined to be over-prepared.
Group B: 203T, 204T, 211, 212, 213, 215, 216, 217, 221T, 223T, 245T, 301, 305, 306, 308, 325, 326, 407, 408, 427, 428.
Department strongly recommends that students elect at least one course from each group.
It is strongly recommended that prospective majors complete 103, 104, 201, 202 and 207 by the end of the sophomore year.
Performance and Concert Requirements
Music majors are encouraged to participate in departmental ensembles throughout their careers at Williams; i.e., for eight semesters. Majors are required to
participate in departmental ensembles for at least four semesters. Under special circumstances the student may petition the music faculty to allow this requirement
to be met in an alternative way.
Foreign Languages
Music majors are strongly urged to take courses in at least one foreign language while at Williams.
Musicianship Skills
Music majors are strongly urged to maintain, refine and improve their musicianship skills, such as sight-singing, score reading, melodic and harmonic dicta-
tion, and keyboard proficiency, throughout their entire Williams career.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN MUSIC
Three routes provide the opportunity for honors or highest honors consideration in the Music major:
a. Composition: A Composition thesis must include one major work completed during the senior year, a portfolio of smaller works completed during the
junior and senior years, and a 10- to 15-page discussion of the student's work or analysis of a major 20th Century work.
b. Performance: A Performance thesis must include an honors recital given during the spring of the senior year and a 15- to 20-page discussion of one or
more of the works performed. The student's general performance career will also be considered in determining honors.
c. History, Theory and Analysis, or Ethnomusicology: A written Historical, Theoretical/Analytical, or Ethnomusicological thesis between 65 and 80 pages
in length and an oral presentation based on the thesis is required. A written thesis should offer new insights based on original research.
In order for a thesis proposal to be approved a student must have at least a 3.3 GPA in Music courses (this GPA must be maintained in order to receive honors),
and must have demonstrated outstanding ability and experience through coursework and performance in the proposed thesis area. Students are encouraged to
seek the advice of their potential thesis advisor early in the junior year and no later than the first month of the second semester. A 1 to 2 page proposal written in
consultation with the faculty advisor must be received by the Music chair by the end of spring break.
Honors candidates must enroll in Music 493(F)-W31-494(S) during their senior year. A student who is highly qualified for honors work, but is unable to
pursue a year-long project for compelling reasons, may petition the department for permission to pursue a WS/one-semester thesis. The standards for evaluating
such a thesis remain the same. Completed thesis is due by April 15.
209
LESSONS
Courses involving individual vocal or instrumental instruction involve extra fees which are subsidized by the department. (See Music 251-258 and Studies in
the Musical Art 325, 326, 427, 428). For further information check the Music Department webpage and contact the Department of Music.
STUDY ABROAD
Music majors considering study abroad should meet with the department chair well in advance in order to determine whether it will be possible to complete the
requirements for the major. Study abroad courses are not accepted as substitutes for the specific required major courses. However, they may qualify as electives
toward the major if approved by the department.
________________________________
Students considering a major in music should enroll in Music 103 and 104.
Descriptions of the following courses are listed numerically within the course listings.
THEORY AND MUSICIANSHIP
MUS 103 Music Theory and Musicianship I
MUS 104 Music Theory and Musicianship I
MUS 201 Music Theory and Musicianship II
MUS 202 Music Theory and Musicianship II
MUS 245 Music Analysis: Music with Text
MUS 301 An Introduction to Modal and Tonal Counterpoint
MUS 308 Orchestration and Instrumentation
COMPOSITION (See the first course number in the sequence for course description.)
MUS 203T, 204T Composition I and II
MUS 305, 306, 407, 408 Composition III, IV, V and VI
SPECIAL STUDIES IN THE MUSICAL ART (See the first course number in the sequence for course description.)
MUS 325, 326, 427, 428 Musical Studies
100-LEVEL COURSES
MUS 101(F) Listening to Music: An Introduction to the Western Classical Tradition
Intended for non-major students with little or no formal training.
When you listen to music--on the radio, on your Ipod, at a concert--how much do you really hear? This course aims to refine students' listening skills so as to
enhance their understanding and enjoyment of music, as well as to provide an introduction to the major composers, musical styles and genres of the Western
classical tradition. We will study music from the Baroque, Classical, Romantic, and Modern periods, including works by composers such as Bach, Mozart,
Beethoven, Brahms, Mahler, and Stravinsky. Genres to be covered include the symphony, string quartet, sonata, opera, song, and choral music. Attendance at
selected concerts on campus required.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based on quizzes and tests and a final exam, and two concert reports.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 40). If overenrolled, preference will be given to first-years and sophomores and any student who expresses a
strong interest in the course.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF M. HIRSCH
MUS 102 Fundamentals of Music (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
This course seeks to define and describe the fundamental nature of music in Western society. Through a variety of exercises and projects, students will develop
an understanding of basic musical rudiments such as pitch, scales, triads, rhythm, meter, and notation materials that form the foundation of Western art and
popular musics. By the end of the course, students will have begun the study of basic four-part harmony. All theoretical concepts will be reinforced through the
development of appropriate active-performance skills, including sight-singing, dictation, and keyboard performance. In addition, students will explore various
topics such as philosophies of music (including aesthetics), music cognition and perception, and acoustics, and their relationships to defining what music is,
what music "means," and how and why music is valuable. Students will be expected to complete weekly argumentative papers reacting to the various philo-
sophical readings; as the semester progresses, these reaction papers will increase in both length and depth, in preparation for a final project of each student's
choice. Students will receive frequent and detailed critiques (either in the form of written comments or verbal discussions) of each writing assignment.
Format: two weekly lectures. Evaluation will be based on written and performance quizzes, written papers, and a final research project.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 16 (expected: 10). Preference given to students with music-reading proficiency and demonstrated performance experience.
MUS 103(F) Music Theory and Musicianship I
Music 103 and 104 are designed for potential majors and for students with strong instrumental or vocal backgrounds. Although there is no prerequisite for Music
103, students are expected to have some knowledge of musical rudiments, reading proficiency in at least one clef, and ideally have some comfort reading both
bass and treble clefs. A short diagnostic exam will be administered at the first class meeting of Music 103 to assess students' skills and background, and determine
if a student requires any additional remedial work to complement and fortify course work during the early weeks of the semester. Students with a strong back-
ground in music theory may take a placement exam during First Days to see whether they can pass out of one or both semesters. Music 103 and 104 are required
for the music major.
Music 103 presents the materials, structures and procedures of tonal music, with an emphasis on the harmonic and contrapuntal practice of the baroque and
classical periods (ca. 1650-1825).
Music 103 explores triadic harmony, voice leading, and counterpoint with an emphasis on the chorale style of J.S. Bach and his predecessors. Keyboard harmony
and figured bass exercises, sight singing, dictation, analysis of repertoire, written exercises and emulation projects will develop both an intellectual and an aural
understanding of music of the period. Projects include the harmonization of chorale melodies, the arrangement of classical period minuets and the composition of
a dice game minuet.
Format: lecture two days a week; a conference meeting one day a week; ear training/musicianship skills lab meeting twice a week. Evaluation will be based on
weekly written work, written and keyboard quizzes, and midyear and final projects. Must be taken as a graded course.
Enrollment limit: 32 (expected: 32). Preference to potential majors, and those with strongest musicianship skills.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR, 11:20-12:35 TR Labs: 9-9:50 MWF, 10-10:50 MWF, 11-11:50 MWF, 12-12:50 MWF
GOLLIN (lectures); GOLLIN, LAWRENCE and PRINDLE (conference/labs)
MUS 104(S) Music Theory and Musicianship I
Music 104 continues the practical musicianship work of Music 103, while expanding the scope of harmonic topics to include seventh chords and chromatic
harmony. Music 104 further explores the transformation of chorale harmony in contrapuntal works of the eighteenth century. Projects include the composition
and performance of preludes, fugues and organ chorale preludes on baroque models.
Format: lecture two days a week; a conference meeting one day a week; ear training/keyboard skills lab meeting twice a week. Evaluation will be based on
weekly written work, written and keyboard quizzes, and midyear and final projects. Must be taken as a graded course.
Prerequisite: Music 103. Enrollment limit: 24 (expected: 24). Preference given to potential Music majors and those with the strongest musicianship skills.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR Lab: 9-9:50 MWF, 10-10:50 MWF, 11-11:50 MWF, GOLLIN (lecture); GOLLIN, LAWRENCE (conference/labs)
NOTE: Prerequisites for Music 106 through 141
For each course, varying degrees of musical experience are necessary. Students may consult with the instructor or simply attend the first class meeting. (Suc-
cessful completion of Music 101 automatically qualifies the student for Music 106 through 141.)
MUS 106 Opera (Not offered 2011-2012)
An introduction to the history of opera, from the genre's birth c. 1600 to the present. At various points in its 400-year development, opera has been considered
the highest synthesis of the arts, a vehicle for the social elite, or a form of popular entertainment. Opera's position in European cultural history will be a primary
focus of our inquiry. We will also study the intriguing relationship between text and music, aspects of performance and production, and the artistic and social
conventions of the operatic world. The multidimensional nature of opera invites a variety of analytical and critical perspectives, including those of music analy-
sis, literary studies, feminist interpretations, and political and sociological approaches. Works to be considered include operas by Monteverdi, Lully, Charpenti-
er, Handel, Gluck, Mozart, Rossini, Donizetti, Verdi, Wagner, Bizet, Puccini, Strauss, Berg, Britten, Glass, and Adams. This course will involve a trip to the
210
Metropolitan Opera.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on a midterm, a brief paper, an 8-page paper, and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 35 (expected: 25).
W. A. SHEPPARD
MUS 108 The Concerto (Not offered 2011-2012)
More than any other instrumental genre in music, the concerto by its nature tells stories. As in opera, the concerto focuses on a protagonist, usually a single
soloist; the interest of the work lies in the dynamic musical interplay between that individual and the larger ensemble. This course will explore the development
of the concerto, from its origins in 17th-century Italy through the 20th century. We will focus on the musical means by which composers of the Baroque,
Classical, Romantic, and Modern periods, working in a wide variety of styles, created compelling musical narratives. We will also consider the cultural contexts
within which concerti are composed and performed, giving particular attention to the persona of the virtuoso as exemplified by such figures as Bach, Mozart,
Beethoven, Clara Schumann, Liszt, Paganini, Horowitz, and Marta Argerich. Works to be studied will include several concerti to be performed on campus by
the Berkshire Symphony with professional and student soloists.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on short quizzes and papers, a midterm and a final exam, and attendance and participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15).
BLOXAM
MUS 109 Symphony (Not offered 2011-2012)
A musical and cultural historical survey of music for the symphony orchestra as observed in the late-eighteenth through the twentieth century. Genres to be
explored include the symphony, concerto, tone poem, and concert overture, by composers such as Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven, Berlioz, Liszt, Brahms, Mahler,
Richard Strauss, Ravel, Bartok, Crumb, Hailstork, and Joan Tower. Emphasis on listening.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based on two hour-exams or quizzes from listening assignments and readings, one short paper and a final exam.
No prerequisites. No enrollment limit (expected: 25).
MUS 110 Chamber Music (Not offered 2011-2012)
A musical and cultural historical survey of music for small instrumental ensembles from the early-eighteenth through the twentieth centuries. Defined for this
course as ensemble music for from three to eight players, we will consider string quartets, works for strings and piano, and examples of wind and brass chamber
music by Bach, Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven, Brahms, Webern, Bartok, Beach, Hailstork and many others. Several live performances will be presented in class
by faculty and visiting chamber musicians.
Format: lecture, twice per week. Evaluation will be based on several listening quizzes or short exams, a paper based on research or listening, and a final exam
No prerequisites. No enrollment limit (expected: 25).
MUS 111 Popular Music: Revolutions in the History of Rock (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course will trace the history of rock music from the 1950s to the present, focusing on those musicians who revolutionized the genre in various periods.
Such "revolutions" are discovered in the use of new sounds and musical forms, in the relationship between lyrics and musical setting, and in the conception of
rock's role in society. Three objectives will underpin our studies: to develop listening skills with music that one often hears, but perhaps rarely listens to intently;
to determine in what ways popular music can be interpreted as reflecting its cultural context; and to encounter the work of several of the more innovative
musicians in the history of rock. Finally we will interrogate our own activities by asking why the study of the "merely popular" should be pursued in a liberal
arts education, whether new approaches can be developed for this endeavor, and what makes music "popular."
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on two tests, two papers, and a final exam.
No prerequisites or musical background assumed. Enrollment limit: 80 (expected: 80). Preference given to juniors and sophomores.
W. A. SHEPPARD
MUS 113(F) Exploring 20th Century American Experimentalism: The New York School Composers and Visual Artists (Same as American
Studies 113)
In the mid 20th century, American composers and visual artists in downtown New York convened around 8th street to discuss and share a common vision of
letting free the unconscious mind to break past the conventions of European formalism. Were these the fresh ideas of a new generation of young composers and
artists or were their ideas influenced by earlier American thought? This course will look first to the 19th and early 20th century to find some philosophical and
aesthetic roots that gave rise to experimentation in 20th century American Music. We will then explore the ideas and music of the New York Schools of compos-
ers and look at the special bonds they formed with their visual artist counterparts: Morton Feldman, Mark Rothko and Philip Guston; Earle Brown, Jackson
Pollack and Alexander Calder; John Cage and Marcel Duchamp. We will also explore how our own creative intuitions work and what they can produce in music
by forming an experimental foundobject ensemble. We will develop our creative ideas through experimentation and improvisation and present our improvisa-
tions and compositions in a concert at the end of the semester. No prior musical experience is required for this class.
Format: weekly lecture class and ensemble class. Evaluation will be based on reading assignments, periodic quizzes, journal keeping, creative work throughout
the semester, end of semester concert of experimental works and an eight page paper reflecting on creative work using journals and referencing class readings.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 12). Selection based on consultation with instructor.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 WF J. ROBERTS
MUS 114 American Music (Not offered 2011-2012)
This lecture and discussion course focuses on American music in its cultural context. Students will explore a range of issues concerning music's relation to
national and ethnic identity, historical events, societal conflicts, and philosophical, literary, and artistic movements. The class will study works from a variety of
musical traditions: e.g., Native American, religious, classical, patriotic, blues, jazz, folk, Broadway, rock, and rap.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short papers, a midterm exam, and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15). Preference to students with demonstrated interest in American Studies or Music.
M. HIRSCH
MUS 115 Introduction to Twentieth-Century Music (Not offered 2011-2012)
Twentieth-century Euro-American art music involved a persistent exploration of the limits of musical possibility. Encounters with this music often challenge
our ears and musical minds and require us to reconsider fundamental conceptions of music itself. Throughout the course, we will investigate in what ways the
basic elements of music (e.g., harmonic organization, rhythm, timbre, instrumentation and performance conventions) were extended and revolutionized. Topics
and styles to be discussed include: atonality, expressionism, twelve-tone techniques, neoclassicism, electronic and computer music, stochastic music, minimal-
ism, and neoromanticism. We will also consider the music of this century in relation to contemporary developments in the other arts and to popular musical
styles. The syllabus will include works by such composers as Debussy, Mahler, Stravinsky, Schoenberg, Webern, Bartk, Weill, Milhaud, Shostakovich, Ives,
Copland, Babbitt, Stockhausen, Messiaen, Boulez, Berio, Cage, Grecki, Glass, Gubaidulina, and Tower.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on two tests, two short papers, and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 12).
W. A. SHEPPARD
MUS 116 Music in Modernism (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
The synthesis of the arts was a primary pursuit of modernist composers, artists, choreographers, and writers. Seeking either to realize Wagner's "total work of
art" in the theater, or to uncover the more general correspondences celebrated by Baudelaire, modernists consistently looked beyond their own media. Collabo-
rations on works of "total theater" were common: Satie, Cocteau, Massine, Picasso; Brecht, Hindemith, Weill; Stravinsky, Nijinsky, Bakst; Claudel, Honegger,
Rubinstein. Modernists explored new connections between music and color (Scriabin, Kandinsky), music and literature (Joyce, Mann), and music and dance
(Duncan, Graham). Occasionally, modernists attempted to unite the arts on their own: Schoenberg painted, Pound composed, and Kokoschka wrote. Our focus
will be on those works of music, art, dance, and literature that explored new relationships between the arts. One goal will be to investigate whether specific
equivalents exist between techniques of modernist painting, poetics, choreography, and composition. Aware of the risks and rewards of interdisciplinary study,
we will attempt our own theories of artistic synthesis. This course is designed to bring multiple perspectives to the study of music in modernism.
Format: discussion/lecture. Evaluation will be based on three papers (6, 8, and 12 pages in length) and on class participation; drafts of two of these papers will be
required. Students will receive detailed comments on each paper, allowing them to build upon those comments in subsequent writing assignments.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 10).
W. A. SHEPPARD
211
MUS 117(F) Mozart
This course will examine the extraordinary life and musical genius of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. Through lectures, discussion, readings, and guided listening,
students will gain appreciation of Mozart's classical compositional style and familiarity with many of his greatest works. The class will explore Mozart's pivotal
position as a musician in Viennese society; his strange combination of bawdy behavior and sublime artistry; his relationship with his domineering father Leopold,
as well as with Haydn, Beethoven, and Salieri; and the myths about Mozart that have sprung up in the two centuries since his death.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, listening quizzes, two short papers, a midterm exam, and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15). Preference given to students with demonstrated interest in music.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF M. HIRSCH
MUS 118(S) Bach
Johann Sebastian Bach now enjoys the status of a cultural icon, transcending time and place. But who was Bach, and why do his musical creations continue to
fascinate us? This course offers an introduction to the life and music of this iconic composer. We will explore aspects of cultural context (such as the social milieu
in which Bach developed his art and the use and perception of his music by his contemporaries), as well develop our listening skills by exploring matters of purely
musical content (the styles and forms of his prodigious oeuvre). Both instrumental and vocal music will be surveyed, including the Brandenburg Concerti, the
Goldberg Variations, the Magnificat, and the B Minor Mass. The course will conclude with a consideration of Bach's legacy in the 19th and 20th centuries.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on 2 papers, a midterm, a final exam, and class participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected 15).
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR BLOXAM
MUS 120 Beethoven (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course provides an introduction to the life and music of Ludwig van Beethoven. The composer's difficult childhood, tragic loss of hearing, clandestine
affair with the "Immortal Beloved," and tempestuous relationship with his suicidal nephew Karl--such biographical elements, together with the French Revo-
lution and emergence of Romanticism, will form the backdrop for our study of his titanic artistic struggles and monumental achievements. Students will listen
to a broad cross section of Beethoven's music, including piano sonatas, string quartets, symphonies, overtures, concertos, choral works, and opera. We will
explore his ties to Haydn, Mozart, and other composers, his fierce individualism, and his impact on later generations, subjects linked to notions of artistic genius
and the sublime.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on listening quizzes, two papers, midterm and final exams, and class participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15). Preference will be given to those with a demonstrated interest in music.
M. HIRSCH
MUS 122(S) African-American Music (Same as Africana Studies 122) (D)
This course will survey the history of African-American music in the United States from its beginnings through the mid-twentieth century. Themes include: the
continuation of Africanisms in African-American music, transculturation between Black and White American music, and the ever-changing sound of African-
American music in the U.S.
There will be an emphasis on discussing music, listening to it, and attending concerts of live music for which there may be additional costs.
This EDI course explores the experiences and expressions of the culturally diverse peoples of African descent in the New World (and the Old), as well as the
myriad ways in which they confront, negotiate, and at times challenge dominant U.S. and/or European hierarchies of race, culture, gender and class.
Evaluation based on hour exam, final exam, and two concert reviews.
No prerequisites, but students without musical backgrounds must learn a vocabulary of terms for describing musical sound; open to first-year students.. Enroll-
ment limit: 20. If more than 20 students enroll, priority will be given to Africana Studies majors, music majors, and seniors.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR E. D. BROWN
MUS 123(S) Music Technology I
Designed for students with some music background who wish to learn basic principles of Musical Technology and practical use of current software and hardware.
Topics include acoustics, MIDI sequencing, digital recording and editing, sampling, analog and digital synthesis, digital signal processing, and instrument design.
Lectures will provide technical explanations on those topics covered in class and an historical overview of electronic music.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based on weekly assignments, a midterm exam a final paper and two composition projects. Some background in acoustics/
physics is desirable.
Prerequisites: Music 102 or 103. Knowledge of and proficiency with musical notation is required. Enrollment limit: 9 (due to the limitations of the electronic
music studio facility) (expected: 9). Preference given to Music majors and those planning to major.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR PEREZ VELAZQUEZ
MUS 124 The Singing Voice: Mechanics, History and Meaning (Not offered 2011-2012)
Why does an opera singer sound different from a rock singer? Why can't one convincingly sing in the style of the other? And why is the former granted a higher
status and the latter a wider audience? This course examines the physiological and acoustical properties of singing and explores the varieties of singing style and
function including Western classical, jazz, pop and gospel as well as less familiar approaches such as overtone singing, yodeling and belting. The historical
development of singing styles will be considered as will the meaning making of specific vocal qualities. Students will learn the basics of several singing styles.
Format: lecture/discussion and one 50-minute vocal lab. Evaluation will be based on two tests, two papers, and a final project.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15). Preference will be given to department ensemble participants.
B. WELLS
MUS 125(F) Music Cultures of the World (D)
This course examines a variety of musical traditions from across the globe. Music will be explored as complex cultural expression, intensely invested with social,
artistic, economic and political meanings. The class is designed to advance knowledge not only of what happens in musical performance, but with a view to
understanding musicmaking as one of many interrelated cultural systems. Music and identity, dance, migration, politics, and public health performance etc. will
all be explored using different case studies drawn from West and Southern Africa, India, China, South America and the Caribbean, North America, Eastern
Europe, Middle East etc. Students will become familiar with some of the key ideas and methods of the cultural study of music. However, prior formal training in
music is not necessary to do well in this course. There will be emphasis on listening.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be comprehensively based on attendance and participation in class, two short papers, a final project, and midterm and final
exams.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 30). Preference will be given to current or prospective majors in Music, Anthropology and Sociology, as well as
current and prospective students concentrating in Arabic Studies, Asian Studies, Africana Studies and Latina/o Studies.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR OKIGBO
MUS 126 Musics of Asia (Same as Asian Studies 126) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
This course offers an introduction to the great diversity of Asian music. Our survey will span from East Asia (China, Korea, and Japan) to Southeast Asia
(Thailand and Indonesia) to the Indian subcontinent, Central Asia (Tibet and Afghanistan), to the Middle East (Iran and the Arabian peninsula), and will end
with the extension of Asian music across North Africa and into Eastern Europe. Within this broad survey, we will focus on selected and representative musical
cultures and genres. In each section of the course, aspects of cultural context (including music's function in religious life and its relationship to the other arts),
will be emphasized. While our focus will be on the traditional and classical musics of these cultures, we will also briefly consider the current musical scene.
Encounters with this music will include attendance at live performances when possible.
This course satisfies the EDI requirement by exploring how the diverse musical traditions of Asia are shaped by radically different religious beliefs and social
norms and by demonstrating how various Asian cultures can be understood through their musical traditions. Much of the music we will encounter presents
aesthetics and cultural norms that differ radically from mainstream Euro-American cultural practices. To engage with these traditions students must attempt to
place themselves within different cultural frameworks, to hear music that they may find shockingly foreign with a different set of ears.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on four tests and two papers.
No prerequisites; no musical experience necessary. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 20).
W. A. SHEPPARD
MUS 127(S) Cuban Popular Music and Culture (D)
This class will cover genres of Cuban folk, and popular music and the impact that Cuban history has had on Cuban music, art, and culture in general. Topics to be
discussed will include the African influence on Cuban music between the 15th and 16th centuries, the contemporary coexistence of old African musical practices
with new musical manifestations now purely Cuban, and the Spanish influence on the Punto Cubano or Punto Guajiro that flourished at the end of the 18th
212
century as a family-neighborhood activity. We will also discuss the connection between folk music and the utilization of European techniques that gave as a result
the danzon, the mambo, the cha cha cha, the Cuban son, as well as multiple genres of the Cuban cancion (song). Other topics of discussion will include the strong
bonds between Cuban music and North American music during the 20th century, and how the combination of folk music/professional music imparts a dynamic
to Afro-Cuban jazz, and salsa. We will also discuss more recent developments of Afro-Cuban music such as timba cubana, Cuban hip hop, and the social issues
represented in their lyrics. A good understanding of Cuban music requires the understanding of Cuban people and their culture. We will discuss how Cuban music
is and has been for centuries an expression and part of the religious and political systems of belief of the Cuban people. Class examples will also demonstrate how
Cuban music is a force that unifies all Cubans regardless of their social class or political view.
Format: lecture. Requirements: two research papers (10 pages long each) and two class presentations on the subject of the research paper.
No prerequisites. No enrollment limit (expected: 25).
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR PEREZ VELAZQUEZ
MUS 128(S) Chinese Music and Intercultural Influence: From the Silk Road to Korea and Japan (Same as Asian Studies 128) (D)
Traveling back in time across the immense span of Chinese history, it is almost impossible to fathom the incredible richness of sound and musical style that
emanated from the Dynastic courts, Daoist temples, private literati gardens or local villages. Equally impressive is the broad influence Chinese music both re-
ceived from and passed on to other cultures. Our task in this course is to explore and understand Chinese Music by looking broadly at its history and traditions. We
will examine more closely historical periods of intercultural exchange. We will learn about Central Asian music, the Silk Road and its influence on Chinese Music
from the Han through Tang Dynasties. We will also explore Japanese and Korean Music and see how Chinese culture and music influenced these traditions. We
will look at some basic principles of Western culture and music to provide context from which to better understand differences between Western and East Asian
music. We will not just listen to recordings but will have the chance to experience several live performances of this music during the semester. No prior musical
experience is required for this class.
Format: weekly lecture classes. Evaluation will be based on class participation, reading assignments, journal keeping, a midterm and final exam as well as a term
paper.
No prerequisites; no prior musical experience is required for this class. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). If overenrolled, the instructor will decide on basis of
individual consultations with students.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 WF J. ROBERTS
MUS 129(F) Music in African Religious Experience (Same as Africana Studies 121 and Religion 262) (D)
This course explores the role of music in the multiplicity of religions that pervades the continent of Africa. Whether in the rituals of ancestral veneration; spiritual
healing and spirit possession; worships in mainstream, independent, and Pentecostal Christian churches; and the rites of the Muslim Brotherhoods, religious
practices are always paired with music. Music plays the role of forging a sense of community as well as enhances participants' spiritual experience at ritual events.
Beyond the contexts of ritual and worship however, religious music performance in Africa sometimes comprises the locus for negotiating identities and power.
Relying on relevant analytical literature and audios/films, this course will pay particular attention to the social and political history of various communities, and
how religion and ritual music have been used to articulate members' experiences, and rendering them in performance either as affirmation of, or to challenge the
circumstances of those experiences.
Format: lecture. A comprehensive evaluation for this course will be based on attendance and participation in class; two review essays; two quizzes; and midterm
and final exams.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). Preference will be given to current or prospective music majors, religion majors, and Africana Studies
concentrators
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR OKIGBO
MUS 130 History of Jazz (Same as Africana Studies 130) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
This course surveys the history of jazz from its origins to the present. Emphasis is on the contributions of the major figures in jazz as seen against the backdrop
of their social milieu. Emphasis on the relationship between music and the social experience of African Americans.
This EDI course explores the experiences and expressions of the culturally diverse peoples of African descent in the New World (and the Old), as well as the
myriad ways in which they confront, negotiate, and at times challenge dominant U.S. and/or European hierarchies of race, culture, gender and class.
Format: lecture with some discussion. Evaluations based on the following: homework 50%, one concert review 20%, research paper 30%.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). Preference given to jazz musicians, Africana Studies concentrators, and seniors.
E. D. BROWN
MUS 132 Women and Music (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course will introduce students to various issues concerning women in music (classical and popular): e.g., the widespread perception that there are no
"great" female composers, the claim that there is a "women's sound" in music, the representation of women in music by men, the gendered understanding of
musical forms, genres, and techniques, the historical spheres of women's music-making, and the challenges faced by female musicians in various social con-
texts from the Middle Ages to the present. The class will explore women's contributions to music as composers, performers, teachers, patrons, and scholars.
Evaluation based on class participation, two papers, a class presentation, and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15).
M. HIRSCH
MUS 133 Men, Women, and Pianos (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course takes the piano, its repertory, and its performers as focal points for a social history of Western music, treating the piano as a locus around which
issues of gender, class and race are played out in nineteenth century and twentieth century musical life. In addition to exploring "serious" works by composers
such as Mozart and Beethoven, we will consider parlor music and music by crowd-pleasing virtuosi such as Liszt and Gottschalk. We will also consider a broad
range of classical and popular performers, ranging from Clara Schumann, Vladimir Horowitz, Arthur Rubinstein and Glenn Gould through Art Tatum and
Liberace. Other topics will include the "cult of the virtuoso," Jane Campion's 1993 film The Piano, and musical nationalism as reflected in music for the piano.
Format: lecture/discussion. Two meetings per week. Evaluation based on participation, several short papers and quizzes, and a final project.
Prerequisites; ability to read music, or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19).
BLOXAM
MUS 134 Myth in Music (Same as Comparative Literature 134) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Orpheus, Prometheus, Faust, and Don Juan--these figures have captured the imagination of writers, artists, and composers throughout history. This course
explores how prominent myths of western civilization have found expression in a broad variety of musical works, e.g., operas by Claudio Monteverdi, Wolf-
gang Amadeus Mozart, Jacques Offenbach, and Richard Wagner; songs by Franz Schubert, Hugo Wolf, Ricky Ian Gordon, and Adam Guettel; ballets by
Ludwig van Beethoven and Igor Stravinsky; symphonic poems by Franz Liszt, Richard Strauss and Alexander Scriabin; Broadway musicals by Richard Adler,
and Randy Newman; and mixed-media projects by Rinde Eckert. Our inquiry will lead us to ponder an array of questions: Why have certain myths proven
especially appealing to composers? What accounts for these myths' musical longevity? How have myths been adapted to different musical genres and styles,
and for what purposes? How do the works reflect the historical cultures in which they originated? How have they engaged with different social, political,
artistic, and intellectual concerns?
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, three 6- to 8-page papers (with revisions), and a final presentation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 10). Preference given to students with a demonstrated interest in literature or music.
M. HIRSCH
MUS 135 Storytelling in Music (Not offered 2011-2012)
Many of the songs we hear on the radio derive their appeal, in part, from the interest of the narratives conveyed by their lyrics. Even without lyrics, however,
music itself can compellingly depict characters, emotions, settings, or events in order to relate tales of love, tragic loss, conflict, heroism and victory, transcen-
dence, comedy, adventure, and the exotic. This course explores the variousmusical means through which composers of the past several centuries have sought to
convey such stories in both texted and untexted genres including the sixteenth-century madrigal; opera; the concerto and the symphony; nineteenth-century
song cycles, solo piano works, and tone-poems; ballet and film scores; and jazz and rock 'n roll.
Evaluation will be based on brief written assignments and a paper, a midterm and a final exam, and attendance and participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15).
BLOXAM and HIRSCH
213
MUS 136 Bach and Handel: Their Music in High Baroque Culture (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course compares and contrasts the lives and music of the two composers of the High Baroque who best capture the period's expressive aims, Johann
Sebastian Bach and George Frideric Handel. We will examine their contrasting life experiences and musical pursuits within the larger social and cultural frame-
work of the period: Bach as a provincial composer, servant to minor German aristocrats and the Lutheran Church, virtuoso organist and pedagogue; Handel as a
cosmopolitan celebrity and entrepreneur, creator of operatic and instrumental entertainments for both the Italian and English nobility and the paying public.
Bach's Brandenburg Concerti and B-minor Mass, and Handel's Water Music and Messiah are just a few of the works to be explored and enjoyed.
Evaluation will be based on several quizzes, two short papers, and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 12).
BLOXAM
MUS 138 Sibyl of the Rhine: The Life and Times of Hildegard of Bingen (Not offered 2011-2012)
The 11th century German abbess Hildegard of Bingen was one of the most remarkable people of her age. She was a theologian and reformer, poet, composer,
artist, author of treatises on natural science and medicine; she corresponded with emperors, kings, queens and popes as well as abbots, abbesses, nuns, monks,
and laypeople. Yet she lived most of her long life in a remote cloister on the banks of the river Rhine, and was virtually lost to history until her recent rediscovery
900 years after her birth. This course draws on a wealth of recent scholarship to explore the life and times of this extraordinary woman, using her music as the
window into her ideas and her world. Class meetings will include discussion of readings by and about her life and work as well as in-class performance of her
plainsongs and liturgical drama.
Format: lecture/discussion, two days a week. Evaluation based on class participation, several short papers, and a final project. A field trip may be required.
No prerequisites. No enrollment limit (expected: 10-15).
BLOXAM
200-LEVEL COURSES
MUS 201(F) Music Theory and Musicianship II
Music 201 continues to greater degrees the study of music techniques from the common practice period by means of analysis, composition, written exercises,
sightsinging, keyboard application and dictation. We will expand our understanding of chromaticism. We will learn how chromaticism is used as a voice-leading
tool, and how it participates in music events at deeper levels of the structure. We will learn about innovations that occurred from the early 19th century through the
beginning of the 20th century and will trace the origins for these new harmonic tendencies. We will also learn how composers create larger formal structures.
Format: two lecture meetings and two skills lab meetings per week. Final grading will be based on homework, theory quizzes, analysis papers, compositional
projects, a final exam, class attendance, preparation and participation, and on the results of the lab portion of the class (sight singing, ear training, and keyboard
harmony).
Prerequisites: Music 104. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 12). Preference to potential Music majors.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR Lab: 1:10-2:25 MR PEREZ VELAZQUEZ (lecture); DILTHEY and PRINDLE (lab)
MUS 202(S) Music Theory and Musicianship II
Music 202 proceeds to the study of twentieth-century practices including harmony, scales and modes, rhythmic techniques, new formal ideas, serial procedures,
and set theory. It also covers more recent musical developments including aleatorism, minimalism, electronic music, post-modernism, eclecticism, and other
techniques.
Format: two lecture meetings and two skills lab meetings per week. Final grading will be based on homework, theory quizzes, analysis papers, compositional
projects, a final exam, class attendance, preparation and participation, and on the results of the lab portion of the class (sight singing, ear training, and keyboard
harmony).
Prerequisite: Music 201. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15). Preference given to Music majors and those with the strongest musicianship skills.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR Lab: 12-12:50 MF GOLLIN (lecture); DILTHEY (lab)
MUS 203T(S), 204T(F) Composition I and II
Beginning courses in musical composition taught in tutorial format. Required assignments range from 5 to 6 and each student is required to complete a semester
composition project. 1-2 group meetings per week will deal with the presentation of new assignments, analysis of models for composition, performance of work
in class, and critiquing of work. Individual meetings will deal with the conception and execution of the semester project. Performances of work in class will be
arranged by the instructor. Performance of the semester project on the semester-end concert is required and such arrangements are the responsibility of the student.
Evaluation based on the quality and timeliness of composition projects, attendance, and class participation.
Prerequisites: Music 202 (may be taken concurrently) and permission of instructor; not open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 6 (expected: 4). Preference
given to music majors. Consideration of non-majors based on qualifications and experience.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF First Semester: PEREZ VELAZQUEZ
1:10-2:25 TF Second Semester: ROBERTS
MUS 206T Verdi and Wagner (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Born in the same year (1813), Giuseppe Verdi and Richard Wagner stand as the two central figures of nineteenth-century European opera. Their divergent
approaches to the genre provoked heated debate that continues today. Both composers not only transformed the operatic forms they inherited, but they also had
a significant impact on the cultural and political histories of their emerging nations. Throughout the semester we will juxtapose major works by these composers
in order to investigate such topics as opera's relationship to its literary sources; the staging of opera; intersections between opera and film; connections between
opera and political context; and biographical influences on the creation of opera. Our final meeting will be devoted to the broader operatic and cultural legacies
of these two composers. Focusing on one opera per week, we will study Verdi's Nabucco, Il trovatore, La traviata, Aida, Otello, and Falstaff, and on Wagner's
Tannhaser, Lohengrin, Die Walkre, Tristan und Isolde, Die Meistersinger von Nrnberg, and Parsifal. When possible, this tutorial will include field trips to
live performances and/or live HD broadcasts of these operas.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: evaluation will be based on five 5- to 6-page essays and on the quality of the student's critical engagement with the work of
his/her tutorial partner.
Prerequisites: previous related course work and/or musical experience is desirable, but is not required; open to all students. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10).
Preference given to sophomores and juniors.
W.A. SHEPPARD
MUS 207(F) Music in History I: Antiquity-1750
This course explores 1000 years of music-making in Western European culture, beginning with the philosophical and theoretical origins of that music in ancient
Greece and extending to the life and music of J.S. Bach. Topics covered will include how the sound of music changed over a millennium; the different functions it
served and how genres developed to serve these functions; the lives of the men and women who composed, performed, and wrote about music; and how the
changing notation and theory of music related to its practice over the centuries. At the same time, the course provides an introduction to the modern study of music
history, sampling a broad range of recent scholarship reflecting an array of critical approaches to the study of early music in our own day.
Format: lecture/discussion, three meetings per week; field trip may be required. Evaluation will be based on class participation, written assignments, midterm and
final exams.
Prerequisites: ability to read music. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 12). Preference given to Music majors or those planning to major.
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF BLOXAM
MUS 208(S) Music in History II: 1750-1900
A survey exploring the development of music in Western society from the Classical through the Romantic periods. Emphasis will be on the contextual study of
works by such composers as Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven, Schumann, Berlioz, Verdi, Wagner, and Strauss. Changing musical styles will be examined in conjunc-
tion with the aesthetics of the period, with special attention to the use and purpose of music and the role of the musician in society.
Format: lecture/discussion, three days per week. Evaluation will be based on class participation, two papers, class presentations, a midterm, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: ability to read music. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 12). Preference given to Music majors or those planning to major.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF M. HIRSCH
MUS 209(F) Music in History III: Musics of the Twentieth Century
A survey of musics in both Western and non-Western society from the close of the nineteenth century to the present. Emphasis will be on the contextual study of
the music of major composers of Western art music, on the musical expressions of selected areas of world music such as Africa, Asia, India, and the Americas,
and on the intermingling of musical influences of pop, jazz, and art music of the electronic age.
214
Format: lecture/discussion, two days per week. Evaluation will be based on class participation, two papers, a midterm, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: ability to read music. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 12). Preference given to Music majors or those planning to major.
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF ROBERTS
MUS 210T American Pop Orientalism (Not offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
This tutorial will investigate the representation of Asians and Asian Americans in American popular culture since the late nineteenth century. Our focus will be
on music's role in Orientalist representation in a wide variety of media, including Hollywood film, television, popular song, Broadway musicals, and novels.
We will begin with major texts in cultural theory (Said, Bhabha) and will attempt throughout the semester to revise and refine their tenets. Can American
Orientalism be distinguished in any fundamental way from nineteenth-century European imperialist thought? How does Orientalist representation calibrate
when the "exotic others" being represented are themselves Americans? Our own critical thought will be sharpened through analysis and interpretation of specif-
ic works, such as Madame Butterfly, "Chinatown, My Chinatown," The King and I, Sayonara, Flower Drum Song, Miss Saigon, Rising Sun, M. Butterfly,
Aladdin, and Weezer's Pinkerton. We will end the semester by considering the current state of Orientalism in American popular culture.
This course satisfies the EDI requirement by considering diversity in relation to the representation of specific minority groups within American popular culture
and the attempts by members of those minority groups to participate in mainstream culture. We will also engage with critical theories offered by scholars for
understanding the dynamics of these representations and this cultural participation.
Format: tutorial. Evaluation will be based on five 5- to 6-page essays and on the quality of the student's critical engagement with the work of his/her colleagues.
Previous related coursework and/or musical experience is desirable, but is not required. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected:10). Preference to sophomores and
juniors.
W. A. SHEPPARD
MUS 211(S) Arranging for Voices
The elements of arranging music for vocal ensembles will be studied from numerous angles. In addition to regular assignments involving arranging in various
styles, the class will study successful vocal arrangements. Analysis of the various components involved in good arranging--including voice leading, range bal-
ance and voicing, key relationships, and motivic and structural cohesiveness--will be addressed.
Evaluation will be based on weekly arranging assignments building toward the midterm, final exams, larger arranging projects, and a performance of selected
works.
Prerequisites: MUS 103 and 104. Enrollment limit: 8 (expected: 8). Preference given to upperclasses.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR WELLS
MUS 212(F) Jazz Theory and Improvisation I (Same as Africana Studies 212)
The theory and application of basic techniques in jazz improvisation and performance styles, including blues forms, swing, bebop, modally based composition,
Afro-Cuban, etc. Appropriate for students with skill on their instrument and some basic theoretical knowledge. Knowledge of all key signatures, major/minor
keys and modes, intervals, triads and basic seventh chords and their functions within keys. Students should be able to play and demonstrate these concepts on their
instruments--competence on an instrument is essential (vocalists will be encouraged to study the piano). Pianists and guitarists should be able to sight read chords
on a jazz lead sheet.
In addition to the development of skills, written work consists of assignments (e.g., harmonic analysis and exercises in transposition and transcription), a tran-
scription project (e.g., of a recorded solo or a composition) and concluding recital.
Format: alternates between lecture style exposition of theoretical topics and a master class where students will perform and be evaluated on pieces they arrange for
a student group. Evaluation will be based on weekly homework, a midterm, a transcription project and the end of semester concert, as well as improvement as
measured in weekly class performance.
Prerequisites: Music 103 and/or permission of instructor; musical literacy required as per above description. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 13). Preference
given to students with jazz performance experience. Course may not be taken pass/fail.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR JAFFE
MUS 213 Jazz Theory and Improvisation II (Same as Africana Studies 214) (Not offered 2011-2012)
A continuation of Music 212, this course builds upon theoretical knowledge, performance and aural skills developed previously. Students will deal with more
complex theoretical and performance issues, such as modal interchange and minor key harmony, use of symmetric scales, commonly-used reharmonizations of
the blues and "I Got Rhythm" chord progressions, and Coltrane's "Three Tonic" harmonic system.
The format is the same as for Music 212, with two weekly meetings, alternating between theory and performance sessions, and including a final recital.
Requirements: two transcription projects and two original compositions, as well as a midterm and participation in a recital at the end of the semester.
Prerequisites: Music 212. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 5-8). Preference given to advanced students already capable jazz performers.
JAFFE
MUS 214(F) Groovin' the Written Word: The Role of Music in African American Literature (Same as Africana Studies 314, American
Studies 314, Comparative Literature 321, and English 314)
(See under AFR 314 for full description.) BRAGGS
MUS 215(F) Choral Conducting
Choral conducting techniques will be developed through exercises and projects that encompass the many facets of this activity. Using the class as the primary
practice choir, students will focus on conducting patterns applied to elements of interpretation, keyboard and vocal skills, issues of tuning and blend, rehearsal
techniques, score study, and style and repertoire. Regular videotaping of conducting sessions will provide opportunities for students to study themselves. Reper-
toire will include works from the early Renaissance through the late-twentieth century, accompanied and a cappella, and issues of conducting ensembles at
various skill levels will be addressed.
Evaluation will be based on regular conducting assignments and final projects.
Prerequisites:Music 103 or 104. Enrollment limit: 8 (expected: 6). Preference given to upperclasses.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR WELLS
MUS 216(S) Orchestral Conducting
This course will introduce and develop a broad range of subjects associated with conducting, including rehearsal techniques, physical and aural skills, interpreta-
tion, and programming. Related areas to be discussed include: balance, intonation, rhythm, articulation, bowings, and complex meters. Weekly conducting and
score reading assignments will form the core of the workload. Larger projects may include conducting existing instrumental ensembles, and along with score
reading, will be the basis of the midterm and final exams. This course involves a trip to audit a Boston Symphony rehearsal at Symphony Hall.
Format: lecture/lab. Evaluation will be based on class participation, regular conducting assignments, midterm and final projects.
Prerequisites: permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 6 (expected: 2-4). Preference will be given to Music majors.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF FELDMAN
MUS 217 Jazz Arranging and Composition (Not offered 2011-2012)
This is a course designed to acquaint the student with the basic principles of composing and arranging for Jazz Ensemble, beginning with the quintet and
progressing through the big band. Intensive score study and some transcription required.
Evaluation will be based on the successful completion, rehearsal and performance of original arrangements and/or compositions during the semester, to include
at least one transcription of a recorded arrangement, one quintet or sextet arrangement, and one arrangement for big band. Performances by the Jazz Ensembles,
as rehearsed and prepared by the students of this course, are also expected.
Format: weekly lecture and targeted ensemble rehearsals generally last 1 and 1/2 hours. Additional individual meetings are generally an hour a week, more
frequently and for longer amounts of time as needed. Requirements: project based; students must participate in small ensembles.
Prerequisites: Music 212 and permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 5 (expected: 3-5).
JAFFE
MUS 221T Jazz Ear Training (Not offered 2011-2012)
This tutorial is designed for jazz performers, composers and arrangers who have taken Music 212 and who seek further work in the area of aural development.
The focus of the tutorial will be on the development of advanced aural skills specific to the disciplines of jazz performance and arranging/composition.
Its format will involve two weekly meetings. In the first, tutorial pairs will meet individually with the instructor to present transcriptions of approved impro-
215
vised solos, which will be thoroughly notated and performed by the students. A critique of both the performance and notation of these transcription projects will
be offered by the partnered students for one another, as well as by the instructor, with revisions and corrections incorporated into an edited performance for the
entire class the following week. In the other weekly meeting, all of the tutorial pairs will meet jointly with the instructor in order to do group assignments
involving sight-singing (both rhythmic and melodic), and advanced harmonic and melodic dictation. During these sessions the instructor will offer a critique of
the past week's performances as well, based on the following criteria: 1.) notational technique, 2.) observations relating to performance practice, 3.) how such
factors contributed to the evolution of the given soloists' style, and, 4.) historical significance of the given performance and its relationship to the overall evolu-
tion of the given performer's personal voice.
Format: tutorial. Evaluation based on assessment of weekly assignments as described above.
Prerequisites: Music 212, functional jazz keyboard skills,and permission of the instructor.Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 8). Preference given to those students
judged by the instructor to be best prepared.
JAFFE
MUS 231(S) Nothin' But the Blues (Same as Africana Studies 231) (D)
For the past 100 years, blues has been an important and influential form of African-American music that has spread its influence far beyond Black Americans.
This seminar examines the history and evolution of the blues and asks several questions. What values and beliefs are implicit in or are expressed through the
blues? How has the social experience of African-Americans affected blues music? How has this music changed over time and in different places? Have these
changes allowed this music to speak to audiences? What have various forms of the blues meant to African-Americans, to white Americans, to Europeans, Afri-
cans, and other peoples? Are there significant differences in the ways in which men and women approach singing or playing the blues? What has been the impact
of the blues on other forms of music?
This EDI course explores the experiences and expressions of the culturally diverse peoples of African descent in the New World (and the Old), as well as the
myriad ways in which they confront, negotiate, and at times challenge dominant U.S. and/or European hierarchies of race, culture, gender and class.
Evaluation is based on oral presentations and four 5-page papers.
Prerequisites: prior knowledge of, or course work in, music, African-American history, or African-American culture. Enrollment limit: 10. If over-enrolled prefer-
ence to concentrators in Africana Studies and students with a musical background.
This course is a Critical Reasoning and Analytical Skills Course.
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M E. D. BROWN
MUS 233 African Music: Interdisciplinary Studies (Same as Africana Studies 250 and INTR 287) (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course examines African music from an interdisciplinary perspective that may include musical, historical, religious, sociological, dance, or psychological
studies. It also integrates music (or dance) performance with academic study. The goals of the course are to understand the synergy amongst music, dance, and
religion in Africa and its diaspora and to integrate academic study with the performance of music and dance. Themes and geographical focus may change from
year to year, and the course may be taken more than once.
In 2010-11 we will explore two case studies comparing and/or contrasting religious music and dance in Zimbabwe and Ghana. Students will meet for class
discussions during academic class hours as well as participate in separate labs/rehearsals and concerts with the Zambezi Marimba Band. Concert dates TBA.
Students will participate in two kinds of performance activities: 1) the opportunity to sing, play mbira dza vadzimu (the mbira of the ancestor spirits), marimba,
and hosho (rattle) with Cosmas Magaya and Beauler Shirto who are masters of Zimbabwean mbira music. The opportunity to dance Zimbabwean religious
music may be possible; 2) The opportunity to learn to play gyil (Ghanaian xylophone) and drums. The opportunity to dance to gyil music may be possible.
Evaluation will be based on papers, participation, and the improvement of performance skills. No exams.
Prerequisites: This course is open to all students with an intermediate level of skill in music or dance.
Labs: Zambezi Marimba Band rehearsals (T, Th 4-6:30 PM) and some weekends to be arranged. Private lessons and production rehearsals required and ar-
ranged as needed. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). If more apply, audition and writing sample may be required.
E. D. BROWN
MUS 234 Afro-Pop: Urban African Dance Music (Same as Africana Studies 234) (Not offered 2011-2012)
Over the past 100 years, West African highlife, Congolese rumba, and South African jazz and other urban musics have arisen all over the African continent.
More recently, rap has taken root, changing the musical landscape in Africa's cities. Although these urban musics are entertaining, they have a deeper signifi-
cance. They help Africans retain a link to tradition while recognizing the impact of urbanization, globalization, and other modern influences on lives of people
in contemporary Africa. We will examine several styles of urban dance music and the multiplicity of meanings these musics may carry through reading texts,
watching videos, and learning to perform music from Zimbabwe and Ghana with Forward Kwenda, Bernard Woma, and Ernest Brown.
Format: seminar and rehearsal/performance. Requirements: three 5- to 7-page papers and related oral presentations, attendance and participation in class and lab
(rehearsals with the Zambezi Marimba Band TR 4-6:30 PM and some weekends), participation in a concert of mbira music with Forward Kwenda on Nov. 7,
participation in a concert of Zimbabwean and Ghanaian dance music with Kusika (date TBA).
Evaluation: three papers and related oral presentations 60%; participation in rehearsals and two concerts 20%; improvement in performance skills 20%.
Prerequisites: open to all students with an intermediate level of performance skill in any kind of music or dance. Enrollment limit:10 (expected: 10). If more
apply, audition will be required.
E. D. BROWN
MUS 235 African Rhythm, African Sensibility (Same as Africana Studies 235) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
This course has three goals. The first is to immerse students in African music, encouraging them to learn to play an African musical instrument, the Zimbab-
wean mbira dza vadzimu (the mbira of the ancestor spirits), and to understand the structure of this music from an insider's perspective. The second goal is to
deepen that understanding by introducing students to the work of scholars who have contributed to a theoretical understanding of African music. The final goal
is to broaden that understanding by comparing and contrasting certain features of mbira music with non-African music.
The course will investigate these topics through class discussions, papers, and reading, listening, and viewing assignments. This course has a lab component
which involves taking mbira lessons for credit (MUS 251-Section 30) with Forward Kwenda (times TBA), a master of the mbira dza vadzimu. This material
will be performed in a concert with Mr. Kwenda on a date TBA. Other music will be discussed, analyzed, or performed informally in class.
This course fits the Educational Diversity Initiative in that it immerses students in another music culture and gives them the tools with which to understand that
culture from the inside. It also encourages students to reflect critically upon this perspective and to develop a deeper and more theoretical understanding of
mbira music. Finally, this course fits EDI's emphasis on the Comparative Study of Cultures and Societies by encouraging students to compare and contrast
specific aspects of African and non-African music cultures.
Format: discussion/performance. Evaluation: performance 20%; participation in class 20%; papers 60%.
Prerequisites: an intermediate level of performance ability in music or dance. Prior experience performing on African instruments not required. Enrollment is
by audition on the first day of class and submission of a writing sample to Prof. Brown before the first class meeting. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). If
more than 10 students register for the course, selection will be by audition and writing sample
E. D. BROWN
MUS 240(S) Introduction to the Music of Duke Ellington (Same as Africana Studies 240) (W)
This course will survey the career and compositional style of Edward Kennedy (Duke) Ellington (1899-1974). Students will learn to listen to and analyze music
from throughout Ellington's five-decade career as a bandleader, composer, arranger, and writer. Particular emphasis will be placed on development of aural
analysis skills, in terms of form, style, orchestration, and the ability to identify the individual sounds of key Ellingtonian soloists. Ellington's importance as a key
figure in American cultural history, and the relationships between his music and parallel stylistic developments and influences from both within and outside of the
jazz tradition will also be discussed.
Requirements: weekly listening and reading assignments, one biographical paper examining the career of an Ellingtonian, as well as participation in a group
presentation to the class of one of Ellington's extended works; midterm and final exams will also be given.
Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 10). Preference given to Music majors and Africana Studies concentrators.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR JAFFE
MUS 241 Introduction to the Music of John Coltrane (Same as Africana Studies 242) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
This course offers the serious music student an opportunity to study the unique body of work produced by saxophonist and composer John Coltrane
(1926-1967). The course traces the evolution of Coltrane's compositional and performance styles in the context of the musical and cultural environment in
which they developed. Emphasis placed on Coltrane's musical style, representing a unique synthesis of influences, including jazz, world, and European Classi-
cal music and spirituality. Substantial reading assignments, including a biography and related criticism, as well as detailed score analysis and study, are required.
216
Format: lecture. Evaluation based on in-class participation and preparation, quizzes on assigned readings, midterm and final examinations, and a final paper;
evaluation partially based on participation in an in-class group analysis presentation, and a final paper involving musical analysis of a Coltrane composition or
recorded performance.
Prerequisite(s): Music 103 and/or 212 strongly recommended. Musical literacy sufficient to deal with the material and /or permission of the instructor. Enroll-
ment limit: 19 (expected: 10). Preference given to musically literatate students and Music majors.
JAFFE
MUS 244T Music and Meaning (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Nearly everyone finds music meaningful, but what exactly does it mean? Without the help of words, this largely non-referential art presents special challenges
to interpretation. While most would agree that musical sounds can do such things as mimic the rumbling of thunder, evoke the countryside, suggest the act of
chasing, or express rage, the capacity of music to convey meaning remains controversial among scholars, performers, and listeners. Some, following music
critic Eduard Hanslick, assert that musical works are essentially "tonally moving forms"--patterns of sound with no reference to the world outside themselves;
a work's meaning derives solely from the interplay of musical elements. Others counter that music can signify aspects of human experience, its sounds and
structures not merely referring to the outside world but even relating complex narratives. Certain writers have argued that, without the assistance of language,
what music signifies remains vague, while others insist that the meaning of music is actually more precise than that of words. In this tutorial course, we will
explore a range of questions regarding musical meaning. How can combinations of pitches, rhythms, and instrumental timbres signify something beyond
themselves? Is the subject of musical meaning more relevant to some historical styles or genres than others? How can we glean the meaning(s) of a work?
Should we concentrate on formal processes within the music? Consider socially constructed meanings? Seek the composer's intentions? What makes some
interpretations more convincing than others? In grappling with these questions, students will engage with writings by Agawu, Cone, Hanslick, Kramer, Langer,
Lewin, Newcomb, and Schopenhauer, among others. Music to be studied includes works by Beethoven, Schubert, Chopin, Brahms, Mahler, Tchaikovsky,
Ravel, Stravinsky, Glass, and Adams.
Format: tutorial. During the first and last weeks of the semester, students will attend two group classes. In the other weeks, students will meet with the instructor
in pairs for a one-hour session. Students will write and present a 5- to 6-page paper every other week and a 1-2 page response to their partner's paper in the
alternate weeks. Evaluation will be based on five papers/presentations, and five responses.
Prerequisites: ability to read music, or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to sophomores and juniors.
M. HIRSCH
MUS 245T Music Analysis: Music with Text (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
The course explores the ways in which musical structure interacts with, can comment upon, and can influence one's reading of a text set to music, and similarly,
how texts set to music can exert influence upon and guide one's understanding of the musical structure. Using scenes from Mozart operas and selected songs of
the 19th and 20th centuries (by Schubert, Schumann, Brahms and Schoenberg), the course will examine the bearing specific aspects of a text (voice, person,
time, alliteration, meter, and so forth) have upon the musical domain, and conversely, how musical structures have the ability to project or allegorize actions in
the text. We will observe the often amazing ways composers of texted music use the tonal system to create musical desires--desires that may be fulfilled,
withheld, delayed, redirected, and so forth, in ways that enhance, or enact the desires of characters in a drama or poem. In addition to the specific issues involv-
ing texted and dramatic works, the course will introduce certain techniques and insights of linear analysis--one of the most profound developments in tonal
analysis during the last century. Analysis assignments, based on the student's close study of texted musical works, will offer the opportunity to apply these
techniques. The course will also confront the difficult issue of writing about music and will help students define and clearly express ideas about music.
Format: tutorial. Students will attend one weekly group lecture and one weekly tutorial meeting. Grades will be based on five analysis essays/presentations and
five critiques of another student's analyses.
Prerequisites: Music 104. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference to those with the most theory background (Music 103/104, 201/202).
E. GOLLIN
MUS 246T The Tale of Carmen, 1845-Now (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 248T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
The story of the gypsy femme fatale Carmen has endured for over 150 years. In Western culture she exemplifies the seductive, exotic, independent and forbid-
den female who drives an upstanding man to a life of crime and finally murder. This course explores a broad array of treatments of this archetypal narrative,
starting with Prosper Mrime's 1845 novella on which Bizet based his beloved 1875 opera Carmen. We will consider various staged and film versions of the
opera itself, including Francesco Rosi's stunning 1984 movie, and discuss various other film transformations of the story, from DeMille's 1915 silent film
through Hammerstein's 1954 all-black musical Carmen Jones, to the MTV version A Hip Hopera of 2004. Comic approaches will also be assessed, from
Charlie Chaplin's Carmen Burlesque of 1915 through Spike Jones' 1952 Carmen Murdered! and The Naked Carmen of 1970. We will analyze re-castings of
Bizet's famous score in instrumental music since 1875, and explore remarkable dance interpretations ranging from Carlos Saura's 1983 flamenco version
through David Bourne's choreography in his 2001 gay reading called The Car Man. Our ultimate purpose will be to probe the ways in which this powerful
narrative and the music it inspired have lent themselves to multifaceted textual and musical constructions of individual and group identities, encompassing
gender and sexuality, "Otherness," nationality, ethnicity, and class.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: After initial group meetings to discuss Mrime's novella and Bizet's music, students will meet with the instructor in pairs for
one hour each week. Each student will write a 5- to 6-page essay every other week (five in all), and provide peer reviews in alternate weeks. Evaluation will be
based on the quality of written work, discussions, and oral presentation.
No prerequisites; ability to read music useful but not necessary. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference to sophomores and juniors.
BLOXAM
MUS 248 The Romantic Generation (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course explores the emergence and flowering of musical Romanticism through contextual study of the life and works of Franz Schubert, Frederic Chopin,
Robert Schumann, and Franz Liszt. The music of these four composers will be examined in connection with political, social, philosophical, and aesthetic
developments of the first half of the nineteenth century. By exploring musical manifestations of such diverse Romantic topics as the sublime, fantasy, myth, the
exotic, rebellion, and intersections among music, literature, and painting, students will gain appreciation of the extraordinary complexity and richness of nine-
teenth-century Romanticism. Musical works to be studied include Lieder, character pieces for piano, chamber music, choral music, opera, and orchestral music.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: evaluation based on class participation, four short papers, an oral presentation, and a final exam.
No prerequisites, however, students should be able to read music.Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15). Preference given to students with demonstrated interest in
music.
HIRSCH
MUS 251-258 Individual Vocal and Instrumental Instruction
Individual lessons in voice, keyboard and most orchestral and jazz instruments offered as a partial credit fifth course. Students are encouraged to take this course
for a letter grade, but as with all fifth courses, pass/fail is also an option. Students are required to prepare for 10 lessons during the semester with a minimum
expectation of one hour practice per day and to perform publicly on at least one departmental studio recital during the semester. Lessons are scheduled TBA based
upon instructor schedule. Make-up lessons given at the discretion of the instructor. Grading will be based upon lesson preparation, public performance, and
progress throughout the semester. All individual instruction involves an extra fee, partially subsidized by the department. To register for the course, a student must
first contact the appropriate teacher (see Music Dept. for list), fill out a registration/billing contract, signed by both teacher and student, and turn that in to the
Music Office. This replaces the need to register online. Registration is for course number 251, with the appropriate section number from the following list. Stu-
dents will be reassigned to course numbers 252-258 based on the number of semesters of instruction already taken in one particular section.
Specific instrument or voice sections are as follows:
01 Bassoon 11 Organ 21 Trombone
02 Cello 12 Percussion 22 Harp
03 Clarinet 13 Piano 23 Jazz Drums
04 Bass 14 Classical Saxophone 24 Jazz Saxophone
05 Flute 15 Trumpet 25 Jazz Trumpet
06 Guitar 16 Viola 26 Euphonium
07 Harpsichord 17 Violin 27 Tuba
08 Horn 18 Voice 28 African Drumming
09 Jazz Piano 19 Jazz Bass 29 Jazz Guitar
10 Oboe 20 Jazz Vocal 30 Mbira
Prerequisite: Permission of the individual instructor. Enrollment limits apply to each section based upon availability and qualifications.
Hour: TBA STAFF
217
MUS 261-268 Chamber Music Workshop
Chamber Music and other small groups coached by faculty on a weekly basis culminating in a performance. Offered as a partial credit fifth course. Students are
encouraged to take this course for a letter grade, but as with all fifth courses, pass/fail is also an option. Students are required to prepare for 10 one-hour coaching
sessions during the semester. It is recommended that each group rehearse a minimum of 2 hours each week n preparation of the coaching. Each ensemble is
responsible for keeping a weekly log of rehearsal times and attendance. The logs are to be handed in to the coaches at the end of the semester. In addition students
are expected to practice the assigned music individually and are required to perform on the Chamber Music 261 concert at the end of the semester. The ensembles
will be organized based on skill levels and the instruments represented.
To register for the course, a student must first contact the Chamber Music Performance Coordinator, fill out registration/billing contract signed by both the Coor-
dinator and the student, and turn that in to the Music office. This replaces the need to register on line. Students should register for 261 for their first semester
enrolled in this course and should use the numbers 262-268 for subsequent semesters.
Format: partial credit fifth course. Evaluation based on preparation for coachings weekly.
Prerequisite: permission of the Chamber Music Performance Coordinator, Ronald Feldman. Enrollment limit: 12. Preference given to more advanced students, to
be determined by audition as necessary.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF STAFF
300-LEVEL COURSES
MUS 301 Introduction to Counterpoint (Not offered 2011-2012)
Counterpoint, the study of the ways independent melodic lines can be joined in music, has been essential to musical and compositional instruction for centuries.
Counterpoint was taught by Mozart, studied by Beethoven, and to this day remains an integral part of compositional training. The course will introduce students
to species counterpoint in two and three voices--exercises that develop discipline in polyphonic writing, hearing, and thinking-and will illustrate how such
contrapuntal discipline is manifest in music from Palestrina and Bach to Brahms and Debussy. The species exercises will lead to a final composition project,
such as emulation of a motet in sixteenth-century style or a fugue.
Evaluation will be based on written exercises and emulation projects.
Prerequisites: Music 103 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 13).
E. GOLLIN
MUS 305, 306, 407, 408 Composition III, IV, V, and VI
Advanced individual instruction in composition. Projects will be initiated largely by the students with guidance from the instructor. Student is responsible for
arranging performance of his/her own work.
Student may enroll for up to four semesters by taking these courses in sequence, with the lower numbered course being the prerequisite for the next higher
numbered course. May not be taken in conjunction with Music 493 or 494, the honors courses in composition.
Prerequisites: Music 203T, 204T and permission of instructor.
Enrollment limit: 2 students per instructor for all four courses.
Hour: This course will be offered in the same time slot as the 200-level composition tutorial (203 or 204) that is offered in that semester KECHLEY, PEREZ VE-
LAZQUEZ
MUS 308 Orchestration and Instrumentation (Not offered 2011-2012)
A practical and historical study designed to develop knowledge and skill when working with the instruments of the orchestra, wind ensemble, and other groups.
Includes analysis of examples from the literature as well as projects performed and discussed in class.
Evaluation based on assignments, larger projects, quizzes, and final exam.
Prerequisite: Music 104. Enrollment limit: 6, preference given to music majors, potential majors, and composition students.
KECHLEY
MUS 325, 326, 427, 428 Musical Studies
Tutorial in nature, this course offers the opportunity for work of a creative nature, based upon the talents and backgrounds of the individual student, working under
the close guidance of music faculty. All such projects require approval of the full music faculty by the day PRIOR to the first day of classes of the semester. No
proposals will be accepted or considered if this deadline is missed. The course includes the following possibilities:
a. individual instruction in the performance of literature for voice, piano, organ, or an orchestral instrument at the advanced level. Additional guidelines for
instrumental or vocal lessons for full credit can be secured at the Music Department office and on the Music Department website. Full credit lessons must
be approved by the entire music faculty. An audition may be required.
b. jazz arranging and composition;
c. advanced studies in jazz improvisation;
d. coaching, rehearsal, and performance of instrumental or vocal chamber music;
e. advanced work in music theory (critical methods and analysis, solfeggio, keyboard harmony, ear-training and dictation, counterpoint and orchestration).
Prerequisites: Music 202;
f. advanced independent study in modal and tonal counterpoint. Prerequisites: Music 301;
g. studies in issue areas such as acoustics and perception, philosophy and aesthetics of music, women and minorities in music, music of non-Western cul-
tures, music and technology;
h. advanced work in music history.
With the permission of the department, the project may be continued by election of the next-higher numbered course. Majors may register for four semesters;
non-majors may register for two semesters. The specific name of the project elected is to be specified after the title, "Musical Studies."
The numbers 325, 326, 427, 428 should be used for four sequence courses in the same subject. If a different subject is elected, the numbering sequence should
start again at 325. These numbers are selected without regard to semester taken or class year of student.
Prerequisites: Permission of the instructor and music faculty. (Intended primarily for music majors.)
Students must obtain a special form for this course election from the Music Department Office.
Note: Music 325, 326, 427, 428 must be taken as a graded course and it is strongly recommended that it be taken only as part of a four-course load.
Hour: TBA CHAIR and Members of the Department
MUS 394(S) Junior Thesis
This course involves independent study in history or theory of music, under the supervision of a member of the department, as preparation for the senior thesis.
400-LEVEL COURSES
MUS 402(S) Senior Seminar in Music: Schubert and Brahms (W)
Franz Schubert reached artistic maturity during the early years of musical Romanticism, Johannes Brahms during the later years. The relation between the two
composers illuminates central features of this aesthetic period. Brahms cherished Schubert's music and shared many of his passions and preoccupations: folk-
song, dance, nature, childhood, love, memory, nostalgia, dreams, and death. Both composers were awed by Beethoven's monumentality, sought a balance be-
tween tradition and innovation in form and harmony, and explored the relation between song and instrumental music. But there were important differences as
well. Through comparative study of Schubert's and Brahms's works, careers, and critical reception, this seminar will explore core qualities of Romantic expres-
sion - some persisting throughout the century, others evolving. Using a number of analytical and interpretive approaches, students will study works from an array
of genres, e.g., Lieder, piano pieces, chamber music, choral works, and symphonies.
Format: seminar. Requirements: evaluation will be based on papers, presentations, and class participation.
Prerequisites: MUS 202, 207, 208, 209 or permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 6). Preference given to senior Music majors.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W M. HIRSCH
MUS 407, 408 Composition V and VI
(See under MUS 305 for full description).
MUS 427, 428 Musical Studies
(See under MUS 325 for full description).
218
MUS 493(F)-W31-494(S) Senior Thesis
Required for all students approved for thesis work in music. Please refer to "The Degree with Honors in Music" for deadlines and other requirements.
MUS 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
All independent study proposals must be approved by the entire music faculty. Proposals must be completed and signed by faculty sponsor, and submitted to
department chair, by the day PRIOR to the first day of classes of the semester. No proposals will be accepted or considered if this deadline is missed. Proposals
for full-year projects must be complete at the beginning of the fall semester.
NEUROSCIENCE (Div. III)
Chair, Professor HEATHER WILLIAMS (fall semester)
Associate Professor NOAH SANDSTROM (spring semester)
Advisory Committee: Professors: P. SOLOMON*, H. WILLIAMS, ZIMMERBERG, ZOTTOLI**. Associate Professor: N. SANDSTROM. Assis-
tant Professor: LEBESTKY. Senior Essel Fellow: MARVIN. Affiliated faculty: HANE, SWOAP.
Neuroscience is a rapidly growing interdisciplinary field concerned with understanding the relationship between brain, mind, and behavior. The interdisciplin-
ary nature of the field is apparent when surveying those who call themselves neuroscientists. Among these are anatomists, physiologists, chemists, psychologists,
philosophers, molecular biologists, computer scientists, linguists, and ethologists. The areas that neuroscience addresses are equally diverse and range from phys-
iological and molecular studies of single neurons, to investigations of how systems of neurons produce phenomena such as vision and movement, to the study of
the neural basis of complex cognitive phenomena such as memory, language, and consciousness. Applications of neuroscience research are rapidly growing and
include the development of drugs to treat neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease, the use of noninvasive techniques for
imaging the human brain such as PET scans and MRI, and the development of methods for repair of the damaged human brain such as the use of brain explants
and implants. Combining this wide range of approaches and research methods to study a single remarkably complex organ--the brain--requires a unique inter-
disciplinary approach. The Neuroscience Program is designed to provide students with the opportunity to explore this approach.
THE PROGRAM
The program in neuroscience consists of five courses including an introductory course, three electives, and a senior course. In addition, students are required to
take two courses, Biology 101 and Psychology 101, as part of the program.
Neuroscience (Neuroscience 201) is the basic course and provides the background for other neuroscience courses. Ideally, this will be taken in the sophomore
year. Either Biology 101 or Psychology 101 serves as the prerequisite. Electives are designed to provide in-depth coverage including laboratory experience in
specific areas of neuroscience. At least one elective course is required in Biology (Group A) and one in Psychology (Group B). The third elective course may also
come from Group A or Group B, or may be selected from other neuroscience related courses upon approval of the advisory committee. Topics in Neuroscience
(Neuroscience 401) is designed to provide an integrative culminating experience. Students take this course in the senior year.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN NEUROSCIENCE
The degree with honors in Neuroscience provides students with the opportunity to undertake an original research project under the supervision of one or more
of the Neuroscience faculty. In addition to completing the requirements of the Neuroscience Program, candidates for an honors degree must enroll in Neurosci-
ence 493-W31-494 and write a thesis based on an original research project. Presentation of a thesis, however, should not be interpreted as a guarantee of a degree
with honors. Students interested in pursuing a degree with honors should contact the Neuroscience Advisory Committee in the spring of their junior year.
REQUIRED COURSES
BIOL 101 The Cell
PSYC101 Introductory Psychology
(Both of these courses should be completed by the end of the sophomore year.)
NSCI 201/BIOL 212/PSYC 212 Neuroscience
NSCI 401 Topics in Neuroscience
Students can check with the department coordinator to see if other courses not listed here might count as
electives.
ELECTIVES
Three elective courses are required. At least one elective must be from Group A and at least one elective must be from Group B. The third elective may come
from either Group A or Group B or the student may wish to petition the advisory committee to substitute a related course.
Group A
BIOL/NSCI 209T Animal Communication
BIOL 213 Sensory Biology
BIOL/NSCI 304 Neurobiology
BIOL/NSCI 310 Neural Development
BIOL 410 Cell Dynamics in Living Systems
BIOL 407/NSCI 347 Neurobiology of Emotion
Group B
PSYC/NSCI 315 Hormones and Behavior
PSYC/NSCI 316 Clinical Neuroscience
PSYC 317T Nature via Nurture: Explorations in Developmental Psychobiology
PSYC/NSCI 318/INTR 223 Image, Imaging and Imagining: The Brain and Visual Arts
NSCI 201(F) Neuroscience (Same as Biology 212 and Psychology 212)
A study of the relationship between brain, mind, and behavior. Topics include a survey of the structure and function of the nervous system, basic neurophysiology,
development, learning and memory, sensory and motor systems, language, consciousness and clinical disorders such as schizophrenia, Parkinson's disease, and
addiction. The laboratory focuses on current topics in neuroscience.
Format: lecture, three hours a week; laboratory, every other week. Evaluation will be based on a lab practical, lab reports, two hour exams and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Psychology 101 or Biology 101; open to first-year students with permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 72 (expected: 72). Preference given to
sophomores and to Biology and Psychology majors.
Satisfies one semester of the Division III requirement.
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR Lab: 1-4 M,T,W N. SANDSTROM and H. WILLIAMS (lecture) MARVIN (labs)
NSCI 304(F) Neurobiology (Same as Biology 304)
(See under BIOL 304 for full description.) ZOTTOLI
NSCI 310(S) Neural Development and Plasticity (Same as Biology 310)
(See under BIOL 310 for full description.) LEBESTKY
NSCI 315(S) Hormones and Behavior (Same as Psychology 315)
(See under PSYC 315 for full description.) N. SANDSTROM
NSCI 316 Clinical Neuroscience (Same as Psychology 316) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under PSYC 316 for full description.) P. SOLOMON
NSCI 318(F) Image, Imaging and Imagining: The Brain and Visual Arts (Same as INTR 223 and Psychology 318)
(See under PSYC 318 for full description.) ZIMMERBERG
NSCI 347(F) Neurobiology of Emotion (Same as Biology 407)
(See under BIOL 407 for full description.) LEBESTKY
219
NSCI 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
NSCI 401(S) Topics in Neuroscience
Neuroscientists explore issues inherent in the study of brain and behavior. The overall objective of this seminar is to create a culminating senior experience in
which previous course work in specific areas in the Neuroscience Program can be brought to bear in a synthetic, interdisciplinary approach to understanding
complex problems. The specific goals for students in this seminar are to evaluate original research and critically examine the experimental evidence for theoretical
issues in the discipline. Topics and instructional formats will vary somewhat from year to year, but in all cases the course will emphasize an integrative approach
in which students will be asked to consider topics from a range of perspectives including molecular, cellular, systems, behavioral and clinical neuroscience.
Previous topics have included autism, depression, alcoholism, stress, neurogenesis, novel neuromodulators, retrograde messengers, and synaptic plasticity.
Format: seminar and tutorial meetings. Evaluation will be based on oral presentations, several short papers, and a term paper.
Prerequisites: open only to seniors in the Neuroscience program. Enrollment limit: 18 (expected: 14).
This course is required of all senior students in the Neuroscience program.
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 R SANDSTROM
NSCI 493(F)-W31-494(S) Senior Thesis
Independent research for two semesters and a winter study under the guidance of one or more neuroscience faculty. After reviewing the literature in a special-
ized field of neuroscience, students design and conduct an original research project, the results of which are reported in a thesis. Senior thesis work is supervised
by the faculty participating in the program.
PERFORMANCE STUDIES
Advisory Committee: Professors: DARROW, D. EDWARDS, EPPEL**, HOPPIN, OCKMAN, W. A. SHEPPARD. Associate Professors: KA-
GAYA, L. JOHNSON, MLADENOVIC. Assistant Professors: BURTON, JOTTAR (Coordinator), SANGARE. Lecturers: BROTHERS,
JAFFE***.
The Performance Studies Program provides an opportunity to inhabit an intellectual place where the making of artistic and cultural meaning intersects with
critical reflection on those processes. The program has as its primary goal the bringing together of those students and faculty engaged in the creative arts, i.e.,
studio art, creative writing, dance, film and video, music, and theater with those departments that reflect in part on those activities, e.g., Anthropology and Sociol-
ogy, Art History, Classics, Comparative Literature, English, History, Music, Philosophy, Psychology, Legal Studies, Religion and Theatre. Central concepts and
interactions to Performance Studies are: action, the body, presence, ritual, representation, race, ethnicity, gender, sexuality, politics, history and transcultural expe-
rience.
Performance Studies strongly suggests that interested students take the introductory course (LATS 230) and two of several recommended upper-level courses
(AFR 305, AFR 400, ARTH 408, ARTH 461, LATS 375, WNY 310, or WNY 311).
Currently, the Program's status is as a program without a concentration. However, students can petition and obtain a Performance Studies Contract Mayor.
Students are encouraged to do five things: 1) take the introductory course, which in 2009-10 is (LATS 230) Approaching Performance Studies; 2) take two
advanced courses which utilizes critical theory in relation to performance, such as (AFR 305) The Hip-Hop Generation; LATS (LATS 330) The Aesthetics of
Resistance; (LATS 375) Performance and Its Traces; (WNY 310) Art, Space and the City; (WNY 311) Imagining New York City; (AFR 400) Race, Gender,
Space; (ARTH 408) Contemporary Performance Art History: Space, Time, Action; (ARTH 461) Writing About Bodies; 3) try different artistic media, both in the
curriculum and beyond; 4) produce projects that are a combination of art and performance with critical thinking about that process; and 5) prepare a portfolio of
their work.
As a senior year project, the Performance Studies Program strongly recommends the assembling of a senior portfolio. Preparation of the portfolio should
normally begin in the second semester of the junior year. It will be done under the supervision of a member of the advisory faculty and will be submitted in the
spring of the senior year. What we suggest is that portfolios should draw on at least four projects or productions. They should show critical self-reflection on the
creative processes, a comparison of the artistic media employed and also demonstrate performance criticism on the work of others.
AFR 400 Race, Gender, Space (Same as Comparative Literature 369, English 365, and Women's and Gender Studies 400)
(See under AFR 400 for full description.) ROBOLIN
ARTH 408 Contemporary Performance Art History: Space, Time, Action (W)
(See under ARTH 408 for full description.) CHAVOYA
ARTH 461T Writing about Bodies (Same as INTR 461 and Women's and Gender Studies 461) (W)
(See under ARTH 461 for full description.) OCKMAN
INTR 230 Prelude to Revolt: The Life and Work of Martha Graham
(See under INTR 230 for full description.) DANKMEYER
JAPN 223(S) Physical Theatre Japan (Same as Theatre 233)
(See under JAPN 223 for full description.) O'CONNOR
JAPN 276 Premodern Japanese Literature and Performance (Same as Comparative Literature 278)
(See under JAPN 276 for full description.) KAGAYA
LATS 230 Approaching Performance Studies (Same as Theatre 230 and Women and Gender Studies 231)
(See under LATS 230 for full description.) JOTTAR
LATS 375 Performance and Its Traces (Same as Theatre 375)
(See under LATS 375 for full description.) JOTTAR
THEA 104 Introduction to World Theatre and Performance (Same as Comparative Literature 104) (D)
(See under THEA 104 for full description.) HOLZAPFEL
THEA 204 Acting II
(See under THEA 204 for full description.) SANGARE
THEA 236 Political Theatre Making
(See under THEA 236 for full description.) EPPEL
THEA 250T Women and Theatre: Gender, Sexuality and the Stage (Same as English 253T and Women and Gender Studies 250T) (W)
(See under THEA 250 for full description.) HOLZAPFEL
THEA 305 Costume Design (Same as ArtS 200)
(See under THEA 305 for full description.) BROTHERS
PHILOSOPHY (Div. II)
Chair, Professor STEVEN GERRARD
Professors: DUDLEY*, GERRARD, SAWICKI, WHITE***. Associate Professors: BARRY**, CRUZ**, MLADENOVIC. Assistant Professors:
MCPARTLAND**. Visiting Assistant Professor: J. PEDRONI.
To engage in philosophy is to ask a variety of questions about the world and our place in it. What can we know? What should we do? What may we hope?
What makes human beings human? These questions, in various forms, and others like them are not inventions of philosophers; on the contrary, they occur to most
people simply as they live their lives. Many of us ask them as children, but later either ignore them, or accept answers we can live with. Philosophers, however,
seek to keep such questions open, and to address them through reasoned discussion and argument, instead of accepting answers to them based on opinion or
prejudice. The program in philosophy is designed to aid students in thinking about these issues, by acquainting them with influential work in the field, past and
present, and by training them to grapple with these issues themselves. The program emphasizes training in clear, critical thinking and in effective writing. Philoso-
phy courses center around class discussions and the writing of interpretive and critical essays.
MAJOR
Philosophy is a discipline with a long and intricate history, a history that remains an integral part of the discipline. In this way, it differs dramatically from the
natural sciences: for example, although no contemporary physicists or biologists embrace Aristotle's physics or biology, among philosophers there continue to be
champions of Aristotle's metaphysics and of his ethics. Because of the richness and continuing importance of the history of philosophy, the program is designed to
give majors a historical background that will acquaint them with a wide variety of approaches in philosophical issues, and will provide them with a basis for
evaluating and contributing to contemporary debates.
220
A total of nine courses is required for the major in Philosophy. There are both a new and old set of requirements. Students in the class of 2014 and later must
meet the new set; students in earlier classes may choose to meet the old or new set.
The new set has four required classes and five electives. The required classes are: any 100-level philosophy course, Philosophy 201 (History of Ancient
Philosophy), Philosophy 202 (History of Modern Philosophy), and Philosophy 401 (Senior Seminar). The five electives will be structured by a distribution re-
quirement. Students must take at least one course in each of three areas: Contemporary Metaphysics and Epistemology [M&E], Contemporary Value Theory [V],
and History [H]. In addition at least one of the electives must be a tutorial. The tutorial may also count toward the distribution requirements if it is designated in the
course catalog as fitting into one of the three areas. We recommend that prospective majors take Philosophy 201 and 202, Philosophy 203, and a tutorial in
philosophy, by the end of their sophomore year. Cross-listed courses and courses taught at other institutions will not count towards the distribution requirement.
Up to two courses cross-listed with other departments at Williams, or taught at other institutions (and approved by the Williams department), may be counted
toward the philosophy major.
In the old set of requirements students are required to take 101 and 102, Philosophy 401, and six electives. Students wishing to meet the old set who have taken
101 and not 102 must take a Metaphysics and Epistemology course; students who have taken 102 and not 101 must take a Value Theory course.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN PHILOSOPHY
The degree with honors in Philosophy is awarded to the student who has demonstrated outstanding achievement in a program of study that extends beyond the
requirements of the major. The extension beyond major requirements may take the form either of independent work culminating in a senior essay or thesis (the
independent-study route) or of additional course work (the directed-study route). Candidates must have GPAs of 3.6 or higher in their courses in philosophy at the
end of the junior and senior years. Juniors interested in pursuing honors should so inform the Department Chair no later than mid-April. The independent-study
route to honors requires the completion and defense of either a senior essay produced in the fall semester plus winter study period
(maximum 40 pages) or a year-long senior thesis (maximum 75 pages). Plans for either essay or thesis (including a brief proposal and bibliography, worked out in
consultation with an advisor) must be submitted to the department in April of the junior year. A recommendation for graduation with honors will be made on the
basis of the thoroughness, independence, and originality of the student's work. The directed-study route to honors requires the completion of two courses in
philosophy in addition to the nine required for the major. Candidates taking this route must also submit to the department revised copies of two term papers (10
pages or longer) written for philosophy courses they have taken. Students should register for a directed study over their senior year winter study and work with an
advisor on the paper revisions. A recommendation for graduation with honors will be made on the basis of the scope of the student's course work, the quality of
the student's participation in Philosophy 401, and the thoroughness, independence, and originality reflected in the submitted papers.
PHIL 112(F,S) Who Are We? Philosophy and Human Nature (W)
What, if anything, makes us human? Are we fundamentally rational or spiritual? Natural or social? Free or determined? Can we change what and how we are? Or
is our nature fixed? Are we basically self-interested or other directed? Do men and women share one nature? Is there a fundamental purpose to human life? Can
philosophers help us answer any of these questions today? Or have philosophical accounts of nature been surpassed by those found in the natural and social
sciences? In this course we critically examine influential philosophical accounts of human nature found in the works of figures such as Plato, Aristotle, Confucius,
Aquinas, Hume, Marx, Nietzsche, Freud, Sartre, Beauvoir, and Foucault. Readings from the natural and social sciences may also be included.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: frequent short papers (some graded, some p/f), class participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to first-years and sophomores.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR First Semester: SAWICKI
9:55-11:10 TR Second Semester: SAWICKI
PHIL 114 Plato, With Footnotes (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Twentieth-century philosopher Alfred North Whitehead wrote, famously, "The safest general characterization of the European philosophical tradition is that it
consists of a series of footnotes to Plato." Whitehead's remark provides the organizational basis for this introductory course: during the semester, we make our
way through Plato's Republic, one of the tradition's most influential great books. As we encounter perennial philosophical issues, we punctuate our examina-
tion of the Republic by taking detours to consider some of the most important "footnotes to Plato" provided by later philosophers such as Aristotle, Hobbes,
Kant, and Nietzsche.
Format: discussion. Requirements: regular short papers, class participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to first-year students and prospective Philosophy majors who have taken no 100-level
courses.
A. WHITE
PHIL 115(S) Personal Identity (W)
Through lectures, discussions, close readings and assigned writings, we will consider some of the variety of philosophical questions about the nature of persons,
and personal identity through time. Persons are subjects of experiences, have thoughts and feelings, motivation and agency; a person is thought of as continuous
over time, and as related to, recognized and respected by other persons. Thus, the concept of person plays a significant role in most branches of philosophy:
metaphysics, epistemology, moral and political philosophy, and of course in the philosophy of mind. Conceptions of person are equally important for scientific
research programs (especially in psychology), for Law, and for the arts (especially mimetic arts). Questions about persons are thus of central importance for a
myriad of our theories and practices, and for the ways in which we live our lives. The aim of this course is to explore and evaluate a number of rival conceptions of
persons and personal identity over time. Some of the questions which we will discuss are: What is a person? How do I know that I am one? What constitutes my
knowledge of myself as a person, and does that knowledge differ in any significant respect from my knowledge of physical objects and other people? What
makes me the particular person that I am, and how is my identity as this individual person preserved over time?
While addressing these questions through lectures and class discussions, the course will place special emphasis on developing students' intellectual skills in the
following domains: close, analytical reading; recognizing, reconstructing and evaluating claims and reasons that support them; producing original ideas and
arguments; writing clear, polished, wellargued papers.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: class attendance, preparedness and participation; small group meetings; weekly short writing assignments.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). In case of overenrollment, preference will be given to first-year students and
sophomores.
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR MLADENOVIC
PHIL 116 Mind and Knowledge (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
An introduction to philosophy through two of its central themes, the nature of the mind and the limits of knowledge. Topics include skepticism, the mind/body
problem, reason, knowledge of the external world, and subjectivity. Our discussions will range over historical and contemporary works, and will draw from
both Western and Eastern philosophical traditions. Throughout we will pay special attention to whether and to what degree science sheds light on these issues.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active participation; five (4-6 page) essays.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to first-years and sophomores.
CRUZ
PHIL 117(S) Arguing about God (W)
"Faith is a fine invention," according to Emily Dickinson's poem, "when gentlemen can see; but microscopes are prudent in an emergency." This introduction to
philosophy will see how far the microscopes of reason and logic can carry us in traditional arguments about the existence and nature of God. We will closely
analyze classical arguments by Augustine, Avicenna, Aquinas, Anselm, Maimonides, Descartes, and others. Pascal's wager is a different approach: it argues that
even though proof of the existence of God is unavailable, you will maximize your expected utility by believing. We will examine the wager in its original home of
Pascal's Pensees, and look at William James' related article, "The Will to Believe". The millennia old problem of whether human suffering is compatible with
God's perfection is called "the problem of evil". We will examine this issue in Hume's Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, classic sources and contemporary
articles.
Students should be aware that, in the classic tradition, this class resembles a logic course.
Format: seminar. Requirements: frequent short papers.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to first-years and sophomores.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF GERRARD
PHIL 119 What is the Meaning of "Meaning"? (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
What is the meaning of the sentence: what is the meaning of the sentence? What is the meaning of Marcel Duchamp's Fountain? What is the meaning of
Vladimir Nabokov's Pale Fire? What is the meaning of the scat syllables in Ella Fitzgerald's 1960 Berlin performance of Mack the Knife? What is the meaning
of life? Does "meaning" mean the same thing in each of these questions? We will ask and attempt to answer these questions with the help of philosophers,
221
artists, musicians, and novelists.
Format: seminar. Requirements: frequent short papers.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to first-year students and sophomores.
GERRARD
PHIL 121(F) Trust, Goodness and Beauty (W)
In our everday lives, we routinely assume that our clocks can tell us the truth about what time it is, that committing murder is wrong, and that there are people,
landscapes, and works of art that are beautiful. But we are also aware that people can and often do disagree about what is true, what is good or right, and what is
beautiful. Should the fact of such disagreement lead us to conclude that truth, goodness, and beauty are in some basic sense relative to human beings, perhaps as
individuals, perhaps as members of societies or cultures? Some philosophers defend such conclusions, but others argue that truth, goodness, and beauty are
"objective," in some important sense, despite the fact that people disagree about them. This introductory course addresses these and related issues by way of
historical and contemporary readings.
Format: seminar. Requirements: attendance, frequent short papers, class participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit 19 (expected: 19). Preference to first-year students and potential Philosophy majors.
Hour: 12:00-12:50 MWF WHITE
PHIL 122(F) Philosophical Approaches to Contemporary Moral Issues (W)
In this course we will examine a number of prominent and controversial social issues, using our study of them both as an opportunity to better understand the
moral dimensions of those issues in and of themselves, and to consider the ways in which selected classical and contemporary moral theories characterize and
address those moral dimensions. Topics will depend to some extent on student interest, but are likely to include concerns that fall under such headings as food
ethics, environmental ethics, immigration, terrorism, euthanasia, abortion, and the like. Writing assignments will employ a "target essay" approach that involves
writing groups in which students share their work with each other. For each issue we cover in class, one student in each group will write a five to seven page
"target essay" on an assigned topic; all of the remaining members of each group will then read that essay and write a two page response to it. Depending on the
number of students in the class, each person will write either one or two target essays, as well as four or five response essays throughout the course of the term. In
addition, students will be required to substantially revise and expand one target essay in light of the peer response papers and written comments from the instruc-
tor, and to submit it as a final paper for the course.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: class attendance and participation, four or five short response papers (h/p/f, 2 pages each), one or two target essays
(graded, 5-7 pages each), and one revised final essay (7-10 pages).
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to first-years and sophomores.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF J. PEDRONI
PHIL 123(S) Objectivity in Ethics (W)
It is often claimed that morality is subjective or just a matter of opinion. In this course we'll examine several influential attempts to provide a rational foundation
for morality, along with Nietzsche's wholesale rejection of these efforts. Readings will include work by Plato, Hobbes, Kant, Mill, Nietzsche, and contemporary
authors.
Format: seminar. Requirements: attendance; participation in discussion; short response papers; three 5- to 6-page papers.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to first-years and sophomores.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR BARRY
PHIL 124(S) (formerly 109T) Skepticism and Relativism (W)
Intellectually, we are ready skeptics and relativists. We doubt, we point out that no one can be certain in what she believes, and we are suspicious of declarations
of transcendent reason or truth (unless they are our own). Emboldened by our confidence in skeptical arguments, we claim that knowledge is inevitably limited,
that it depends on one's perspective, and that everything one believes is relative to context or culture. No domain of inquiry is immune to this destructive skepti-
cism and confident relativism. Science is only "true" for some people, agnosticism is the only alternative to foolish superstition, and moral relativism and, conse-
quently, nihilism are obvious.
But is the best conclusion we can come to with respect to our intellectual endeavors that skepticism always carries the day and that nothing at all is true? (Of
course, this question cannot really be answered, nor is there any value in trying to answer it, and any "answer" will only be "true" for you. Right?)
In this seminar, we will investigate the nature of skepticism and the varieties of relativism it encourages. Our readings will come primarily from philosophy, but
will be supplemented with material from anthropology, physics, psychology, and linguistics. We will look at relativism with respect to reason and truth in general
as well as with respect to science, religion, and morality. Along the way, we will need to come to grips with the following surprising fact. With few exceptions,
thoroughgoing skepticism and relativism have not been the prevailing views of the greatest minds in the history of philosophy. Were they simply too unsophisti-
cated and confused to understand what is for us the irresistible power of skepticism and relativism? Or might it be that our skepticism and relativism are the result
of our own laziness and failure?
Format: seminar. Requirements: four 1500-2000 word essays.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference will be given to sophomores and first-year students.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF CRUZ
PHIL 201(S) History of Ancient Greek Philosophy (Same as Classics 201)
Very few people believe that everything is water, that we knew everything before birth, that philosophers ought to rule the state, or that some people are natural
slaves. Why then should we spend our time studying people who in addition to having these surprising beliefs have been dead for 2500 years? First of all, Greek
thinkers, especially Plato and Aristotle, radically shaped the trajectory of western thought in every area of philosophy. No one can have an adequate understanding
of western intellectual history without some familiarity with the Greeks, and we might think that an understanding of our intellectual history can deepen our
understanding of our own situation. More importantly, many of the thinkers that we will read in this class are simply excellent philosophers, and it is worthwhile
for anyone interested in philosophical problems to read treatments of these problems by excellent philosophers. We will begin the course by looking briefly at
some of the Presocratic philosophers active in the Mediterranean world of the seventh through fifth centuries BCE, and some of the sophists active in the fifth
century. We will then turn to several of Plato's dialogues, examining Plato's portrayal of Socrates and his development of a new and profoundly powerful philo-
sophical conception. We will then read some of Aristotle's works on metaphysics, epistemology and ethics, considering some of the ways Aristotle's thought
responds to that of predecessors.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: short papers, possibly supplemented by one or more exams.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: none (expected: 20-40).
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF MCPARTLAND
PHIL 202(F) History of Modern Philosophy
European philosophy in 17th and 18th both responded to, and shaped in its turn, major revolutions in scientific and political thought. The legacy of this intellectu-
ally fertile period is still felt in contemporary epistemology, metaphysics, ethics, and political philosophy. We will consider some of the questions that are both
central to the modern era and philosophically important today: What are the origins, nature and limits of human knowledge? How should scientific inquiry
proceed? What is the nature of reality, and how can it be known? What is the relationship between the mind and the body? How should we think about causality in
the material world, and how about causality that involves persons as agents? Are we free or determined? Are there compelling reasons to be moral? What is the
nature of moral thinking and acting? How can our social and political institutions be explained and justified? We will read a necessarily limited selection of
writings by the most important thinkers of the modern period: Bacon, Galileo, Descartes, Hobbes, Locke, Berkeley, Leibniz, Spinoza, Hume, Reid, Rousseau and
Kant.
Format: lecture, with some discussion. Requirements: class attendance, preparedness and participation; small group meetings; 8 short assignments or quizzes;
one midterm and a final exam.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: none (expected: 15-20).
This course is one of the requirements for Philosophy major.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF MLADENOVIC
PHIL 203 (formerly 103) Logic and Language (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
Logic is the study of reasoning and argument. More particularly, it concerns itself with the difference between good and bad reasoning, between strong and
weak arguments. We all examine the virtues and vices of good arguments in both informal and formal systems. The goals of this course are to improve the
critical thinking of the students, to introduce them to sentential and predicate logic, to familiarize them with enough formal logic to enable them to read some of
the great works of philosophy, which use formal logic (such as Wittgenstein's Tractatus), and to examine some of the connections between logic and philoso-
222
phy.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: a midterm, a final, frequent homework and problems sets.
No prerequisites. No enrollment limit (expected: 50-80).
[Contemporary Metaphysics and Epistemology]
GERRARD
PHIL 204 Endtimes: Messianism in Modernity (Same as Jewish Studies 204 and Religion 204) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under REL 204 for full description.) HAMMERSCHLAG
PHIL 205 (formerly 201) Continental Philosophy: Reading the Critics of Reason (Not offered 2011-2012)
Nineteenth- and twentieth-century European philosophy gave rise to an astounding number of brilliant thinkers (including Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Heidegger,
Arendt, Lacan, Adorno, Gadamer, Habermas, Irigaray, Deleuze, and Derrida), who in turn initiated an equally astounding number of important philosophical
movements (including existentialism, structuralism, critical theory, hermeneutics, French feminism, and post-structuralism). Fortunately, this bewildering di-
versity comprises a recognizable tradition in virtue of a common theme: the relentless critique of the conceptions and projects of reason inherited from the
Enlightenment, Kant, and Hegel. Unfortunately, because many of these critiques are written in ways that attempt to undermine and transform our notions of
rationality, they can be maddeningly difficult to read.
This course will introduce students to continental philosophy through guided readings of these challenging texts aimed at developing students interpretative
skills.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: several short papers, final 8- to 10-page paper, regular attendance and participation
No prerequisites. (Philosophy 102 recommended). Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 10-15).
This course is part of the Critical Reasoning and Analytical Skills initiative.
SAWICKI
PHIL 206(S) (formerly 202) Philosophy of Language and Philosophy of Mind (W)
This course is designed to introduce students to twentieth-century philosophy by focusing on two of its premier research areas, language and mind. Each of these
topics been studied independently of the other, with the philosophy of language dominating the first half of the century and the philosophy of mind surging in the
second half. Research on language and mind have also enjoyed a fruitful liaison, as much of the technical apparatus of the philosophy of language has been used
to illuminate the mind. The other side of this coin is that language is something that minds achieve, and some prominent theories of linguistic meaning have
emphasized psychological elements of language use. The course will begin with the work of Frege, Russell, and Wittgenstein, and end with the work of Putnam,
Dennett, Fodor and Churchland. The course is intended to prepare students for more advanced research on either language or mind. At the same time, the course
aims to offer an overview of the methods and intellectual style of analytic philosophy. Thus, it will also serve as preparation for advanced work in epistemology,
philosophy of science, metaphysics, and ethics. The syllabus can be found at:http://www.williams.edu/philosophy/fourth_layer/faculty_pages/jcruz/courses/
lang&mind.html.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: short writing assignments each week, and two longer papers.
Prerequisite: at least one Philosophy course or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 12-18). Preference given to Philosophy, Psychology,
and Computer Science majors and Cognitive Science concentrators.
[Contemporary Metaphysics and Epistemology]
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR CRUZ
PHIL 207 The Unconscious (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Modern Philosophy of mind--from Descartes though Hume to Kant--relies on the natural assumption that all mental states are at least potentially conscious.
Beliefs, desires and intentions must belong to someone, to some subject--and from this it seems to follow that some subject must be aware of them as his or her
own. Sigmund Freud offers a radical challenge to this Cartesian picture when he introduces the idea that consciousness arises from an unconscious--the exis-
tence of which undermines certainty about our reasons for belief. In this course we explore theories of the unconscious in contemporary analytic and continental
philosophy. We begin with close readings of Freud's seminal texts (including his case-studies) in order to elucidate his concept of unconscious mental states and
his view that human action cannot be understood without postulating unconscious beliefs and desires. We discuss the nature, evidence and reliability of Freud's
theory with reference to the writings of his many critics and defenders, including later Freudians. Finally we turn to radical transformations and applications of
the idea of the unconscious in post-Freudian philosophy of mind, moral philosophy, political theory and feminism. In addition to Freud, readings may include
writings by Adler, Winnicott, Sartre, Davidson, Rorty, Lear, Gardiner, M. Cavell, Dennett, Moran, Wilkes, Marx, Marcuse, Foucault, and Butler.
Format: four weeks of lecture/discussion, six weeks of tutorials, and two weeks of seminar. Requirements: class participation, four 5- to 6-page papers and a
final paper.
Prerequisites: Philosophy 101 and 102, or consent of the instructors. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). Preference given to Philosophy majors.
MLADENOVIC and SAWICKI
PHIL 209(F) Philosophy of Science
It is a generally held belief, in our time and culture, that science is the best source of our knowledge of the world, and of ourselves. The aim of this course is to
examine the origins, grounds, and nature of this belief. We will analyze and discuss various accounts of scientific method, structure and justification of scientific
theories, scientific choice, change, and the idea that scientific knowledge is progressive.
The course will begin with the "received view" of science, advanced by logical empiricists, which assumes the objectivity and the rationality of science. We will
then discuss philosophies of science which emerged out of various criticisms of this view--especially those of Popper, Lakatos, Kuhn and Feyerabend--and the
challenges to the assumptions of scientific objectivity and rationality their works provoked. This discussion will naturally lead us to the relativist and social-
constructivist views developed within contemporary science studies. Finally, we will analyze the current debate about cognitive credentials of science and proper
approach to the study of science, which came to be known as "the science wars."
Format: seminar, with a short lecture component in each class. Requirements: class attendance, preparedness and participation; two short assignments; three
5-page papers; class presentation.
Prerequisites: one philosophy course (excluding courses focusing exclusively on moral and political theory, or on aesthetics); or declared major in a natural
science; or consent of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 10-15). In case of overenrollment, preference will be given to declared and intended Philoso-
phy majors.
[Contemporary Metaphysics and Epistemology]
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR MLADENOVIC
PHIL 210 Philosophy of Social Sciences (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Is it possible to have scientific knowledge of human thought, feelings, behavior, social life and history? If so, is that knowledge importantly different in kind or
in rigor from the knowledge we have of natural phenomena? Do social sciences legitimately employ different methodology than natural sciences? If so, what is
that methodology, is there a single one, and what is the cognitive goal it serves? If not, could social sciences improve their scientific credibility by emulating the
methodology of natural sciences? To answer these questions, we will discuss some of the following issues in the philosophy of social sciences: nature of `social
facts' and social reality; holism vs. reductionism; teleological, functional and structural explanations; theory formation, evidence, and the role of values in social
science; the relationship between knowers and the known; and some issues concerning agency, rationality, intentionality and understanding. The readings will
include Mill, Dilthey, Durkhem, Weber, Hempel, Rudner, Nagel, Popper, Winch, Taylor, Geertz, Rosenberg, MacIntyre, Hacking, Longino, Nelson, Wylie, and
other contemporary philosophers of social sciences.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: class participation, 8 short weekly response papers (1-2 page), three longer (5 page) papers.
Prerequisites: Philosophy 101 or 102 or 103; or consent of the instructor. Philosophy 209 is highly recommended. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 10-15).
Preference given to philosophy majors, students who have taken Philosophy 209, and students who demonstrate serious interest in the course.
MLADENOVIC
PHIL 212 Ethics and Reproductive Technologies (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 212) (Not offered 2010-2011) (W)
(See under WGST 212 for full description.) J. PEDRONI
PHIL 213T Biomedical Ethics (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Much like the construction of medical knowledge itself, it is from specific cases that general principles of biomedical ethics arise and are systematized into a
theoretical framework, and it is to cases they must return, if they are to be both useful and comprehensible to those making decisions within the biomedical
context. In this tutorial we will exploit this characteristic of biomedical ethics by using a case-based approach to examining core concepts of the field. The first
223
portion of the course will be devoted to developing and understanding four moral principles which have come to be accepted as canonical: respect for autono-
my, beneficence, nonmaleficence, and justice. The remainder of the course will consider key concepts at the core of medical ethics and central issues for the
field, such as privacy and confidentiality, the distinction between killing and "letting die," therapy vs. research, and enhancement vs. therapy. To this end, each
week we will (1) read philosophical material focused on one principle or concept, and (2) consider in detail one bioethics case in which the principle or concept
has special application or relevance. In some weeks, students will be asked to choose from a small set which case they would like to address; in others the case
will be assigned. Students will meet with the professor in pairs for approximately one hour per week, writing and presenting 5- to 7-page essays every other
week, and commenting orally on partners' essays in alternate weeks.
Format: tutorial. Evaluation will be based on written work, on oral presentations of that work, and on oral critiques.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference will be given to declared and prospective philosophy majors and students committed to taking
the tutorial.
[Contemporary Value theory]
PEDRONI
PHIL 220T Immortality and the Soul in Ancient and Medieval Thought (Same as Religion 282T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
According to a 2003 poll, 84% of Americans believe that the soul survives death. Ideas about immortality and the soul have a long history, and have been at the
center some of the major philosophical and religious traditions of Western culture. The central aim of this course is to examine how some central figures in these
traditions think about immortality and the soul. In addition, we will discuss some of the philosophical difficulties that come to the fore when thinking about
these issues. Is the immortality of human persons even coherent? What would it mean for an individual to survive her own death? Does belief in the indestructi-
bility of the human soul have ethical implications? What evidence is there for the existence, let alone immortality, of the soul?
Format: tutorial. Requirements: students will be expected to write a short paper every other week, and to give a presentation based on their papers. They will
also be expected to write a final paper. We will pay close attention to revising papers in light of peer and instructor feedback. We will also work on critically
reading and evaluating texts in the history of philosophy. Readings for the class may include: Homer, Plato, Aristotle, Fragments from the Stoics and Pre-So-
cratics, Plotinus, Origen, Tertullian, Augustine, Moses Maimonides, Ibn Sina, Averroes, and Aquinas.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to sophomores.
MCPARTLAND
PHIL 222(F) Minds, Brains, and Intelligent Behavior: An Introduction to Cognitive Science (Same as Cognitive Science 222 and
Psychology 222)
(See under COGS 222 for full description.) KIRBY
[Contemporary Metaphysics and Epistemology]
PHIL 225 Classics in Western Feminist Thought (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 225) (Not offered 2010-2011) (W)
(See under WGST 225 for full description.) SAWICKI
PHIL 227(S) Death and Dying (W)
In this course we will examine traditional philosophical approaches to understanding death and related concepts, with a special focus on the ethical concerns
surrounding death and care for the dying. We will begin with questions about how to define death, as well as reflections on its meaning and function in human life.
We will move on to examine ethical issues of truth-telling with terminally ill patients and their families, decisions to withhold or withdraw life-sustaining treat-
ments, the care of seriously ill newborns, physician-assisted suicide, euthanasia, and posthumous interests. In addition to key concepts of death, dying, and termi-
nal illness, we will develop and refine notions of medical futility, paternalism and autonomy, particularly within the context of advance directives and surrogate
decision making.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: class attendance and participation, periodic short essays (3 or 4 total, 2-3 pages each), two mid-length papers (5-7
pages each); possible experiential learning component.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 10-15).
[Contemporary Value theory]
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF J. PEDRONI
PHIL 228 Feminist Bioethics (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 228) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
In this course we'll explore the ways in which feminist approaches to moral thinking have influenced both the methodology and the content of contemporary
bioethics. The first portion of the course will address the emergence of the "Ethics of Care," critically assessing its origins in feminist theory, its development
within the context of the caring professions, and its potential as a general approach to bioethical reasoning. The second portion of the course will use feminist
philosophy to inform our understanding of the ways in which gender structures the individual's interactions with the health care system. To do this we'll explore
topics that might traditionally be considered "women's issues" in health care, such as medicine and body image (e.g., cosmetic surgery, eating disorders),
reproductive and genetic technologies, and research on women and their health care needs. In addition we'll also look at feminist analyses of topics that tradi-
tionally have not been regarded as "gendered," such as resource allocation and end of life issues. As a course offered under the Exploring Diversity Initiative,
this class is designed to improve students' ability to recognize both the existence and the effects of gender disparities within the health care context, and in
particular, how power and privilege within and beyond medicine contribute to gender inequalities in health and medical treatment. Moreover, students will
theorize about ways of conceptualizing and of reforming health care interactions in order to reduce or eliminate those gender inequalities.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: active participation in class discussions, two mid-length papers (7-10 pp. each), one oral presentation, and periodic
short writing assignments (four or five, app. 2 pp. each).
No prerequisites, although previous coursework in Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies is desirable; not open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 19
(expected: 8-10). Preference given to Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies and Philosophy majors.
[Contemporary Value theory]
J. PEDRONI
PHIL 231 Ancient Political Thought (Same as Political Science 231) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under PSCI 231 for full description.)
PHIL 232(F) Modern Political Thought (Same as Political Science 232)
(See under PSCI 232 for full description.) NJOYA
PHIL 235T Morality and Partiality: Loyalty, Friendship, Patriotism (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
The aim of this tutorial is to critically examine the nature, importance, and ethical value of personal attachments and loyalties. Loyalty is frequently expected by
family, friends and lovers, and demanded by institutions, religious and political communities, as well as by the state. A person incapable of loyalty is often
characterized as fickle, cold, self-serving and sometimes even pathological. However, the status of loyalty as a virtue has always been suspect: it has been
argued that it is incompatible with impartiality, fairness and equality, and claimed that it is always exclusionary. So, some relationships with other peopl--such
as friendships, familial ties, love, patriotism--seem to be ethically desirable, central to the quality of our lives, and yet prima facie in tension with the widely
held belief that morality requires impartiality and equal treatment of all human beings. Are we ever justified in having more concern, and doing more, for our
friends, family, community or nation? Does morality require that we always subordinate our personal relationships to universal principles? Is patriotism incom-
patible with cosmopolitanism, and if so, which of the two should we value? If loyalty is a virtue, what are the proper limits of its cultivation and expression?
Format: tutorial. Requirements: tutorial pairs will meet with the instructor for one hour a week; each student will write a 5-page paper every second week, and
comment on the tutorial partner's paper on alternate weeks; no final paper; the final grade will be based on the cumulative quality of papers (which will not be
individually graded), quality of the responses to the tutorial partner's written work, preparedness for tutorial meetings, quality of oral contribution, and overall
progress in the course; I will meet individually with each student for a midterm evaluation.
No prerequisites; open to first-years. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to preference to Philosophy majors and then to sophomores.
Not available for the Gaudino option.
[Contemporary Value Theory]
MLADENOVIC
PHIL 236 Contemporary Ethical Theory (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Is sacrificing an individual's welfare for the sake of the community ever justified, or does each individual have an inviolable status that must be respected?
Should moral considerations always take priority over personal projects and intimate relationships, or are there some spheres in which we should be free to
pursue our goals without concern for morality? We will explore these and related questions by systematically comparing the two dominant ethical theories of
224
the 20th century, consequentialism and deontology. While both theories find their roots in earlier thinkers--consequentialism in Mill and Sidgwick, deontology
in Kant--our focus will be on contemporary developments of these views. After examining these approaches in depth, we'll turn our attention to recent theories
that attempt to transcend the distinctions that divide consequentialist and deontological views. Readings include works by Bentham, Mill, Nozick, Railton,
Brink, Williams, Wolf, Taurek, Rawls, Smart, Scheffler, Nagel, Kant, Kamm, Quinn, Kagan, Ross, and Scanlon. This is a writing intensive course.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: several short response papers; an 8- to 10-page midterm paper; a 10- to 12-page final paper.
Prerequisite: Philosophy 101, Philosophy 102, or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 10-15). Preference will be given to Philosophy
majors.
BARRY
PHIL 238T(F) Just War Theory, Terrorism, and Weapons of Mass Destruction (Sames as Political Science 237) (W)
What is generally known as Just War Theory (JWT), first clearly formulated by Augustine and then developing both theistic and non-theistic variants, is currently
challenged by terrorism, torture, and weapons of mass destruction. Participants on this tutorial will review prominent current forms of JWT, examining how each
deals-or can be adapted to deal-with these challenges. Participants will aim to discover, or perhaps in part to develop, the currently best available theory concern-
ing the political ethics of torture, terrorism, counterterrorism, and the production and uses of weapons of mass destruction.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: tutorial papers and responses to partners' tutorial papers, in alternating weeks; participation in tutorial discussions.
Prerequisite: any Philosophy course, Political Science 203, or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference to Philosophy and
Political Science majors and potential majors.
[Contemporary Value Theory]
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. WHITE
PHIL 271T(S) Woman as "Other" (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 271T) (D) (W)
At mid-century, Simone de Beauvoir, existential philosopher and perhaps the greatest feminist theorist of the twentieth century, described woman as "living in a
world where men compel her to assume the status of the Other." At the same time, Beauvoir asserts: "One is not born a woman, one becomes one." How, given
their objectification, can women become subjects for themselves? Is authenticity even possible? Must the relation between self and other inevitably be one of
objectification and domination? Is reciprocity and mutuality in self-other relations possible? In our efforts to deepen our understanding of these important philo-
sophical questions, questions that have been at the center of social and political thought at least since Hegel introduced the dialectic of master and slave, we will
engage in close readings of writings by Beauvoir (including autobiography and biography), as well as philosophers responding to her--Frantz Fanon, Luce
Irigary and Judith Butler.
Format: tutorial. Students will work in pairs. Requirements: each student will write and present orally a 5-page essay every other week. Students not presenting
essays will prepare oral critiques of their partners' essays. Evaluation will be based on written work, oral presentations of essays, and oral critiques.
Prerequisites: one course in either Philosophy or Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to current and
prospective Philosophy and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies majors.
[History]
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. SAWICKI
PHIL 272T Free Will and Responsibility (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
In moral and legal decisions we hold people responsible for their deliberate actions. This practice seems justified as long as people are free to make the choices
that they do. But which criteria must a decision meet in order to qualify as free? Clearly, a free decision must not be the result of external coercion. But must the
decision also be free from any outside influence at all? If so then freedom may seem impossible, for we are all deeply influenced by external factors ranging
from the general laws of nature to specific features of our genetic endowment and social environment including religion, political ideology, and advertising.
These affect not only our particular choices but also, more fundamentally, who we are and what we value. Since it is undeniable that we are pervasively in-
fluenced by such forces, the real question is whether, and how, free choice is possible amidst all of these influences. In this course we will examine the best-
known recent philosophical attempts to make sense of the nature of free will and responsibility. Since these issues have a direct bearing on which theory of legal
punishment we should accept, we will also examine influential theories of punishment. Our focus will be on works by contemporary authors.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: students meet with the instructor in pairs for roughly an hour each week; each student will write a 5- to 6-page paper every other
week (6 in all) and comment on his or her tutorial partner's paper in alternate weeks. Emphasis will be placed on developing skills in reading, interpretation and
oral argument as well as critical reasoning and writing.
Prerequisite: Philosophy 101 or 102, or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference will be given to current and prospective
Philosophy majors and students committed to taking the tutorial.
BARRY
PHIL 274T Messing with People: The Ethics of Human Experimentation (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
From the now infamous Tuskegee Syphilis Study and Stanley Milgram's Obedience experiments, to lesser known but equally important landmarks in research
ethics--such as the Willowbrook experiment, in which residents of a state home for mentally retarded children were intentionally infected with a virus that
causes hepatitis, and the Kennedy-Krieger Lead Abatement study, which tested the efficacy of a new, inexpensive lead paint removal procedure by offering to
low-income parents of young children reduced-rate housing in lead-abated units and testing those children for lead exposure--in this sophomore tutorial we
will closely examine a series of contemporary and historical cases of human experimentation (roughly, one case per week) with an eye toward elucidating the
moral norms that ought to govern human subjects research. A number of conceptual themes will emerge throughout the course of the term, including notions of
exploitation and coercion, privacy and confidentiality, and the balance between public interests and individual rights. Specific issues will include the ethics of
placebo research, deception in research, studies of illicit/illegal behavior, genetic research, experimentation with children, pregnant women and fetuses, and
persons with diminished mental capacity, among other topics. Students will meet with the professor in pairs for approximately one hour per week, writing and
presenting 5- to 7-page essays every other week, and commenting orally on their partners' essays in alternate weeks.
Format: tutorial. Evaluations will be based on written work, on oral presentations of that work, and on oral critiques.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference will be given to prospective philosophy majors and students committed to taking the tutorial.
[Contemporary Value theory]
J. PEDRONI
PHIL 280 Frege, Russell, and the Early Wittgenstein (Not offered 2011-2012)
The last line of Ludwig Wittgenstein's Tractatus famously reads: "Whereof one cannot speak, thereof one must be silent." Are there things that cannot be put
into words? What are the limits of language? What is the nature of language? How do logic and language relate? We will examine these (and other questions) in
the context of the great philosophical revolution at the beginning of the last century: the linguistic turn and the birth of analytic philosophy. We will see how a
focus on language affects our understanding of many traditional philosophical questions, ranging from epistemology and metaphysics to aesthetics and ethics.
Our texts will include Gottlob Frege,The Foundations of Arithmetic, Bertrand Russell,Principles of Mathematics, and Ludwig Wittgenstein,Tractatus Logico-
Philosophicus.
While you're debating whether to take this class, consider the following puzzle. There is a village where the barber shaves (a) all those and (b) only those who
do not shave themselves. Now, ask yourself: who shaves the barber? You will see that if the barber does not shave himself, then by condition (a) he does shave
himself. And, if the barber does shave himself, then by condition (b) he does not shave himself. Thus, the barber shaves himself if and only if he does not shave
himself. See if you can figure out why this is sometimes called a paradox, and then ask yourself what this has to do with our opening questions.
Format: seminar. Requirements: two short papers (5 pages) and one longer final paper (12-15 pages).
Prerequisite: Philosophy 102. Expected enrollment: 12-15. Preference give first to Philosophy majors, and then to seniors and juniors of any major.
GERRARD
PHIL 281T Philosophy of Religion (Same as Religion 302) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Our goal in this course will be to try to determine how far reason can justify belief in God. We will spend at least half of the semester examining the best-known
philosophical arguments for and against the existence of God (including the ontological argument, the cosmological argument, the teleological argument, the
argument from religious experience, the argument from evil, and the argument from religious disagreement). For each one, we will first look at historically
important formulations of the argument and then turn to contemporary reformulations. Our aim will be to identify and then evaluate the strongest version of
each argument. After working through these arguments, we will reflect more generally on the proper roles of reason and faith in justifying religious belief. In the
final section of the course we shall examine the relationship between god and morality. Authors will include Plato, Anselm, Aquinas, Pascal, Paley, Hume,
Kant, Kierkegaard, Freud, Marx, and several contemporary philosophers.
Format: tutorial; emphasis will be placed on developing skills in reading, interpretation and oral argument as well as critical reasoning and writing. Require-
225
ments: students meet with the instructor in pairs for roughly an hour each week; each student will write a 5- to 6-page paper every other week (six in all) and
comment on his or her tutorial partner's paper in alternate weeks.
Prerequisite: Philosophy 101 or 102, or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected : 10). Preference will be given to current and prospective
philosophy majors.
BARRY
PHIL 282 The Turn to Religion in Post-Modern Thought (Same as Jewish Studies 280 and Religion 303) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under REL 303 for full description.) HAMMERSCHLAG
PHIL 288(S) Embodied Mind: A Cross-Cultural Exploration (Same as Religion 288)
This course examines some of the central questions raised by the study of the consciousness: the place of intentionality, the role of emotions, the relation with the
body, the nature of subjectivity, the scope of reflexivity, the nature of perceptual presence, etc. In confronting these difficult questions, we do not proceed purely
theoretically but consider the contributions of various observation-based traditions, from Buddhist psychology and meditative practices to phenomenology to
neurosciences. We begin by examining some of the central concepts of Buddhist psychology, its treatment of the mind as a selfless stream of consciousness, its
examination of the variety of mental factors and its accounts of the relation between cognition and affects. We also introduce the practice of meditation as a way to
observe the mind and raise questions concerning the place of its study in the mind-sciences. We pursue this reflection by examining the views of James, Husserl,
Sartre and Merleau-Ponty, particularly as they concern the methods for the study of the mind and the relation between consciousness, reflexivity and the body. In
this way, we develop a rich array of analytical tools and observational practices to further our understanding of the mind. But we also question the value of these
tools based on first person approaches by relating them to the third person studies of the mind. In this way, we come to appreciate the importance of considering
the biology on which mental processes are based and the light that this approach throws on the nature of consciousness. We conclude by considering the relation
between first and third person studies of the mind, focusing on the concept of the embodied mind as a fruitful bridge between these different traditions.
Format: seminar. Requirements: regular practice of meditation, a class presentation, a short essay (6p) and a long final research paper (15 p.).
Prerequisites: some background in either psychology, cognitive sciences, philosophy or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 18 (expected: 12). Selec-
tion on the basis of relevant background.
[Contemporary Metaphysics and Epistemology]
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. CRUZ and DREYFUS
PHIL 294T(S) Philosophy and Narrative Fiction (Same as Comparative Literature 294) (W)
What is it for a novel, a story, a play or a film to be a philosophical narrative? It is not enough for it merely to be about a character who happens to be a philosopher;
nor is it just that philosophical positions are reviewed in the narrative, as in Gaarder's Sophie's World. Milan Kundera tried to answer this question by saying that a
good philosophical novel does not serve philosophy but, on the contrary, tries to "get hold of a domain that (...) philosophy had kept for itself. There are metaphys-
ical problems, problems of human existence, that philosophy has never known how to grasp in all their concreteness and that only the novel can seize." If Kundera
is right, fictional narratives (such as novels) sometimes do the philosophical work that philosophy cannot do for itself. What kind of work is that, and how is it
accomplished? Why can't argumentative prose--philosophers' preferred form of expression--clearly say, and moreover prove, what literature, theatre and film
illustrate, show and display? One possible answer which we will examine is that, while many philosophers recognize that there are intimate connections between
what we believe, feel and do, philosophical argumentation by its very nature appeals to belief alone; narrative art, by contrast, can simultaneously engage our
reason, emotions, imagination and will, thus resulting not only in deepening our understanding, but also in transformation of the self.
To properly address a number of interrelated questions concerning philosophy in literature and film, and philosophical problems of meaning, interpretation and
evaluation of narrative fiction, we will discuss both narrative works of art and theoretical approaches to their analysis. We will consider the ways in which narra-
tive fiction presents and engages its audience in philosophical reflections on personal identity, nature of the self, interpersonal relationships, memory, time, human
existence, freedom, and the meaning in life.
The works to be discussed and analyzed in the tutorial meetings will be by some of the following writers and directors: Kafka, Dostoyevsky, Sartre, de Beauvoir,
Camus, Thomas Mann, Borges, Kundera, Ecco, Bergman, Tarkovsky, Resnais, Kurosawa, Bunuel and Kubrick. The theoretical aspect of the course will involve
close readings of selected articles in contemporary philosophy of language, mind and action; in contemporary philosophy of literature and philosophy of film; and
in contemporary narratology.
Format: tutorial, involving a three-way discussion among tutorial partners and the instructor. Requirements: all students will attend Monday evening film screen-
ings and discussions. Tutorial pairs will meet with the instructor for one hour a week; each student will write a 5-page paper every second week, and comment on
the tutorial partner's paper on alternate weeks.
No prerequisites; open to first year students. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). In the case of overenrollment, preference will be given to students seriously
committed to the course; among them, to students who are considering a major in Philosophy, in Comparative Literature or in Literary Studies, and to students
especially interested in film.
[Contemporary Value Theory]
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M. MLADENOVIC
PHIL 301 Textual Meaning and Interpretation (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Early philosophy of language focused on meaning of assertions, denials and descriptions. However, this approach is too narrow, since people use language to do
a myriad of things: to ask, demand, promise, praise, blame, threaten, command, insinuate, evoke, express feelings, and sometimes just to play. The philosophi-
cal study of what we do in language, and how we understand one another, is called pragmatics; within the analytic tradition, the main philosophical contribu-
tions to the study of pragmatics in language came from Peirce, Wittgenstein, Austen, Grice and Searle. Other philosophers and literary theorists have used some
of their ideas recently to throw light on the nature of textual meaning and the interpretation of literary texts. We shall first explore the salient features of the
pragmatic approaches to language, paying special attention to Austin's notion of illocutionary force and Grice's notion of non-natural meaning. We will then
examine how these notions may be exploited in the consideration of various long-standing issues in the theory of literary interpretation. We will discuss the
importance of specific genre conventions and broader contextual matters to the interpretation of literary texts (along the lines suggested by Quentin Skinner);
the possibility of using intention to rule out mistaken and arrive at acceptable interpretations, if not a single correct interpretation (a possibility denied by such
relativists as Stanley Fish); the use and meaning of metaphors; and the host of questions surrounding the "intentional fallacy" (the alleged result of invoking
authorial intention to determine textual meaning).
Format: seminar. Requirements: class participation, 10 short weekly response papers, and 2 longer (5-7 page) papers.
Prerequisites: Philosophy 102 or 103. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 6-10). Open to all students, preference given to philosophy majors.
MLADENOVIC
PHIL 304T Authenticity: From Rousseau to Poststructuralism (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
The eighteenth-century aesthetician Edward Young once asked: "Born originals, how comes it to pass we die copies?" In the same century Jean-Jacques Rous-
seau responds to this question by charting the individual's "fall" into society; that is, into artifice, hypocrisy, vanity, and conformism. This tutorial begins with
Rousseau's reflections on authentic individuality as they are developed in several of his works. We then trace the idea of authenticity (as an aesthetic and ethical
category) in both literary and philosophical texts associated with romanticism, existentialism, critical theory, psychoanalytic theory, and posthumanism. We
conclude with recent challenges to the coherence, viability, and value of the ideal of authenticity as it applies not only to individuality, but also to group identi-
ties. Themes and questions investigated include the following: (1) Must "authenticity" refer to some notion of an innate core or deep self? Are there other terms
in which we can imagine "being ourselves"? (2) Does being authentic require that one defy social conventions or is it compatible with adopting conventional
roles? (3) What impact do consumerism, mass media and contemporary technologies (particularly human-machine couplings and nanotechnology) have on
thinking about authenticity? Students will work with partners. Each student will write and present orally an essay of 5-6 pages every other week on an assigned
topic in the reading for that week and serve as a commentator on alternate weeks.
Format: tutorial. Evaluation will be based on written work, oral presentation of essays, and critiques.
Prerequisite: one course in Philosophy or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10).
Not available for the Gaudino option.
[History]
SAWICKI
PHIL 305(F) Existentialism and Phenomenology (W)
According to Jean-Paul Sartre, the only philosopher to ever refer to himself as an "existentialist," existence precedes essence. What is essential to human being is
not any fixed set of characteristics, but rather what a human being becomes and how it defines and creates itself under conditions it does not choose. In this course
we address key themes and figures from two of the most influential movements in twentieth century European philosophy, namely, existentialism and pheno-
menology, a philosophical approach to which existentialism is indebted. We will discuss major works (philosophical, literary, visual) by such figures as Edmund
226
Husserl, Martin Heidegger, Jean-Paul Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir, Albert Camus, Maurice Merleau-Ponty, and Richard Wright, Ingmar Bergman and Jean-Luc
Godard. We will raise questions concerning the task of philosophy, the structure and meaning constituting function of consciousness, the relationship between self
and other, the mind-body relationship, freedom, authenticity, and absurdity.
Format: seminar. Requirements: short critical response papers, occasional short class presentations based on outlines of the text, and three 5- to 6-page papers.
Students will be required to re-write one of the three papers in lieu of a final exam.
Prerequisites: Philosophy 101 or 102 or 240 or 271T or 304T or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 10-15). Preference given to majors and
those considering a major in philosophy.
[History]
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR SAWICKI
PHIL 308 Wittgenstein's Philosophical Investigations (Not offered 2011-2012)
Bertrand Russell claimed that Ludwig Wittgenstein was "perhaps the most perfect example I have ever known of genius as traditionally conceived--passion-
ate, profound, intense, and dominating." Wittgenstein's two masterpieces, the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus and the Philosophical Investigations, stand like
opposing poles around which schools of twentieth-century analytic philosophy revolve. The Wittgenstein of the Tractatus is known as the "earlier Wittgens-
tein," the Wittgenstein of theInvestigationsis known as the "later Wittgenstein." This course is an intensive, line-by-line study of theInvestigations--one of the
greatest (and thus, one of the most controversial) books in the history of philosophy. Aside from its overwhelming influence on 20- and 21st-century philosophy
and intellectual culture, any book which contains the remark, "if a lion could talk, we could not understand him," deserves serious attention.
Format: seminar. Requirements: one short midterm paper (5-7 pages) and one longer final paper (12-15 pages).
Prerequisites: Philosophy 102. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 12).
GERRARD
PHIL 309 Kant (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course will provide an intensive study of the philosophy of Immanuel Kant. Kant's transcendental idealism is profoundly important: it constitutes a chal-
lenge to rationalist metaphysics, a response to Hume's empiricist skepticism, and systematically integrates epistemology, ethics, and aesthetics in a way that has
shaped modern Western thought. It is also profoundly difficult: more than 200 years after its development, there is still vehement disagreement not only over
whether or not Kant was right, but over what Kant actually said. In this course our goal will be to understand Kant's philosophy as a systematic whole, in terms
of the tight-knit relationships that bind all his ideas into one comprehensive vision. We will attempt to understand what Kant said and why, how it is important,
and the extent to which it is right. We will read significant portions of all three of Kant's most important works (the Critique of Pure Reason, Critique of
Practical Reason, and Critique of Judgment), and may occasionally make use of secondary literature.. Requirements: several short assignments; final paper of
12-15 pages.
Prerequisites: Philosophy 102. Expected enrollment: 5-15.
DUDLEY
PHIL 315 Kant's Critique of Pure Reason (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
A close examination of Kant's Critique of Pure Reason, arguably the most important work in the Western philosophical tradition. We will read the Critique in
its entirety and will occasionally make use of secondary literature.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active participation; several short writing assignments; final paper of 12-15 pages.
Prerequisites: any introduction to philosophy course. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 10). Preference given to Philosophy majors.
[History]
CRUZ
PHIL 317 The Philosophy of Hilary Putnam (Not offered 2011-2012)
Hilary Putnam is considered by many (including the professor of this course) to be the world's foremost living philosopher. Putnam is famous for both changing
his mind and for the breadth of his interests. He was one of the earliest proponents of the view that human beings are importantly analogous to computers, and
then later, one of the chief critics of that view. Putnam's works range from the philosophy of logic and physics to the philosophy of education and history. He has
written on philosophers from Aristotle and Kant to Levinas and Dewey. He has examined both the consistency of mathematics and the consistency of religion.
In this course we will study the full range of Putnam's work.
Format: seminar. Requirements: frequent short assignments and presentations and a major final paper.
Prerequisites: Philosophy 101 and 102. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 12-19). Preference given to Philosophy majors.
GERRARD
PHIL 318 Necessity and Possibility (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
You are reading this course description right now. However, it seems true to say that you might have been doing something else, something more fun, instead. In
other words, while it is true that you are reading, it doesn't seem to be necessary that you are reading. It seems to be possible for you to be doing something else.
On the other hand, some claims seem to be necessarily true. For example, it seems to be necessary that anything that is reading this description exists, and it
seems to be necessary that two plus two is equal to four. In other words, it is impossible that two plus two be anything other than four, or that something read
without existing. Furthermore, while there are some things about you that seem to be accidental, other things about you seem to be essential. You might not have
been a Williams student, on the other hand I don't think that you could have been a goldfish. While being a Williams student seems accidental to you, being
human seems to be part of your essence. But what is it for a claim to be necessary? Is necessity a matter of the way that we think about the world, or is necessity
a feature of reality independently of the way we think of it? If necessity is a feature of reality, what sort of feature is it? What is it for a feature to be essential to a
thing? In this course, we will examine a series of questions about necessity and possibility raised in contemporary metaphysics, logic, and philosophy of lan-
guage. Central readings in the class will be drawn from the work of Bertrand Russell, Gottlob Frege, Rudolf Carnap, W. V. O. Quine, Saul Kripke, David
Lewis, David Kaplan, and Kit Fine. This class will be quite technical, and it is strongly recommended that students have a familiarity with first-order logic.
Format: seminar. Requirements: several short response pieces, two 10-page papers that will involve substantial revision in light of instructor feedback, active
participation in seminar meetings.
Prerequisites: Philosophy 102 or permission of instructor. It is strongly recommended that students have also taken Philosophy 103 (Logic) or an equivalent
class. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 10-15). Preference given to Philosophy majors.
MCPARTLAND
PHIL 327T Foucault (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 327) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
This course begins with a brief introduction to some of Foucault's early writings but focuses on a close reading of middle and late texts that have become central
to debates about the significance of his work: Discipline and Punish, The History of Sexuality (vols. 1-3), and selected interviews and course lectures. We
examine debates in the Foucault literature about freedom, power, ethics, and the nature of critical theory. This course has been designated EDI because it
engages questions concerning power, social differences and social and political freedom.
Format: tutorial. Evaluations will be based on written work (six 5- to 6-page papers), oral presentations of that work, and on oral critiques. Prerequisites: at least
two courses in philosophy or Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies, or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 8-10). Preference given to
current or prospective Philosophy and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies majors.
SAWICKI
PHIL 330 Plato (Same as Classics 330) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Plato is one of the most important and influential thinkers in the history of the western tradition. His depiction of the trial and death of Socrates is one of the
classics of western literature, and his views on ethics and politics continue to occupy a central place in our discussions 2400 years after they were written. It is, in
fact, quite difficult to get through any course of study in the liberal arts without some familiarity with Plato. Nevertheless, comparatively few people realize that
the views we commonly think of as "Platonic" represent only one strand in Plato's thought. For example, we commonly attribute to Plato a theory of the Forms
on the basis of his claims in the so-called "middle dialogues" (mainly Republic, Phaedo, and Symposium). However, in his philosophically more sophisticated
and notoriously difficult later dialogues (such as the Parmenides, Philebus, Sophist and Statesman), Plato engages in radical criticism and revision of his earlier
views. In this course, we will spend the first third of the semester attempting to understand the metaphysics and epistemology in Plato's middle dialogues. We
will spend the balance of the semester coming to grips with Plato's arguments in the later dialogues. We will read several complete dialogues in translation, and
will also read a wide variety of secondary source material.
Format: lecture/discussion. This class will be a roughly equal mixture of lectures, student presentations, and seminar discussion. Requirements: students will be
expected to prepare a seminar presentation, to write several focused short analytical pieces, and to write a 15- to 20-page term paper in multiple drafts.
227
Prerequisites: Philosophy 101, Philosophy 102 or permission of instructor. (A prior course in logic will be extremely helpful, but is not necessary.) Enrollment
limit: 15 (expected: 15). Preference given to upper-level Philosophy and Classics majors. This course is part of the Critical Reasoning and Analytical Skills
initiative.
MCPARTLAND
PHIL 331 Contemporary Epistemology (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Epistemology is one of the core areas of philosophical reflection. In this course, we will study the literature in contemporary philosophy on the nature of
knowledge and rational belief. Epistemologists seek answers to the following kinds of questions:
--When is it rational to have a particular belief?
--What is knowledge (as opposed to mere opinion)?
--In order to be justified in holding a belief, must someone know (or believe) that she is justified in holding that belief?
--What, if anything, justifies our scientific knowledge?
These questions are typically asked within a framework where the overarching goal is attaining truth and avoiding falsity. Beyond this common ground, how-
ever, epistemologists are much divided. Some maintain that these issues are solely the provinces of philosophy, using traditional a priori methods. Others
maintain that these questions will only yield to methods that incorporate our broader insight into the nature of the world including, perhaps, feminist thought or
science. Both stances face severe difficulties. Further, even where there is agreement as to the proper way of answering epistemological questions, there is a
stunning variety of possible answers to each question. The syllabus can be found at: http://www.williams.edu/philosophy/fourth_layer/faculty_pages/jcruz/courses/episty.html
Format: seminar. Requirements: short writing assignments each week, and a final paper written in several drafts.
Prerequisites: Philosophy 102 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 5-12). Preference given to Philosophy, Psychology, Linguistics,
and Computer Science majors.
CRUZ
PHIL 332 Aristotle (Same as Classics 332) (Not offered 2011-2012)
Aristotle's status as a central figure in Western philosophy is undisputed. For hundreds of years during the Middle Ages, Aristotle was simply referred to as
"The Philosopher." Aristotle is also credited with the invention of logic, biology, physics, political science, linguistics, and aesthetics. His writings on metaphys-
ics, epistemology, and ethics set the course for much of the subsequent philosophical discussion which continues to the present day. In this class, we will
examine some of Aristotle's central metaphysical, epistemological and ethical views. There are two main objectives in this course: (1) We will work to sym-
pathetically reconstruct Aristotle's views from translations of his primary texts; (2) We will investigate the extent to which these views are relevant to contem-
porary discussions in philosophy.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: several short writing assignments, final paper, attendance and active participation in class.
Prerequisites: Philosophy 101 or 102 or 221. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 12).
MCPARTLAND
PHIL 334 Greek and Roman Ethics (Same as Classics 334) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Most thoughtful human beings spend a good deal of time musing about how we ought to live. The philosophers of ancient Greece and Rome were among the
first thinkers to develop rigorous arguments in response to such musings. While ancient scientific theories and the philosophical systems constructed in accor-
dance with these theories might be of interest only to scholars of the ancient world, the moral philosophy produced in Greece and Rome remains as relevant
today as it was when it was written. In this course, we will closely examine some central texts in ancient moral philosophy. We will begin by reading several of
Plato's early dialogues and the entirety of his Republic. We will then turn to Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics, as well as selections from his Eudemian Ethics,
Magna Moralia and Politics. Finally we will examine some central texts in the Stoic and Epicurean traditions, as well as some of Cicero's contributions to
moral philosophy. We will pay special attention to how different thinkers conceive of the nature of happiness, the nature of virtue, and the relation between the
two. We will also spend a good deal of time thinking about the moral psychology of the thinkers we read.
Format: seminar. Requirements: several short response pieces, two 10-page papers which will involve substantial revision in light of instructor feedback, active
participation in seminar meetings.
Prerequisites: Philosophy 221 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 10-15). Preference given to majors in Philosophy and Classics.
MCPARTLAND
PHIL 335 Contemporary Metaethics (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
We often speak as if moral judgments can be true or false, well-reasoned or not. But how should objectivity in this domain be understood? Is moral objectivity
like scientific objectivity, assuming we have a clear sense of what that involves? If not, should that concern us? Are there other models for understanding moral
objectivity besides science? While answers to such questions are implicit in historically important accounts of morality, these issues became the topic of explicit,
sustained debate in the twentieth century. Our focus will be on the most recent and sophisticated work in this area. We will examine several different approaches
in depth, including realism, constructivism, expressivism, and skepticism. Readings will include works by Moore, Stevenson, Harman, Mackie, Railton, Boyd,
Blackburn, Williams, McDowell, Korsgaard, and Nagel.
Format: seminar. Requirements: final paper, several shorter assignments, attendance and participation.
Prerequisites: Philosophy 101 required; one 200- or 300-level Philosophy course is recommended. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 5-15). Preference given to
Philosophy majors and those considering the Philosophy major.
BARRY
PHIL 337T(F) Justice in Health Care
Justice is a notoriously complex and elusive philosophical concept, the conditions of which are even more difficult to articulate within real world institutions and
contexts than in the abstract. In this course we'll explore justice as a fundamental moral principle and as a desideratum of the US health care system. The first
portion of the course will be devoted to considering general theories of justice as well as alternative conceptions of justice within the health care context. This will
provide the background for subsequent examination of specific topics, which may include, among others: justice in health care financing and reform, which may
itself include an analysis of the Affordable Care Act; justice in health care rationing, with particular attention to the relationship between rationing criteria and
gender, "race," disability, and age; justice in the procurement and allocation of organs for transplantation; AIDS and personal responsibility for illness; and justice
in medical research, including "double standards" for research conducted in less developed countries.
Format: tutorial. Evaluations will be based on written work, oral presentations of that work, and on oral critiques.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference will be given to Philosophy majors, to students in the International Studies Global Health Track,
and to students committed to taking the tutorial.
[Contemporary Value theory]
Tutorial meetings to be arranged PEDRONI
PHIL 340(S) Contemporary Metaphysics (W)
In this course, we will examine a number of issues in contemporary metaphysics. Possible topics include: realism and anti-realism, the problem of universals, the
nature of necessity, causation, material constitution, the nature of time, personal identity, and freedom of the will. While we will be concerned to place our discus-
sions of these issues in historical context, almost all of the reading for the class will consist in articles written by contemporary philosophers working in what is
sometimes called the "analytic" tradition.
Format: lecture and discussion. Evaluation: two long papers (at least one of which will be re-written), short response papers, and active participation in class.
Prerequisites: Philosophy 102 (familiarity with formal logic helpful but not required). Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 10).
[Contemporary Metaphysics and Epistemology]
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W MCPARTLAND
PHIL 360 The Political Thought of Frantz Fanon (Same as Africana Studies 402 and Political Science 360) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under AFR 402 for full description.) ROBERTS
PHIL 378 Pragmatist Currents in Contemporary Epistemology and Philosophy of Science (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
American Pragmatism left a deep legacy in contemporary epistemology and the philosophy of science, but it is--more often than not--a legacy difficult to
disentangle from other intellectual influences. Consequently, many philosophers deeply influenced by pragmatism do not recognize the fact, while, on the other
hand, some self-proclaimed pragmatists of our days can hardly be seen as continuing the tradition to which they pledge allegiance. This seminar will try to
establish, with as much accuracy as the subject allows, what are the central tenets of American Pragmatism, how they have shaped contemporary epistemology
228
and the philosophy of science, and finally, to what extent are pragmatist approaches to human knowledge philosophically sound and fruitful.
The seminar will fall into two unequal parts. The first, shorter part will focus on the writings of the three classics of American pragmatism--Charles S. Peirce,
William James and John Dewey--and analyze their reaction against traditional epistemology, as well as the positive philosophical ideas that they had to offer.
The second, longer part of the seminar will try to isolate and follow some of the pragmatist currents which run through epistemology and philosophy of science
in the 20th and 21st centuries. We will read, among others, selected papers by Carnap, Hempel, Quine, Goodman, Kuhn, Elgin, Hacking, Misak, Putnam,
Rorty, and Haack.
Format: seminar. Requirements: class attendance and participation; 6 short assignments (about 2 pages long); class presentation; and 2 longer papers (about 5
pgs. each).
Prerequisites: three courses in philosophy, two of which must be from this list: Philosophy 102, 103, 109, 131, 202, 207, 209, 210, 280, 330, 331, 379, 380; or
the consent of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 6-9). Preference given to Philosophy majors.
[Contemporary Metaphysics and Epistemology]
MLADENOVIC
PHIL 379(S) American Pragmatism (Same as American Studies 379)
Along with jazz, pragmatism stands as the greatest uniquely American contribution to world culture. As the music wails in the background, we will study the
classic pragmatists: William James, C. S. Peirce, and John Dewey. We will continue with the contemporary inheritors of the tradition: Cornel West, Richard
Rorty, and Hilary Putnam. Although it has influenced both analytic and continental philosophy, pragmatism is a powerful third philosophical movement. Always
asking what practical difference would it make, our authors investigate the central questions and disputes of philosophy, from epistemology and metaphysics to
ethics and religion. Rather than seeing philosophy as an esoteric discipline, the pragmatic philosophers (with the possible exception of Peirce) see philosophy as
integral to our culture and see themselves as public intellectuals.
Format: seminar. Requirements: final paper, several short assignments.
Prerequisite: Philosophy 102. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected : 12-15). Preference given first to Philosophy and American Studies majors, and then to seniors and
juniors of any major.
[History]
Hour: 12:00-12:50 MWF GERRARD
PHIL 380 Relativism (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
`Relativism' is a term often used in philosophy for a great number of very different views. The aim of the course is to survey, analyze and discuss many varieties
of relativism--semantic, epistemic, ontological and moral--from Plato's Theaetetus to contemporary social constructivism. We will pay special attention to the
structure of arguments for and against relativism, as well as to the moral motivations and perceived consequences of its endorsement or rejection. We will thus
be led to discuss some of the concepts common to epistemology, metaphysics and ethics: reason, justification, objectivity, understanding, reality and truth.
Some of the questions we will consider are: Are moral standards relative to cultural frameworks? Are there incompatible but equally true ways of describing the
world? Is rationality--the notion of a good reason to believe something--relative to cultural norms? Is relativism a form of skepticism? Is it forced on people
who endorse cultural pluralism as their political ideal as the only tenable philosophical position?
Our readings will include the relevant works of Plato, Sextus Empiricus, Bayle, Locke, Berkeley, Carnap, Quine, Davidson, Goodman, Elgin, Hacking, Krausz,
Foot, Williams, Harman and Thomson.
Format: seminar. Requirements: This is a writing intensive course. Each student will write 10 weekly short papers (1000 words each); give a class presentation
and lead the ensuing discussion; and write a final paper (7-10 pages). Prerequisites: Philosophy 101 and 102, and at least one 200 level philosophy course.
Enrollment limit: 19 (expected 7-10).
MLADENOVIC
PHIL 388T Consciousness (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
The nature of consciousness remains a fundamental mystery of the universe. Our internal, felt experience--what chocolate tastes like to oneself, what it is like
to see the color red, or, more broadly, what it is like to have a first person, waking perspective at all--resists explanation in any terms other than the conscious
experience itself in spite of centuries of intense effort by philosophers and, more recently, by scientists. As a result, some prominent researchers propose that the
existence of consciousness requires a revision of basic physics, while others (seemingly desperately) deny that consciousness exists at all. Those positions
remain extreme, but the challenge that consciousness poses is dramatic. It is at the same time the most intimately known fact of our humanity and science's most
elusive puzzle.
In this tutorial we will read the contemporary literature on consciousness. We will concentrate both on making precise the philosophical problem(s) of con-
sciousness and on understanding the role of the relevant neuroscientific and cognitive research. Tutorial partners will have an opportunity to spend the end of the
semester working on a special topic of their choosing including, for instance, consciousness and freewill, pain and anesthesia, consciousness and artificial
intelligence, or disorders of consciousness.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: Participants will present substantial written work in the tutorial every other week, and will be responsible for commenting on
their tutorial partner's work on off weeks. Expect several short lectures by the instructor over the course of the semester where all the tutorial members convene.
Prerequisites: Philosophy 102 and at least one upper-level course in philosophy. Preference will be given to majors in Philosophy, or concentrators in Neurosci-
ence or Cognitive Science. Open to sophomores with permission of the instructor. Every effort will be made to pair students according to similar or complimen-
tary background. This course is writing intensive. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10).
CRUZ
PHIL 389 The Structural-Systematic Philosophy (Not offered 2011-2012)
The history of theoretical inquiry since the seventeenth century is plausibly viewed as a process whereby philosophy, for the Greeks the home of virtually all
theoretical inquiry, is increasingly deprived of subject matters by the developments of the natural and social sciences. At an extreme, it can appear--and does
appear, to many philosophers--that philosophy is left with no proper subject matter except perhaps those sciences themselves. On a different view, however,
this process can appear instead as one that clarifies a proper subject matter for philosophy; that subject matter is the all-encompassing domain from which each
natural and social science carves its specific domain. Comprehensive philosophical treatments of this all-encompassing domain may reasonably be termed
"theories of everything." This seminar examines central components of such a theory that is currently under development; this is the structural-systematic
philosophy presented in Structure and Being (Lorenz Puntel, translated by collaboration with Alan White) and Toward a Philosophical Theory of Everything
(Alan White). Among the topics to be examined, as systematically interconnected, are language, knowledge, truth, mindedness, ethics, aesthetics, world history,
God, being as such.
Format: seminar. Requirements: attendance, preparation, participation; regular short writing assignments and/or class presentations; a term paper (10-15 pages).
Prerequisites: Philosophy 102 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 8-12). Preference to Philosophy majors.
WHITE
PHIL 391T(S) The Ethics of Hume and Kant (W)
David Hume and Immanuel Kant are indisputably among the most influential figures in the western philosophical tradition. Interestingly, each regarded his work
in epistemology and metaphysics as a mere prelude to his work in moral philosophy. In both domains, Kant took himself to be responding directly to Hume,
whom he credited with awakening him from his dogmatic slumber. In this tutorial we shall study their core works in moral philosophy, in which they develop
conceptions of practical rationality, motivation, freedom, and morality. For Hume, we'll read Books II and III of A Treatise of Human Nature, the Second Enquiry,
and several essays, including "Of the Standard of Taste." For Kant, we'll read Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals and Critique of Practical Reason, along
with related essays. Rich and intriguing in their own right, these texts are particularly rewarding when read together, as they articulate profoundly different views
of the nature of human reason, agency, and sociality. It is no exaggeration to say that Hume and Kant have set the stage for much current work on these issues in
contemporary ethics. One happy consequence of the enduring quality of their work is an abundance of superb secondary literature, which we'll draw upon to
supplement our study of the primary texts.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: students meet with the instructor in pairs for roughly an hour each week; each students will write a 5- to 6-page paper every other
week (6 in all) and comment on their tutorial partner's paper in alternate weeks. Emphasis will be placed on developing skills in reading, interpretation and oral
argument, as well as critical reasoning and writing.
Prerequisites: A 100-level philosophy course, Philosophy 202 (History of Modern Philosophy), or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected:
10). Preference: current and prospective Philosophy majors.
[History]
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. BARRY
229
PHIL 401(F) Senior Seminar: Philosophy in the Public Sphere
In this seminar we will study contemporary philosophers who see themselves as public intellectuals, using philosophy in an attempt to change as well as comment
on the world.
Format: seminar. Requirements: several short papers, final paper, class presentations, attendance and participation.
Prerequisites: the course is required for senior Philosophy majors. Enrollment is limited to senior Philosophy majors.
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M, 1:10-3:50 W GERRARD
PHIL 491(F)-W30 Senior Essay
This course involves Independent Study under the supervision of a member of the department. The objective is the presentation and writing of a senior essay
(maximum 40 pages).
PHIL 493(F)-W31-494(S) Senior Thesis
This course involves Independent study under the supervision of a member of the department. The objective is the preparation and writing of a senior thesis
(maximum 75 pages).
PHIL 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
PHYSICAL EDUCATION, ATHLETICS, AND RECREATION
Chair and Director, LISA MELENDY
Assistant Professors: A. BARRALE, W. BARRALE, D. BROOKS, F. BROOKS, S. BURTON, M. CREIGHTON, E. DESANTY, R. FARLEY, P.
FARWELL, R. FISHER, D. GREENBERG, E. GREES, R. HASENFUS, K. HERMAN, W. KANGAS, C. KELSEY, A. KELTON, S. KUSTER,
Z. LEVY, S. LEWIS, M. MAKER, P. MANNING, C. MASON, G. MCCORMACK, L. MELENDY, M. PINARD, M. RUSSO, H. SILVA, A.
SWAIN, P. WELLS. Instructors: M. CAMPANELLI, K. CALLAHAN-KOCH. Sports Medicine: M. FRAWLEY, L. WILK, R. LANOUE, Y.
WILKINSON.
The instructional Physical Education Program at Williams is an integral part of the student's total educational experience. As a part of the liberal arts concept,
the program develops the mind -body relationship, which is dependent upon the proper integration of physical and intellectual capacities. The main objective of
the physical education program is to develop in each student an appreciation of physical fitness and wellness, and to expose them to a variety of activities that are
suitable for lifetime participation.
Four credits of Physical Education represent one of the requirements for the College degree. There are five physical education units during the year. In the fall
academic semester, there are two six-week physical education quarters. Winter Study is another unit, and there are two physical education quarters in the spring
academic semester. Two different activities must be completed.
The following courses are offered at various times during the year. A schedule listing all courses offered is issued to every student before each quarter and
Winter Study. Classes may vary according to availability of instructors and interest of students.
Badminton
Basketball
Bicycling
Bowling
Broomball
Canoeing
Core Training
Dance (African, Ballet, Modern)
Diving
Figure Skating
Fly Fishing
Golf
Horseback Riding
Ice Climbing
Kayaking
Martial Arts
Method Matwork, Pilates based
Mountain Biking
Muscle Fitness
Outdoor Living Skills
Paddle Tennis
Plyometircs
Rock Climbing
Rowing
Running
Ski Patrol
Skiing (alpine and cross country)
Snowboarding
Soccer
Spinning
Squash
Swimming
Telemarking
Tennis
Trail Crew
Volleyball
Water Aerobics
Weight Training
Wellness
Wilderness Leadership
Women's Self Defense
Yoga
PHYSICS (Div. III)
Professor DANIEL AALBERTS
Professors: AALBERTS, S. BOLTON*, K. JONES, MAJUMDER, STRAIT***, WOOTTERS. Associate Professors: TUCKER-SMITH. Assistant
Professors: LOPES*, STRAUCH*. Visiting Assistant Professor: SEIFERT. Laboratory Supervisor: FORKEY.
What is light? How does a transistor work? What is a black hole? Why are metals shiny? What is the wave/particle duality? There are people for whom
questions like these are of more than passing interest; some of them become Physics or Astrophysics majors. A physics student experiments with the phenomena
by which the physical world is known and explores the mathematical techniques and theories that make sense of it. A Physics or Astrophysics major serves as
preparation for further work in physics, astrophysics, applied physics, other sciences, engineering, medical research, science teaching and writing, and other
careers involving insight into the fundamental principles of nature.
ASTROPHYSICS MAJOR
The Physics Department, in cooperation with the Astronomy Department, offers a major in astrophysics consisting of (at least): 6 or 7 courses in Physics, 3 or 4
in Astronomy, and 1 in Mathematics. The core sequence of the Astrophysics major is the same as the Physics major described below (except that Physics 302,
although strongly recommended, is not required). Students intending to pursue graduate study in astrophysics will need to take upper-level physics electives
beyond the basic requirements for the major. Honors work in Astrophysics may be in either physics or astronomy. Students majoring in Astrophysics are expected
to consult early and often with faculty from both departments in determining their course selections. The detailed description of the Astrophysics major is given
under "Astronomy," along with a description of the Astronomy major also offered by that department.
PHYSICS MAJOR
Introductory courses
Students considering a major in physics should take both physics and mathematics as first-year students. A student normally begins with either Physics 131 or
Physics 141:
1) Physics 131 Introduction to Mechanics. This is designed as a first course in physics. It is suitable for students who either have not had physics before or have
had some physics but are not comfortable solving "word problems" that require calculus.
2) Physics 141 Mechanics and Waves. Students in this course should have solid backgrounds in science and calculus, either from high school or college,
including at least a year of high school physics.
The Department of Mathematics will place students in the appropriate introductory calculus course. The physics major sequence courses all make use of
calculus at increasingly sophisticated levels. Therefore, students considering a Physics major should continue their mathematical preparation without interruption
230
through the introductory calculus sequence (Mathematics 103, 104, and 105 or 106). Students are encouraged to take Physics 210 as early as possible. Physics
210 is cross listed as Mathematics 210 for the benefit of those students who wish to have the course listed with a MATH prefix.
Advanced Placement
Students with unusually strong backgrounds in calculus and physics may place out of Physics 141 and either: 1) begin with the special seminar course Physics
151 in the fall (typically followed by Physics 210 in the spring), or 2) begin with Physics 142 in the spring (possibly along with Physics 210). Students may take
either 151 or 142 but not both. On rare occasions a student with an exceptional background will be offered the option of enrolling in Physics 201.
Placement is based on AP scores, consultation with the department, and results of a placement exam administered during First Days. The exam can also be
taken later in the year by arrangement with the department chair. The exam covers classical mechanics, basic wave phenomena, and includes some use of calculus
techniques.
Requirements for the Major
A total of ten courses in physics and mathematics are required to complete the Physics major. Students who place out of both Physics 141 and Physics
142 and begin their studies in Physics 201 are required to take a total of nine courses.
Required Physics Sequence Courses
Physics 141 Mechanics and Waves
or Physics 131 Introduction to Mechanics
Physics 142 Foundations of Modern Physics
or Physics 151 Seminar in Modern Physics
Physics 201 Electricity and Magnetism
Physics 202 Waves and Optics
Physics 210 Mathematical Methods for Scientists
Physics 301 Quantum Physics
Physics 302 Statistical Mechanics and Thermodynamics
Required Mathematics Course
Mathematics 105 Multivariable Calculus or Mathematics 106 Multivariable Calculus
Students entering with Advanced Placement in mathematics may obtain credit toward the major for the equivalent Mathematics 105 or 106 taken elsewhere.
At least two more physics or other approved courses must be taken, bringing the total number of courses for the major to ten.
Options
1) Mathematics 104 may be counted if taken at Williams
2) Mathematics 209 may substitute for Physics 210.
3) Astronomy 111 may count in place of Physics 141 if a student places out of 141 (see "advanced placement" above).
4) An additional Astronomy or Astrophysics course above the introductory level that is acceptable for the astrophysics major may be counted.
5) Two approved Division III courses above the introductory level may be substituted for one Physics course. Approval is on an individual basis at the
discretion of the department chair.
6) Honors work is in addition to completion of the basic major so Physics 493 and 494 do not count towards the ten courses in the major.
Preparation for Advanced Study
Students who may wish to do graduate work in physics, astrophysics, or engineering should elect courses in both physics and mathematics beyond the mini-
mum major requirements. The first-year graduate school curriculum in physics usually includes courses in quantum mechanics, electromagnetic theory, and
classical mechanics that presuppose intermediate level study of these subjects as an undergraduate. Therefore, students planning graduate work in physics should
elect all of the following courses:
Physics 402T Applications of Quantum Mechanics
Physics 405T Electromagnetic Theory
Physics 411T Classical Mechanics
Advising
Both majors and non-majors are encouraged to consult with the department chair or course instructors about course selections or other matters.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN PHYSICS
The degree with honors in Physics will be awarded on the basis of a senior thesis presenting the results of a substantial experimental or theoretical investigation
carried out under the direction of a faculty member in the department. There is no rigid grade point average required for admission to the program or for the
awarding of the degree with honors, but it is normally expected that honors students will maintain at least a B average in physics and mathematics. Students will
normally apply for admission to the program early in the spring of their junior year and during senior year these students will normally elect Physics 493, W31,
and 494 in addition to the usual requirements for the major. At the end of winter study, the department will decide whether the student will be admitted to honors
candidacy. Both a written thesis and a colloquium presentation of the results are required. The degree with honors will be awarded to those who meet these
requirements with distinction. The degree with highest honors will be awarded to those who fulfill them with unusually high distinction.
Honors candidates will also be required to participate in departmental colloquium talks.
STUDY ABROAD
The physics community is international in scope and a career in physics (or a related field) can provide many opportunities for travel and contact with individu-
als from outside the United States. The physics major at Williams is a carefully structured four-year program designed to prepare students who are so inclined for
graduate study at leading research institutions. While it is possible to complete the major requirements in three years, such a major will not usually not lead to
further study in the field. With careful early planning on the part of a student, and close consultation with the department chair, it is possible to complete a strong
major and still study abroad provided the foreign institution can provide courses which reasonably substitute or supplement those in the Williams major program.
OPTIONS FOR NON-MAJORS
Many students want to take a self-contained and rigorous full-year survey of physics. For such students, the most appropriate sequence will be either Physics
131 or Physics 141 followed by Physics 132, depending on the student's background in science and mathematics (see Introductory Courses above). Either of
these sequences satisfies the physics requirement for medical school.
The department also offers one semester courses designed for non-majors. This year there are two such offerings: Physics 107 and 109.
PHYS 107(F) Newton, Einstein, and Beyond (Q)
This course follows a quest to understand the nature of space, time, matter, and energy, one that continues to this day. We will focus on two scientific theories that
revolutionized our understanding of the physical world, Newtonian mechanics (developed in the late 17th century) and Einstein's special relativity (developed in
the early 20th century). As we explore these theories, we will pay special attention to the very different stories they tell about space and time. We will conclude the
semester by touching upon recent developments in cosmology, where observations have led to dramatic surprises about the make-up of our universe, and particle
physics, where the Large Hadron Collider experiment is poised to extend our understanding of nature to higher energies and shorter distances.
This course is intended for students whose primary interests lie outside of the natural sciences and mathematics. The mathematics used will be algebra and
trigonometry. Every student will have three meetings every week. Some weeks the three meetings will be lectures (MWF 10-10:50), other weeks there will be
two lectures (MF 10-10:50), and one conference section.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; problem-solving conference section, one hour per week. Evaluation will be based on weekly problem sets, quizzes, two
midterms, and a final exam, all with a significant quantitative component (see the description of the QFR requirement).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 100 (expected: 70). Preference given to students based on seniority.
NOTE: every student will have three meetings every week; some weeks the three meetings will be lectures (MWF 10:0010:50), other weeks there will be two
lectures (WF 10:00-10:50) and one conference section.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 WF Conferences: 10-10:50 M, 12-12:50 M, 1-1:50 T TUCKER-SMITH
PHYS 108 Energy Science and Technology (Same as Environmental Studies 108) (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
Energy use has skyrocketed in the United States and elsewhere in the world, causing significant economic and political shifts, as well as concerns for the
environment. This course will address the physics and technology of energy generation, consumption, and conservation. It will cover a wide range of energy
sources, including fossil fuels, hydropower, solar energy, wind energy, and nuclear energy. We will discuss energy use in transportation, manufacturing, build-
ing heating, and building lighting. Students will learn to compare the efficiencies and environmental impacts of various energy sources and uses.
Format: lecture once a week plus weekly conference section. Evaluation will be based on weekly assignments, two hour tests, and a final project. All of these
231
will be substantially quantitative.
Prerequisites: high school physics, high school chemistry, and mathematics at the level of Mathematics 103. This course will make use of quantitative argu-
ments and an acquaintance with high school physics and chemistry will prove helpful. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 30).
STRAIT
PHYS 109(S) Sound, Light, and Perception (Q)
Light and sound allow us to perceive the world around us, from appreciating music and art to learning the details of atomic structure. Because of their importance
in human experience, light and sound have long been the subject of scientific inquiry. How are sound and light related? How do physiology and neural processing
allow us to hear and see the world around us? What are the origins of color and musical pitch? This course introduces the science and technology of light and
sound to students not majoring in physics. We will start with the origins of sound and light as wave phenomena, and go on to topics including color, the optics of
vision, the meaning of musical pitch and tone, and the physical basis of hearing. We will also discuss some recent technological applications of light, such as
lasers and optical communications. The class will meet for two 75-minute periods each week for a variable mixture of lecture, discussion, and hands-on, interac-
tive experiments.
Format: lecture/lab/discussion. Each student will attend the Thursday lecture plus one conference section weekly. Evaluation will be based on class participation,
problem sets, in-class exams, oral presentations, and a final exam, all with a quantitative component.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 40).
Hour: 1:10-2:25 R Conferences: 1:10-2:25 M, 2:35-3:50 M MAJUMDER
PHYS 131(F) Introduction to Mechanics (Q)
We focus first on the Newtonian mechanics of point particles: the relationship between velocity, acceleration, and position; the puzzle of circular motion; forces;
Newton's laws; energy and momentum; and gravitation. The physics of rotations and vibrations will also be discussed. We finally turn to the basic properties of
waves, such as interference and refraction, as exemplified with sound and light waves. We also study optics of lenses and mirrors. This course is intended for
students who have not studied physics before, or who have had some physics, but are not comfortable solving "word problems" that require calculus.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; laboratory, three hours every other week. Evaluation will be based on exams, labs, and weekly problem sets, all of which
have a substantial quantitative component.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 103; students who scored 4 or 5 on the AP Physics B exam or on the AP Physics C (mechanics) exam, or 6 or 7 on the IB Physics HL
exam may not take this course and are encouraged to take Physics 141 instead. No enrollment limit (expected: 60). Physics 131 can lead to either Physics 132 (for
students wanting a oneyear survey of physics) or Physics 142 (for students considering a physics or astrophysics major).
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 M,T,W AALBERTS
PHYS 132(S) Electromagnetism and the Physics of Matter (Q)
This course is intended as the second half of a one-year survey of physics. In the first half of the semester we will focus on electromagnetic phenomena. We will
introduce the concept of electric and magnetic fields, and study in detail the way in which electrical circuits and circuit elements work. The deep connection
between electric and magnetic phenomena is highlighted in a discussion of Faraday's Law of Induction. In the second half of the semester, we introduce several of
the most central topics in twentieth-century physics. We will discuss Einstein's theory of special relativity as well as aspects of quantum theory. We will end with a
treatment of nuclear physics, radioactivity, and uses of radiation.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; laboratory, three hours every other week. Evaluation will be based on weekly problem sets, labs, quizzes and exams, all of
which have a substantial quantitative component.
Prerequisites: Physics 131 or 141 or permission of instructor, and Mathematics 103. No enrollment limit (expected: 60).
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 M,T,W,R SEIFERT
PHYS 141(F) Mechanics and Waves (Q)
This course covers the same topics as Physics 131, but with a higher level of mathematical sophistication. It is intended for students with solid backgrounds in the
sciences, either from high school or college, who feel comfortable solving "word problems" that require calculus. Physics 141 can lead to either Physics 132 (for
students wanting a one-year survey of physics) or Physics 142 (for students considering a physics or astrophysics major).
Format: lecture, three hours per week; laboratory, three hours every other week/conference, one hour every other week. Evaluation will be based on weekly
problem sets, labs, 2 onehour tests, and a final exam, all of which have a substantial quantitative component.
Prerequisites: high school physics and Mathematics 103 (or equivalent placement). No enrollment limit (expected: 50).
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 M,T,W STRAIT
PHYS 142(S) Foundations of Modern Physics (Q)
Newtonian Mechanics, spectacular as it is in describing planetary motion and a wide range of other phenomena, only hints at the richness of behaviors seen in the
universe.
Special relativity has extended physics into the realm of high speeds and high energies and requires us to rethink our basic notions of space and time. Quantum
mechanics successfully describes atoms, molecules, and solids while at the same time calling into question our notions of what can be predicted by a physical
theory. Statistical physics reveals new behaviors that emerge when many particles are present in a system. This course will survey some of these important ideas,
and can serve either as a terminal course for those seeking to complete a year of physics or can serve as the basis for more advanced study of these topics.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; laboratory, three hours every other week; conference, one hour every other week. Evaluation will be based on weekly
homework, labs, two hour tests, and a final exam, all of which have a substantial quantitative component.
Prerequisites: Physics 141 and Mathematics 103, or equivalent; students may not take both Physics 142 and Physics 151. Physics 131 may substitute for Physics
141 with the permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected:30).
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 T,W WOOTTERS
PHYS 151(F) Seminar in Modern Physics (Q)
Newtonian Mechanics, spectacular as it is in describing planetary motion and a wide range of other phenomena, only hints at the richness of behaviors seen in the
universe.
Special relativity has extended physics into the realm of high speeds and high energies and requires us to rethink our basic notions of space and time. Quantum
mechanics successfully describes atoms, molecules, and solids while at the same time calling into question our notions of what can be predicted by a physical
theory. Statistical physics reveals new behaviors that emerge when many particles are present in a system. This course covers the same basic material as Physics
142 but in a small seminar format for students with strong prior preparation in physics.
Prerequisites: placement by the department (see "advanced placement" section in the description about the department ). Students may take either Physics 142 or
Physics 151 but not both. Enrollment limit: 18 (expected: 18).
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 W JONES
PHYS 201(F) Electricity and Magnetism (Q)
In this course, we study electromagnetic phenomena and their mathematical description. Topics include electrostatics, magnetic fields, and electromagnetic in-
duction, DC and AC circuits, and the electromagnetic properties of matter. We also introduce Maxwell's equations, which express the essence of the theory in
remarkably succinct form.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; laboratory, three hours per week. Evaluation will be based on problem sets, labs, two hour tests, and a final exam, all of
which have a substantial quantitative component.
Prerequisites: Physics 142, Mathematics 105 or 106. No enrollment limit (expected:25).
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 T,R WOOTTERS
PHYS 202(S) Vibrations, Waves and Optics (Q)
Waves and oscillations characterize many different physical systems, including vibrating strings, springs, water waves, sound waves, electromagnetic waves, and
gravitational waves. Quantum mechanics even describes particles with wave functions. Despite these diverse settings waves exhibit several common characteris-
tics, so that the understanding of a few simple systems can provide insight into a wide array of phenomena. In this course we begin with the study of oscillations of
simple systems with only a few degrees of freedom. We then move on to study transverse and longitudinal waves in continuous media in order to gain a general
description of wave behavior. The rest of the course focuses on electromagnetic waves and in particular on optical examples of wave phenomena. In addition to
well known optical effects such as interference and diffraction, we will study a number of modern applications of optics such as short pulse lasers and optical
communications. Throughout the course mathematical methods useful for higher-level physics will be introduced.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; laboratory, three hours per week. Evaluation will be based on problem sets, labs, two one-hour tests, and a final exam, all of
which have a substantial quantitative component.
Prerequisite: Physics 201. Co-requisite: Physics/Mathematics 210 or permission of instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 20).
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 T,W JONES
232
PHYS 210(S) Mathematical Methods for Scientists (Same as Mathematics 210) (Q)
This course covers a variety of mathematical methods used in the sciences, focusing particularly on the solution of ordinary and partial differential equations. In
addition to calling attention to certain special equations that arise frequently in the study of waves and diffusion, we develop general techniques such as looking
for series solutions and, in the case of nonlinear equations, using phase portraits and linearizing around fixed points. We study some simple numerical techniques
for solving differential equations. A series of optional sessions in Mathematica will be offered for students who are not already familiar with this computational
tool.
Format: lecture, three hours per week. Evaluation will be based on weekly problem sets and several in-class exams, all of which have a substantial quantitative
component.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 105 or 106 and familiarity with Newtonian mechanics at the level of Physics 131. No enrollment limit (expected: 20).
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR TUCKER-SMITH
PHYS 301(F) Quantum Physics (Q)
This course serves as a one-semester introduction to the history, formalism, and phenomenology of quantum mechanics. We begin with a discussion of the
historical origins of the quantum theory, and the Schroedinger wave equation. The concepts of matter waves and wave-packets are introduced. Solutions to
one-dimensional problems will be treated prior to introducing the system which serves as a hallmark of the success of quantum theory, the three-dimensional
hydrogen atom. In the second half of the course, we will develop the important connection between the underlying mathematical formalism and the physical
predictions of the quantum theory. We then go on to apply this knowledge to several important problems within the realm of atomic and nuclear physics.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; laboratory, three hours per week. Evaluation will be based on weekly problem sets, labs, a midterm exam, and final exam,
all of which have a substantial quantitative component.
Prerequisites: Physics 202 and Physics 210. No enrollment limit (expected:15).
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF Lab: 1-4 M,W,R MAJUMDER
PHYS 302(S) Statistical Mechanics and Thermodynamics (Q)
Properties like temperature, pressure, magnetization, heat capacity, conductivity, etc describe the material world. Macroscopic objects are made up of huge num-
bers of fundamental particles interacting in simple ways --- obeying the Schrdinger equation, Newton's and Coulomb's Laws. In this course we will develop the
tools of statistical physics, which will allow us to predict the cooperative phenomena that emerge in large ensembles of interacting particles. We will apply those
tools to a wide variety of physical questions, including the behavior of gasses, polymers, heat engines, magnets, and electrons in solids.
Format: lecture/discussion, three hours per week; laboratory, three hours per week. Evaluation will be based on weekly problem sets, exams, and labs, all of which
have a substantial quantitative component.
Prerequisites: Physics 201, Physics 210; Physics 202 recommended. No enrollment limit (expected: 15).
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR Lab: 1-4 T,W AALBERTS
PHYS 315 Computational Biology (Same as Computer Science 315 and INTR 315) (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
This course will provide an overview of Computational Biology, the application of computational, mathematical, and physical problem-solving techniques to
interpret the rapidly expanding amount of biological data. Topics covered will include database searching, DNA sequence alignment, phylogeny reconstruc-
tion, RNA and protein structure prediction, microarray analysis, and genome assembly using techniques such as string matching, dynamic programming, suffix
trees, hidden Markov models, and expectation-maximization.
Format: lecture, three hours per week; laboratory, 1.5 hours per week. Evaluation will be based on weekly problem sets, programming assignments, and a few
quizzes.
Prerequisites: programming experience (e.g. CSCI 136), mathematics (PHYS 210 or MATH 105), and physical science (PHYS 142 or 151, or CHEM 151 or
153 or 155), or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 10). Preference given to students based on seniority.
AALBERTS
PHYS 316 Protecting Information: Applications of Abstract Algebra and Quantum Physics (Same as Mathematics 316) (Not offered
2011-2012) (Q)
Living in the early decades of the information age, we find ourselves depending more and more on codes that protect messages against either noise or eaves-
dropping. We begin this course by studying the history of this subject, including, for example, the story of the enigma code from World War II. We then
examine some of the most important codes currently being used to protect information, including linear codes, which in addition to being mathematically
elegant are the most practical codes for error correction, and the RSA public key cryptographic scheme, popular nowadays for internet applications. Looking
ahead by a decade or more, we show how a "quantum computer" could crack any RSA code in short order, and how quantum cryptographic devices will
achieve security through the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
Evaluation will be based on homework sets and exams.
Prerequisites: Physics 210 or Mathematics 211 (possibly concurrent) or permission of the instructors. (Students not satisfying the course prerequisites but who
have completed Mathematics 209 or Mathematics 251 are particularly encouraged to ask to be admitted.)
WOOTTERS and LOEPP
PHYS 319(F) Integrative Bioinformatics, Genomics, and Proteomics Lab (Same as Biology 319, Chemistry 319, Computer Science 319 and
Mathematics 319) (Q)
(See under BIOL 319 for full description.) BANTA
PHYS 402T Applications of Quantum Mechanics (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
This course will explore a number of important topics in the application of quantum mechanics to physical systems, including perturbation theory and the
semiclassical interaction of atoms and radiation. The course will finish up with an investigation of quantum optics including an experimental project on non-
classical interference phenomena. Applications and examples will be taken mostly from atomic physics with some discussion of precision measurements and
fundamental symmetries.
Format: tutorial, 1 and 1/4 hours per week; lecture, one hour per week. Evaluation will be based on weekly problem sets, tutorial participation, presentations,
and a final exam or final project, all of which have a substantial quantitative component.
Prerequisites: Physics 301. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Not available for the Gaudino option.
K. JONES
PHYS 405T(F) Electromagnetic Theory (Q)
We will review Maxwell's equations and use them to study a range of topics--electric fields and matter, magnetic materials, light, radiation--exploring phenom-
ena and seeking to gain an intuitive understanding. We will also learn some useful approximation techniques and some beautiful mathematical tools.
The class will meet as a whole once per week for an hour lecture on new material and to discuss questions on the readings. Each week a second tutorial meeting
with the instructor will be scheduled; here, students will take turns working problems on the chalkboard. Written solutions to problems will be due a few days after
the tutorial meeting.
Format: tutorial, 1 and 1/4 hours per week; lecture, one hour per week. Evaluation will be based on weekly problem sets, tutorial participation, presentations, and a
final exam or final project, all of which have a substantial quantitative component.
Prerequisites: Physics 202 and Physics 210 or Mathematics 210. Enrollment limit: 10 per section (expected: 10).
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 F. SEIFERT
PHYS 411T Classical Mechanics (Not offered 2011-2012) (Q)
The course will investigate advanced topics in classical mechanics including phase space plots, non-linear oscillators, numerical solutions, approximation meth-
ods, the calculus of variations, the Lagrangian and Hamiltonian reformulations of mechanics, rotating frames of reference (with emphasis on the implications
for physics on the Earth) and scattering cross sections. The carry over of ideas developed in the context of classical mechanics into other areas of physics will be
explored. The class as a whole will meet once per week for an introductory lecture/discussion. A second tutorial meeting between the instructor and a pair of
students will be scheduled later in the week. Students will take turns working and discussing problems at the chalkboard. Written solutions will be due later in
the week.
Format: tutorial, 1 and 1/4 hours per week; lecture, one hour per week. Evaluation will be based on weekly problem sets, tutorial participation, presentations,
and a final exam or final project, all of which have a substantial quantitative component.
Prerequisites: Physics 202 and Physics 210 or Mathematics 210. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 10). Not available for the Gaudino option.
STRAUCH
233
PHYS 418(S) Gravity (Q)
This course is an introduction to the currently accepted theory of gravity, Einstein's general relativity. We begin with a review of special relativity, emphasizing
geometrical aspects of Minkowski spacetime. Working from the equivalence principle, we then motivate gravity as spacetime curvature, and study in detail the
Schwarzschild geometry around a spherically symmetric mass. After this application, we use tensors to develop Einstein's equation, which describes how energy
density curves spacetime. With this equation in hand we study the FriedmannRobertsonWalker geometries for an expanding universe, and finally, we linea-
rize Einstein's equation to develop the theory of gravitational waves.
Format: lecture, three hours per week. Evaluation will be based on weekly problem sets, a midterm exam, and a final exam, all with a substantial quantitative
component.
Prerequisites: Physics 301 or Physics 405 or Physics 411 (students with strong math backgrounds are invited to consult with the instructor about a possible
waiving of the prerequisites.) No enrollment limit (expected: 19).
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MWF TUCKER-SMITH
PHYS 493(F)-W31, W31-494(S) Senior Research
An original experimental or theoretical investigation is carried out under the direction of a faculty member in Physics, as discussed above under the heading of
The Degree with Honors in Physics.
Prerequisites: permission of the department. Senior course.
Hour: TBA AALBERTS
ASPH 493(F)-W31, W31-494(S) Senior Research in Astrophysics
(See under ASPH 493 for full description.)
PHYS 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
Hour: TBA AALBERTS
PHYS 499(F,S) Physics and Astronomy Colloquium (Same as Astronomy 499)
Physics and Astronomy researchers from around the country come to explain their research. Students of Physics and Astronomy at any level are welcome. This is
not a for-credit course. Registration is not necessary to attend.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 F AALBERTS
POLITICAL ECONOMY (Div. II)
Chair, Professor DAREL E. PAUL
Advisory Committee: Professors: GOLLIN, MAHON, MARCUS, MONTIEL, SWAMY. Associate Professors: BAKIJA, PAUL.
The Political Economy major is designed to give students a grasp of the ways in which political and economic forces interact in shaping public policy. The
major includes substantial study of the central analytical approaches in both Political Science and Economics and seeks to surmount the sometimes artificial
barriers of specialization that may characterize either discipline taken by itself. Three of the required Political Economy courses undertake a conscious merging of
the approaches in the two fields. (These courses are designed by, and usually are taught jointly by, political scientists and economists.) Political Economy 250
examines major theoretical texts in political economy and analyzes economic liberalism and critiques of economic liberalism in the context of current policy
issues. Political Economy 401 examines contemporary issues in political economy in their domestic, comparative and international contexts. Political Economy
402 asks students to research and make proposals in policy areas of current importance. Background for the two senior courses is acquired through courses in
international economics, public finance, and domestic and international/comparative politics and policy.
Students in Political Economy 402 visit Washington, D.C. Sunday night through Wednesday of the first week of spring vacation to conduct interviews relating
to their Political Economy 402 group projects. This is a course requirement and thus a requirement for the major.
MAJOR
(Note: Beginning with the class of 2012, Political Economy majors must complete one course with a substantial experiential education compo-
nent and related to public policy.
Four Introductory Courses
ECON 110 Principles of Microeconomics
ECON 120 Principles of Macroeconomics
PSCI 201 Power, Politics, and Democracy in America
or PSCI 203 Introduction to Political Theory
PSCI 202 World Politics: An Introduction to International Relations
or PSCI 204 Introduction to Comparative Politics: State, Nation, and Democracy
Four Political Economy Program Courses
POEC 250 Economic Liberalism and Its Critics
POEC 253 Empirical Methods in Political Economy
or ECON 255 Econometrics
POEC 401 Contemporary Problems in Political Economy
POEC 402 Political Economy of Public Policy Issues
Three Elective Courses
(NOTE: students may not take all three of their electives in the same department.)
One Comparative Political Economy/General Public Policy course:
ECON/ENVI 204 Economics of Developing Countries
or ECON/ENVI 213 Introduction to Environmental and Natural Resources Economics
or ECON 225T Global Financial Crisis and African Economic Development (not offered 201112)
or ECON/ENVI 228T Water as a Scarce Resource
or ECON 378 Long-Run Perspectives on Economic Growth
or ECON/ENVI 386 Environmental Policy and Natural Resource Management
or ECON 389 Tax Policy in Emerging Markets (not offered 201112)
or ECON 390T Financial Crises: Causes and Cures (not offered 201112)
or ECON 502 Institutions and Governance
or ECON 503 Public Economics
or ECON 505 Finance and Development
or ECON 517 Tax Policy in Emerging Markets
or ECON 520T Inclusive Growth
or PSCI 301/ENVI 309/HSCI 309/SCST309 Understanding Public Policy
or PSCI 351 The New Left and Neoliberalism in Latin America
or PSCI 352T Comparative Political Economy
or WIOX 323 Command and Transitional Economies
or WIOX 324 Economics of Developing Countries
or WIOX 326 Public Economics
or WIOX 328 Labour Economics and Industrial Relations
or WIOX 375 Political Economy of the European Union
One U.S. Political Economy and Public Policy course:
ECON 205 Public Economics (not offered 201112)
or ECON 220 American Economic History (not offered 201112)
234
or ECON 229 Law and Economics
or ECON 230 Economics of Health and Health Care (not offered 201112)
or ECON 351 Tax Policy (not offered 201112)
or ECON 383 Cities, Regions and the Economy
or ECON 468 Your Money or Your Life: Health Disparities in the United States
or PSCI 209 Poverty in America (not offered 201112)
or PSCI 216 American Constitutionalism I: Structures of Power
or PSCI 217 American Constitutionalism II: Rights and Liberties (not offered 201112)
or PSCI/LEAD 218 The American Presidency (not offered 201112)
or PSCI 308 In Search of the American State (not offered 201112)
or PSCI/LEAD 314T Leadership in American Political Development (not offered 201112)
or PSCI 317/ENVI 307 Environmental Law
One International Political Economy course:
ECON 211 Gender in the Global Economy (not offered 201112)
or ECON 215 International Trade, Globalization, and Its Effects (not offered 201112)
or ECON 219T Global Economic History
or ECON 358 International Trade and Economic Policy
or ECON 393 International Macroeconomics (not offered 201112)
or ECON 507 International Trade and Development
or PSCI 223 International Law
or PSCI 224 Politics of Globalism
or PSCI 228 International Organization (not offered 201112)
or PSCI 229 Global Political Economy
or PSCI 319/MAST 351 Marine Policy
or PSCI 327 Global Politics of Development and Underdevelopment (not offered 201112)
or WIOX 322 International Economics
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN POLITICAL ECONOMY
Due to the special demands of this interdisciplinary major, the only route to honors in Political Economy is the thesis. Seniors may pursue the honors thesis
course (Political Economy 493-W31) during the fall semester and winter study period. The third course contributing to such an honors program would normally
be an elective in Political Science or Economics taken during the junior year. This course, which may be one of the required electives, must be closely related,
indeed must prepare the ground for the honors thesis.
Juniors in the Political Economy major with at least a 3.5 GPA in the program may apply for the honors thesis program by means of a written proposal
submitted to the chair by the end of the first week after spring vacation. Written guidelines for such proposals are available in the chair's office and on the program
website. The proposal should have been discussed with at least two faculty members, and at least one faculty advisor from each discipline must be solicited by the
student prior to submission of the proposal.
Final decisions about admission to the honors program will be made in late May after spring grades become available.
To achieve the degree with honors in Political Economy, the thesis must be completed by the end of winter study period and be judged of honors quality by a
committee consisting of the two advisors and a third reader. A thesis judged to be of particular distinction will qualify its author for the degree with highest honors.
STUDY ABROAD
Despite the fact that Political Economy requires more courses than the typical major, plenty of Political Economy majors go abroad. Since many students take
POEC 250 in the fall of the junior year, if you're thinking of spending only one semester abroad, spring is the better choice. Nonetheless, many students go away
for the fall or the whole year. Political Economy majors have often been overrepresented in Williams at Oxford. If you do go abroad in the fall, you should take
POEC 250 in your sophomore year if at all possible. You'll probably want to get some major credits when abroad. The easiest to get are upperlevel electives in
political science and economics.
COURSE NUMBERING SYSTEM
The numbering system for courses offered and required in Political Economy is identical to the system outlined on page 33.
POEC 250(F) (formerly 301) Economic Liberalism and Its Critics (Same as Economics 299 and Political Science 238)
Economic liberalism holds that society is better off if people enjoy economic freedom. Its critics point to what they believe this position ignores or what it wrongly
assumes, and hence, how it would make bad policy. This course explores the relationship between politics and economics by surveying influential works of
political economy. Its first part examines major thinkers in relation to the historical development of capitalism in Western Europe and the United States: the
classical liberalism of Adam Smith, Karl Marx's revolutionary socialism, and the reformist ideas of John Stuart Mill, R. H. Tawney, and John Maynard Keynes.
The second part considers more recent writings that revise and critique liberalism from a variety of perspectives. and then illustrates the contending perspectives
with reference to important policy areas. The historical focus of the course permits you to appreciate the ongoing dialogue between classical and contemporary
views of political economy, while classroom discussion involves frequent reference to current public policy issues.
Format: discussion/lecture. Requirements: eight 2-page papers and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Economics 110 and 120 or equivalent; Political Science 201 or 203 (may be taken concurrently with POEC 250) or AP credit in American Politics
(or permission of instructor). Enrollment limit: 35 (expected: 30). Preference given to Political Economy majors and sophomores intending a Political Economy
major.
Required in the Political Economy major but open to non-majors.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR MAHON and BAKIJA
POEC 253(F) Empirical Methods in Political Economy (Same as Economics 253) (Q)
This course introduces students to common empirical tools used in policy analysis and implementation. The broad aim is to train students to be discriminating
consumers of public policy-relevant research. The emphasis in the course is on intuitive understanding of the central concepts. Through hands-on work with data
and critical assessment of existing empirical social scientific research, students will develop the ability to choose and employ the appropriate tool for a particular
research problem, and to understand the limitations of the techniques. Topics to be covered include basic principles of probability; random variables and distribu-
tions; statistical estimation, inference and hypothesis testing; and modeling using multiple regression, with a particular focus on understanding whether and how
relationships between variables can be determined to be causal-an essential requirement for effective policy formation. Throughout the course, the focus will be
on public policy applications relevant to the fields of political science, sociology, and public health, as well as to economics.
Format: lecture and discussion. Requirements: problem sets, group projects, short essays, and three quizzes.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 103 or its equivalent and one course in Economics; not open to students who have taken Economics 255. Enrollment limit: 19 (ex-
pected: 19). Preference given to Political Economy majors, Environmental Policy majors, and sophomores. This course does not satisfy the econometrics re-
quirement for the Economics major.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR SWAMY
POEC 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
Open to juniors or seniors majoring in Political Economy, with approval of a faculty supervisor and the chair.
POEC 401(F) Contemporary Problems in Political Economy
This course examines contemporary problems in political economy at and across diverse spatial scales. Using both Economics and Political Science methods of
analysis, students study the exercise of power and the accumulation of wealth in the world today as well as central public policy debates around those processes.
We begin with a theoretical discussion of economic policy. Then we move through three course sections organized around contemporary problems at three
distinct scales: the global political economy, the United States political economy, and comparative political economy with an emphasis on the advanced capitalist
countries. We end by taking issues usually studied at a single scale and exploring their innate interconnections through an integrated politicaleconomic and
public policy analysis of immigration. The goal of this course is both to build upon theoretical debates encountered in POEC 250 as well as to prepare students for
the public policy analysis they will do in POEC 402.
Format: seminar. Requirements: two 8- to 10-page papers; one 12- to 15-page paper rewrite; class presentations; class participation.
Prerequisites: Economics 110 and 120; Political Science 201 or 203, or equivalent; Political Science 202 or 204, or equivalent; open to nonmajors. Enrollment
limit: 20 (expected: 15). Preference given to Political Economy majors. Required in the Political Economy major but open to non-majors.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR PAUL and GOLLIN
235
POEC 402(S) Political Economy of Public Policy Issues
The core of this course consists of analyses by student study groups of current issues of public policy. The student groups investigate the interacting political and
economic aspects of an issue, do extensive reading, conduct interviews in Washington (during spring recess) with public and private officials, write a major report
on their findings and recommendations, and defend it orally in a public session.
Students visit Washington, D.C. Sunday night through Wednesday of the first week of spring vacation to conduct interviews relating to their group projects. This
is a course requirement.
Format: seminar with student presentations.
Prerequisites: Political Economy 253 or Economics 255; open only to Political Economy majors.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF MARCUS and LALUMIA
POEC 493(F)-W31 Honors Thesis
POLITICAL SCIENCE (Div. II)
Chair, Professor JAMES E. MAHON
Professors: CRANE, C. JOHNSON, MACDONALD***, MAHON, MARCUS, MCALLISTER, M. REINHARDT***, SHANKS, A. WILLING-
HAM***. Associate Professors: MELLOW**, PAUL. Assistant Professors: CROWE, P. MACDONALD*, MUNEMO. Visiting Assistant Profes-
sors: J. ADAMS, GREEN, NJOYA. Stanley Kaplan Distinguished Visiting Professor: LAWRENCE. Adjunct Professor: JAMES***.
Politics is most fundamentally about forging and maintaining community, about how we manage to craft a common destiny guided by shared values. Commu-
nities need a way to reconcile conflicts of interest among their members and to determine their group interest; they need to allocate power and to determine its just
uses. Power may be used wisely or foolishly, rightly or cruelly, but it is always there; it cannot be wished away. Political science attends to the ways that social
power is grasped, maintained, challenged, or justified. The contests over power and the values that it should be used to further give politics its drama and pathos.
The effort to understand politics aims not only to describe and explain, but also to improve political life.
The Political Science major is structured to allow students either to participate in the established ways of studying politics or to develop their own foci. To this
end, the department offers two routes to completing the major, each requiring nine courses. We invite students either to organize their major through the subfields
that structure the discipline of political science (American politics, international relations, political theory, and comparative politics), or to develop individual
concentrations reflecting their particular interests, regardless of subfields.
MAJOR
SUBFIELD CONCENTRATION ROUTE: Upon declaring a major, students choose one subfield: American politics, international relations, political theory, or
comparative politics. The subfield concentration draws at least four (4) of the nine courses from one subfield including the appropriate core course from 201-204,
two electives of the student's choice at the 200 or 300 level and the senior seminar (or an individual project) in the student's subfield. Students selecting political
theory as their subfield concentration must take Political Science 231 or Political Science 232 as one of their four subfield courses, in addition to taking Political
Science 203 and prior to taking Political Science 430. With permission of the department chair, students may take a senior seminar in a different subfield, provid-
ing they take a third elective in the subfield of concentration. In addition, students must take courses in two subfields outside the subfield of concentration to
satisfy the breadth requirement (all courses at the 100 level and all methods courses also count toward the breadth requirement). The faculty advisor must approve
the student plan. All students must take at least one 300-level course and one research course to complete the major. (Most senior seminars are also research
courses but, especially in political theory, not all are.) In addition, no more than two 100-level courses can count toward the major.
INDIVIDUAL CONCENTRATION ROUTE: Alternatively, students may devise a concentration of their own. In this event, the student prepares a curricular
plan in consultation with a faculty advisor, explaining the nature of the concentration and the courses the student will take. The individual concentration also
requires nine (9) courses, with at least five (5) thematically linked courses constituting the concentration. Of these five courses, four are electives at the 200 or 300
level, including one from 201-204, and one is a senior seminar or individual project. In addition, students pursuing an individual concentration must take at least
two other courses that illustrate breadth in political science. To complete the requirement, the student has his or her choice of any two other courses within the
Political Science Department. The faculty advisor and the department chair must approve the student plan. All students must take at least one 300-level course
and one research course to complete the major. (Most senior seminars are also research courses but, especially in political theory, not all are.) In addition, no more
than two 100-level courses can count toward the major.
ADVISEMENT
When a student chooses to major in Political Science (usually at the end of the sophomore year), he or she may register with any Political Science faculty
member. The registering faculty member will ask for preferences for a permanent faculty advisor and will assist undecided students in finding an advisor. In all
cases, students will be paired by the end of the sophomore year with an advisor who will continue with them through graduation.
COURSE NUMBERING
The course numbering used by the Political Science Department reflects the format and specialization of a course The 100-level courses are designed to
address political topics from multiple subfield perspectives; many are seminars designed for first-year students. The 200-level courses are divided between our
core courses and our electives. The core courses, numbered from 201-204, serve as introductions both to the substance of politics and the subfields organizing the
study of politics. The introductory subfield course must be completed before the senior year. The 200-level elective courses delve into political processes, prob-
lems and philosophies. 100-level and 200-level courses have no prerequisites. 300-level courses are more specialized and have prerequisites. 400-level courses
are senior seminars offered for students in the major; senior seminars also are open to juniors and to non-majors if space permits.
WINTER STUDY PROJECT
The department welcomes relevant WSP 99 proposals that can make important contributions to the student's understanding of public affairs and politics.
Majors, seniors, and students without previous WSP 99 experience have preference.
THE JUNIOR YEAR ABROAD
A major in Political Science can be readily and usefully combined with study off-campus. Generally, only one course taken per semester abroad in a program
approved by the College may be counted toward the requirements for a degree in Political Science.
PREPARATION FOR GRADUATE STUDY
The Department recommends that students contemplating graduate school, especially if they plan to study fields outside political theory, take a course in
research and quantitative methods, such as PSCI 300 or, if it is not taught, ECON/POEC 253.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN POLITICAL SCIENCE
To become a candidate for honors the student must (1) apply in the second semester of the junior year, (2) submit a research proposal
acceptable to the department's honors committee and for which an appropriate advisor is available, (3) have a record of academic excellence
in Political Science. The last includes not only the student's cumulative GPA in Political Science, generally 3.5 or above, but also demon-
strated research and writing skills, evidenced by one or two examples of graded work submitted along with the thesis proposal. Along with
the successful completion of a high-quality thesis, the degree with honors in Political Science requires enrollment in the year-long senior
thesis seminar, in addition to the other nine (9) courses of the regular major requirements.
ADVANCED STUDY IN AMERICAN POLITICS
The Department of Political Science provides the opportunity for an unusually gifted student to engage in an entire year's advanced research in American
politics under singularly favorable conditions. Supported by income derived from an endowment fund, the student, designated the Sentinels of the Republic
Scholar (after the name of the fund), receives a substantial research stipend to cover costs associated with the proposed project.
This unique research course (Political Science 481-W33-482) is designed to encourage the pursuit of excellence among the most talented Williams students of
Political Science. Admission to it is awarded to the most distinguished candidate on the basis of demonstrated capacity for outstanding work and of the project's
promise for creative contributions to the understanding of American politics, political institutions and thought.
PSCI 100 Asia and the World (Same as Asian Studies 201 and International Studies 101) (Not offered 2011-2012)
Asia looms large in contemporary world politics: Japan is gradually assuming an expanded regional national security role; The People's Republic of China is
emerging as a multifaceted Great Power; India is challenged by rising ethno-nationalism. This course will explore both the historical background and current
dynamics of political and economic issues in these three countries, drawing on themes of imperialism, nationalism, and globalization. It is an introductory class
and, therefore, no prior coursework in political science or Asian studies is necessary.
Format: predominately lecture. Requirements: two short papers and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 35 per section (expected: 35 per section).
Comparative Politics and International Relations Subfields
236
CRANE
PSCI 101 The Study of Politics: Democracy (Not offered 2011-2012)
Winston Churchill called it "the worst form of government, except for all the others." H.L. Mencken described it as "the art of running the circus from the monkey
cage." Dave Barry defined it as a governmental system "in which you say what you like and do what you're told." Yet, for all its critics (both serious and satirical),
democracy--the once radical, now commonplace political idea that governmental power should be vested in "the people" ives and (in some cases) thrives in
every corner of the globe. What are the virtues of democracy as a political system, and what are its limitations? How is it practiced in America, and how does it
vary around the world? How--or how well--does it balance bottom-up grassroots activism with top-down elite leadership? How does it relate to economic
development, social strife, and military conflict? Examining questions such as these with both empirical analysis and normative theorizing and with reference to
both history and current events, this course will simultaneously serve as an introduction to the subject of democracy, to the discipline of political science, and to
the members of the Political Science Department, with more than ten different faculty teaching at least one class session.
Requirements: short (3 page) weekly writing assignments, a take-home final exam, and class participation (including four mandatory discussion sections).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 35 (expected: 35). Only open to first-year students.
CROWE and members of the department
PSCI 110(S) Seminar: The Politics of Place in America (W)
What does it mean when someone says they're a Midwesterner? A New Englander? A Texan? Is there importance attached to being an urban resident versus a
suburbanite? What about a rural resident? What's the significance of living in a border town? This course explores the politics of place. The country's politics
have always been keyed, in important ways, to geography: representation in national government is defined in terms of geographic areas; resources from the
national government are distributed unequally around the country; state and local governments, which have an influential role in our political system, vary tre-
mendously from one place to the next; and the country's history has been marked by the violence of geographic conflicts as well as the acquisition of new
territory. Much of its social and economic life can also be understood in terms of geography. Patterns of settlement, immigration, slavery, agriculture, education,
religion, and cultural production have left and continue to leave different patterns of sediment throughout the country; these patterns and their interactions form the
bedrock of American politics. We will spend the semester thinking about the significance of place in politics by exploring the ways that culture, economy, and
political institutions vary throughout the country. Topics covered will include urbanization and urban politics, the development of the suburbs, regional differ-
ences, and the effects of globalization on local differences.
Format: seminar. Requirements: class participation, weekly 1-page reading responses, two 5-page papers, one 15-page research paper.
Prerequisites: open only to first year students. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference to first-year students.
American Politics Subfield
Hour: 11:20-12:35 MELLOW
PSCI 120(S) Seminar: America and the World After September 11 (W)
The terrorist attacks of September 11 and the war in Afghanistan raised fundamental questions about the past and future course of American foreign policy. While
virtually no one defended the terrorist attacks, many academics argued that the root causes of September 11th were to be found in the flaws of the American
approach to the world. In this view, America is an arrogant, unilateralist country that ignores the views and perspectives of the rest of the world community, relies
far too much on its overwhelming military power, and often acts against its ideals and values by supporting repressive and unpopular regimes. This course has
three primary objectives. First, we will assess important critiques of contemporary American foreign policy from both the left and right of the political spectrum.
Second, we will examine the historical and intellectual background of both supporters and critics of American foreign policy in the post Vietnam War era. Third,
in the aftermath of September 11 we will attempt to answer the most important question of all for any analysis of American foreign policy: What is to be done?
While current issues of American foreign policy will be addressed in this class, potential students should note that its primary focus is not on the technical/military
elements of combating terrorism. Particular attention will be paid to constructing policy relevant arguments.
Format: seminar. Requirements: assignments will include short response papers and three 5- to 7-page papers
No prerequisites; not open to juniors and seniors. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to first-year students and potential Leadership Studies
concentrators.
International Relations Subfield
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR GREEN
PSCI 125(F) Power, Leadership and Legitimacy: An Introduction to Leadership Studies (Same as Leadership Studies 125)
(See under LEAD 125 for full description.) C. CHANDLER
PSCI 132 Contemporary Africana Social and Political Philosophy (Same as Africana Studies 132) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under AFR 132 for full description.) ROBERTS
PSCI 140(F) (formerly 102) Seminar: Religion and Capitalism (Same as Religion 283) (W)
Up through the 1960s it was popular to claim that the world was becoming increasingly and inevitably secular, with the development of modern capitalist social
relations as a signature cause. Forty years hence the `secularization thesis' is largely defunct. Instead one sees the vibrant return of religion to social, economic and
political prominence in most parts of the world--at the same time we are experiencing through globalization and the so-called 'third industrial revolution' the
most dramatic economic advances in a century. This course seeks to investigate and answer a simple yet encompassing question: what is the relationship between
these two signature forces of religion and capitalism--one cultural, one material--which have constructed and continually define our world? In investigating this
theme, we will discuss both the origins of capitalist society as well as its more recent transformations through the rise of the welfare state, consumerism and
globalization. We will study the `God gap' between largely theist Africa, South and West Asia, and the Americas on the one hand and largely atheist Europe and
East Asia on the other, as well as investigate what has replaced organized religion in the latter regions. The focus of the course is on Christianity in Western
countries both historically and in the present, but we will spend time discussing religion (particularly Pentecostalism) and capitalism in the contemporary Global
South as well.
Format: seminar. Requirements: regular discussion questions, two medium-length papers, in-class paper workshops, final research paper incorporating first two
papers.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 16). Preference given to first-years and sophomores.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF PAUL
PSCI 201(F,S) Power, Politics, and Democracy in America
Begun as an experiment over 200 years ago, the United States has grown into a polity that is simultaneously praised and condemned, critiqued and mythologized,
modeled by others and remodeled itself. This course introduces students to the dynamics and tensions that have animated the American political order and that
have nurtured these conflicting assessments. Topics include the founding of the American system and the primary documents (the Declaration of Independence,
the Constitution, and the Federalist Papers), the primary institutions of national government then and now (Congress, the Presidency, and the Supreme Court) and
the politics of policy-making in the United States. We study structures, processes, key events, and primary actors that have shaped American political develop-
ment. In investigating these topics, we explore questions such as these: How is power allocated? What produces political change? Is there is a trade-off between
democratic accountability and effective governance? How are tensions between liberty and equality resolved? Do the institutions produce good policies, and how
do we define what is good?
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: depending on the section, some combination of response papers, short-to-medium papers, exams, and class participa-
tion.
No prerequisites. This is an introductory course, open to all, including first-year students. Enrollment limit: 35 per section (expected: 35 per section). Preference
given to first- and second-year students.
American Politics Subfield
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR First Semester: C. JOHNSON
11:00-12:15 MWF, 8:30-9:45 TR Second Semester: CROWE, MARCUS
PSCI 202(F,S) World Politics: An Introduction to International Relations
Whereas the field of comparative politics looks at what goes on inside various countries, international relations considers the actions of sovereign states toward
one another and the patterns and institutions that they create. International politics differs from domestic politics in the absence of centralized, legitimate institu-
tions. Anarchy characterizes the world of sovereign states--there is no world government, nor agreement that one is desirable or even possible. This lack of a
common authority means that any dispute among countries is up to the countries themselves to settle, by negotiating, appealing to shared norms, or using force.
For this reason, while international relations involves many of the same topics that consume domestic politics--ethnic antagonisms, spending on aid, war, nation-
al identity, inequality, weapons manufacture, finance, loans, pollution, migration--it shares few of the same processes for dealing with them. This course covers
237
the theories and problems central to international relations. It considers the importance that this radical decentralization has for achieving values we hold, and
examines processes that might undermine or support the anarchical system in which we live.
Format: lecture. Requirements: some combination of short papers, midterm exam/paper, final exam, and class participation.
No prerequisites; this is an introductory course, open to first-year students and sophomores. Juniors and seniors may enroll only with permission of instructor, and
only under special circumstances. Enrollment limit: 35 per section (expected: 35 per section). Preference given to first-year students and sophomores intending
to major in Political Science.
International Relations Subfield
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR First Semester: SHANKS
1:10-2:25 MR Second Semester: MCCALLISTER
PSCI 203(F,S) Introduction to Political Theory
Is politics war by other means? Is it merely a practical way to meet our needs? Or is it, rather, the activity through which citizens pursue justice and the good life?
And what is justice? How can it be established and secured? What are the powers and obligations of citizenship? Who should rule? Who decides? On what basis?
Political theory addresses questions such as these as it investigates the fundamental problems of how we can, do, and ought to live together. The questions have
sparked controversy since the origins of political thinking; the answers remain controversial now. This course addresses the controversies, focusing on major
works of ancient, modern, and contemporary theory by such authors as Plato, Aristotle, Machiavelli, Hobbes, Rousseau, Hegel, Mill, Marx, Nietzsche, Arendt,
Rawls, and Foucault. Themes may include authority, obligation, power, war, violence, freedom, justice, equality, democracy, liberalism, capitalism, community,
and pluralism, though the emphasis will vary from semester to semester.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: two or three papers; some sections also have a final exam.
No prerequisites. This is an introductory course, open to all, including first-year students. Enrollment limit: 25 per section (expected 25). Preference given to first-
and second-year students.
Political Theory Subfield
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR, 11:20-12:35 TR First Semester: NJOYA
8:30-9:45 TR, 9:55-11:10 TR Second Semester: J. ADAMS
PSCI 204(F,S) Introduction to Comparative Politics: State, Nation, and Democracy
Whereas the field of international relations focuses upon the actions of sovereign states toward one another, the comparative study of politics looks mainly at what
goes on inside countries, the domestic dynamics of political power and institutions. It asks, for example, where sovereign states come from, why political life
differs so much from one country to another, and how political regimes, structures and institutions change, sometimes suddenly. Thus comparative politics is
often about what citizens of countries with stable and relatively effective governments take for granted (and why they may take it for granted).
In this course, we will examine several broad historical-political themes: the rise of modern state structures; the emergence of capitalism; the articulation of
national identities; the spread of liberalism and democracy; and the meaning of these concepts. Worthwhile answers will require us to look at them theoretically,
historically, comparatively, and through contemporary developments.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: two 5- to 7-page papers and a final exam.
No prerequisites; this is an introductory course, open to all, including first-year students. Enrollment limit: 35 (expected: 23). Preference given to first-year stu-
dents and sophomores.
Comparative Politics Subfield
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR, 1:10-2:25 MR First Semester: MACDONALD, CRANE
11:00-12:15 MWF Second Semester: MUNEMO
PSCI 205 Contemporary American Conservative Political Thought (Not offered 2011-2012)
Conservative thinkers claim to be leading an intellectual transformation away from the tired nostrums of liberalism. They see themselves as original, dynamic,
serious. This course will read leading conservative political thinkers with a view to identifying their central tenets, both negative and positive. What is it that they
oppose and what is it that they support? What, if anything, defines contemporary conservative thinking? Is it a coherent body of thought, a doctrine, or a
collection of disparate and conflicting thinkers? What is the relationship of thinkers who emphasize the market, order, and traditional values?
Format: seminar. Requirements: one 3-page paper, one 5- to 7-page paper, and one 10-page paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Preference given to sophomores, juniors and Political Science majors and Leadership Studies concentra-
tors.
American and Theory Subfields
M. MACDONALD
PSCI 206 Foundations of Afro-Caribbean Thought (Same as Africana Studies 180) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under AFR 180 for full description.) ROBERTS
PSCI 207 Political Elections (Not offered 2011-2012)
The National and state elections taking place this fall, 2010, will be "interesting". Historically, mid-term elections, elections without the dominant consideration
of who will be the President, generate less attention and less involvement of the public. But, while midterm elections often seem to have less at stake, in 2010
much is at stake. The 21st century in the United States has had a very turbulent beginning and the American public is very divided over how best to respond to
the many challenges that confront the United States. This course explores the factors that shape the outcome of political elections in America. Among the
factors we will consider are the state of the economy, international events, the role of political parties at the state and national levels, the current partisan balance,
ideology, media, special interests, money, candidates, the "hot" issues of the moment, of which there are many, and long enduring issues that have long gener-
ated conflict at the national level. We will consider in detail the 2010 national mid-term elections both for Federal office (Senate and House) and for state offices
(governors and state legislators).
Format: lecture. Requirements: a midterm, a final, and a research paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 35 (expected: 20-24). Preference given to Political Science majors.
American Politics Subfield
MARCUS
PSCI 208T(S) Wealth in America (W)
The pursuit of wealth is an important feature of American political identity, captured by the ideas of the American dream and the Protestant work ethic. The
accumulation of wealth has been lauded as both a worthy individual activity and a vital component of the nation's public interest. Yet inequality in wealth may
conflict with the political equality necessary for democratic governance and public trust, leading to concerns that we are sacrificing community, fairness, and
opportunity for the benefit of a small portion of the population. This tutorial focuses on questions about the public value of wealth and its accumulation, which
have become more pressing now that the richest one percent of Americans own 34 percent of privately held wealth. Some readings will be historical, particularly
those focusing on American political thought and the politics of the Gilded Age, such as Andrew Carnegie's "Gospel of Wealth". Most of the readings, such as
Graetz and Shapiro's Death by a Thousand Cuts and Pierson and Hacker's Winner-Take-All Politics, will focus on contemporary political debates about the
accumulation, concentration, and redistribution of wealth, prompted by concerns about high--and increasing--inequality in both income and wealth.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: five essays (5 pages each), five critiques (2 pages each), and one final paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to sophomores with an interest in social sciences and junior political science and political
economy majors.
American Politics Subfield
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. C. JOHNSON
PSCI 209 Poverty in America (Not offered 2011-2012)
Although some lament that the U.S. is heading toward socialism, social welfare programs in the U.S. differ in important ways from those in other wealthy and
democratic nations. This course focuses on the adoption and development of policies to address poverty and inequality in the U.S. The issues we will explore
include: What is poverty and who is poor? What economic, historical, and sociological theories have been advanced to explain poverty? Why has the U.S.
adopted some approaches to reduce poverty but not others? What enduring political conflicts have shaped the U.S. welfare state?
Format: discussion/lecture. Requirements: class participation, two or three short papers, and a final paper.
No prerequisites; open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Preference given to Political Science, Political Economy, and Women's, Gen-
der and Sexuality Studies majors.
American Politics Subfield
C. JOHNSON
238
PSCI 210(F) Culture and Incarceration (Same as Africana Studies 210, American Studies 210, INTR 210 and Women's, Gender and
Sexuality Studies 210)
This seminar examines incarceration, immigration detention centers, and the death penalty from historical and contemporary perspectives. Students will study
and examine interdisciplinary texts as well primary sources (legislature and criminal codes and writings by the incarcerated). The emphasis will be on the study of
social attitudes concerning ethnic groups, gender/sexuality and class as they pertain to a "penal culture" in the United States.
Format: seminar. Requirements: attendance and active participation (10%); collective/group presentations (30%); four 3- to 5-page double spaced e-papers
(60%).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20. Preference given to juniors and seniors, or sophomores with permission of instructor.
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M JAMES
PSCI 211(F) Public Opinion and Political Behavior
The focus of this course is the role of public opinion in democratic regimes. The influence of public opinion on public affairs and popular governments is a
relatively new phenomenon in the history of governments (largely subsequent to the American and French revolutions). We can see from recent events the impact
of public opinion: In the early 1990s the American public quickly became interested in drought and starvation in Somalia pressing the American government to
intervene, if briefly and unsuccessfully. Some have claimed that American journalists successfully provoked the American public to go to war (the Spanish-
American War, creating the slogan, "Remember the Maine"), and to withdraw from war (Viet Nam). More recently, public support to commence the Iraq war was
generated in the United States while at the same time democratic publics in other nations strongly opposed the war. We see political leaders make use of the"bully
pulpit" to rally support for their agendas, efforts that sometimes succeed and other times fail. We shall explore public opinion in American politics. There are
many interesting questions awaiting us this semester. How do events and crises influence public opinion? Which psychological, sociological, and political factors
impact public opinion formation? When and under what circumstances do pressure groups influence public opinion? Do mass beliefs alter individual voters'
choices? When and how do political leaders influence public opinion and when does public opinion influence political leaders?
Format: lecture/discussion. In addition, we will have direct access to the holdings of the Roper Center, using iPOLL, which enables direct exploration of the
thousands of polls on American public opinion from 1937 to today. Requirements: 8- to 12-page research paper, a midterm and final examination.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 14 (expected 14).
American Politics Subfield
Research Course
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR MARCUS
PSCI 213(F) Theory and Practice of Civil Rights Protest (Same as Africana Studies 213)
Analysis of the ideas, leadership, tactics, and pivotal episodes of the American Civil Rights Movement. The course will focus on the period from World War II
through the 1960s with attention to primary writings about race segregation, civil disobedience, mass political movements, and the conditions that promote or
hinder the effective exercise of citizenship rights by racial minorities.
Requirements: a midterm, a paper, and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 35.
American Politics Subfield
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF A. WILLINGHAM
PSCI 216(F) American Constitutionalism I: Structures of Power
How has the American Constitution been debated and understood over time? What is the relationship between constitutional and political change? This course
examines the historical development of American constitutional law and politics from the Founding to the present. Our focus is on structures of power--the limits
on congressional lawmaking, growth of presidential authority, establishment of judicial review, conflicts among the three branches of the federal government, and
boundaries between the federal and state and local governments. The specific disputes under these rubrics range from secession to impeachment, gun control to
child labor, waging war to spurring commerce; the historical periods to be covered include the Marshall and Taney Court years, the Civil War and Reconstruction,
the Progressive era, the New Deal, the Warren Court, and the conservative ascendancy of the late twentieth century. Readings are drawn from Supreme Court
opinions, presidential addresses, congressional debates and statutes, political party platforms, key tracts of American political thought, and secondary scholarship
on constitutional development. Throughout the semester, our goal will be less to remember elaborate doctrinal rules and multi-part constitutional "tests" than to
understand the changing nature of, and changing relationship between, constitutional power and constitutional meaning in American history.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: three 5- to 7-page essays, a final exam, and class participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Preference given to Political Science majors.
American Politics Subfield
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF CROWE
PSCI 217 American Constitutionalism II: Rights and Liberties (Not offered 2011-2012)
How has the American Constitution been debated and understood over time? What is the relationship between constitutional and political change? This course
examines the historical development of American constitutional law and politics from the Founding to the present. Our focus is on rights and libertiesfreedom
of speech and religion, property, criminal process, autonomy and privacy, and equality. The specific disputes under these rubrics range from abortion to affirma-
tive action, hate speech to capital punishment, school prayer to same-sex marriage; the historical periods to be covered include the early republic, the ante-bel-
lum era, the Civil War and Reconstruction, World Wars I and II, the Warren Court, and contemporary America. Readings are drawn from Supreme Court
opinions, presidential addresses, congressional debates and statutes, political party platforms, key tracts of American political thought, and secondary scholar-
ship on constitutional development. Throughout the semester, our goal will be less to remember elaborate doctrinal rules and multi-part constitutional "tests"
than to understand the changing nature of, and changing relationship between, constitutional rights and constitutional meaning in American history.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: three 5- to 7-page essays, a final exam, and class participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Preference given to Political Science majors.
American Politics Subfield
CROWE
PSCI 218 The American Presidency (Same as Leadership Studies 218) (Not offered 2011-2012)
To study the presidency is to study human nature and personality, constitution and institution, strategy and contingency. This course will examine the problems
and paradoxes that attend the exercise of the most powerful political office in the world's oldest democracy: Can an executive office be constructed with
sufficient energy to govern and also be democratically accountable? How much do we attribute the shaping of politics to the agency of the individual in the
office and to what extent are politics the result of structural, cultural, and institutional factors? Are the politics of the presidency different in foreign and domestic
policy? How are national security concerns balanced with domestic priorities such as the protection of civil liberties? How is the office and purpose of the
presidency affected by an economic order predicated on private capital? Exploration of these questions will lead us to examine topics such as presidential
selection, the bases of presidential power, character and leadership issues, congressional-executive relations, the media, and emergency powers. Attention will
focus largely on the modern presidency, though older historical examples will also be used to help us gain perspective on these problems.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: one exam, two short to medium length papers, small group projects, and class participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 24 (expected: 24). Preference will give given to Political Science majors.
American Politics Subfield
MELLOW
PSCI 219T(F) Women in National Politics (Same as INTR 219 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 219) (W)
(See under INTR 219T for full description.) JAMES
PSCI 222 The United States and Latin America (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course examines the most important political and diplomatic divide in the Western Hemisphere. The first half is a historical survey of US-Latin American
foreign relations from the early Spanish American independence movements through the end of the Cold War, with some emphasis on the latter. We consider
how this history confirms or undermines influential views about US foreign relations and about international relations generally. We also compare historical US
foreign policy toward the hemisphere to current policy globally. The second half covers the most important current issues in hemispheric relations: the embargo
on Cuba, economic integration, the war on drugs, immigration, and border security. At the end we reconsider current US policies, in view of the economic and
political evolution of Latin America, in historical perspective.
Format: lecture/ discussion, with more lecture in the first half, more discussion and several in-class debates in the second. Requirements: a map quiz; a 6-page
239
midterm paper; one 4-page policy paper; and either a second policy paper and the regular final exam, or a medium-length (12-page) research paper and an
abbreviated final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 39 (expected 35). Preference given to Political Science majors.
Comparative Politics Subfield
MAHON
PSCI 223(S) International Law
International law embodies the rules that govern the society of states. It spells out who can be a state and how to become one, what states can do, what they cannot
do, and who can punish transgressions; it also determines the status of other actors, like international organizations, heads of state, refugees, transnational religious
institutions and multinational corporations. International law is like domestic law, with one difference: the same group that makes the law enforces it. In other
respects it is the same: it protects the status quo, including the distribution of power among its members; it spells out legitimate and illegitimate ways of resolving
conflicts of interest; it is biased toward the powerful; it tells its members how to act to coordinate their interests and minimize direct conflict; some of it is laugh-
able and purely aspirational, some of it necessary for survival. And like domestic law, it is enforced only some of the time, and then against the weak more than the
strong. Yet law is still where we look first for justice. This course will examine the historical bases of contemporary international law, its development since World
War II in the context of the Holocaust and decolonization, and current dilemmas in its practice. Students will study primary materials (treaties, order, memos and
cases). This is not a law-school course, but an academic course in liberal arts.
Format: lecture. Requirements: two midterm exams, one final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 30). Preference given to Political Science majors.
International Relations Subfield
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF SHANKS
PSCI 225(F) International Security
This course provides an introduction to international security, a field that is fundamentally about how states and non-state actors use force to achieve their political
and economic objectives? We will seek answers to questions such as: when do states threaten to use force and for what purposes? Do alliances and multilateral
institutions such as the United Nations help promote peace? Does the spread of nuclear weapons make the world a safer or more dangerous place? How do
terrorists use violence to realize their objectives and when is it effective? Can intervention in civil wars prevent bloodshed and bring stability to failed states? How
will "non-traditional threats" such as environmental scarcity, migration, and climate change shape international security in the twenty-first century? Throughout
this course, students will be encouraged to consider the normative question of who should provide security in international politics and who should benefit from
this protection.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: midterm exam, one medium length final paper, three short memorandums, in-class debate, and class participation.
No prerequisites. Political Science 202 is recommended. Enrollment limit: 35 (expected: 35). Preference given to sophomores and Political Science majors.
International Relations Subfield
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR GREEN
PSCI 228 International Organization (Not offered 2011-2012)
Tens of thousands of international organizations populate our world. IGOs, whose members are governments of sovereigns, range from the UN and NATO to
the Nordic Association for Reindeer Research; NGOs, whose members are private groups and individuals, include the International Association of Esperantist
Bankers as well as the International Committee of the Red Cross.
What exactly do they do? What do they have in common? And do they have any effect at all? They are, after all, bureaucracies. This survey class will cover the
history, structures and functions of international organizations, using case studies.
Class Format: lecture
Requirements/Evaluation: three short papers, a midterm exam, one longer paper.
Prerequisites: at least one subfield introductory course (201, 202, 203, or 204) or 101; open to first-year student if they have the prerequisites. Enrollment limit:
30 (expected: 30). Preference given to Political Science majors.
International Relations Subfield
SHANKS
PSCI 229(S) Global Political Economy
This course offers a broad introduction to the workings of contemporary global capitalism, emphasizing the inherent and inseparable intertwining of politics and
economics, power and wealth, the state and the market. It begins with an overview of the recent history of globalization and its continuous creation and destruc-
tion of asset bubbles. The core of the course is made up of a broad analysis of global trade and global finance, with special attention to subjects such as free trade,
the WTO, development, money, and financial crisis. We conclude the course with a close look at the global economic crisis, its politics, and its implications for the
future of global capitalism.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: two short papers, two medium-length papers, one discussion section,final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 35 (expected: 35). Preference given to Political Science and Political Economy majors.
International Relations Subfield
This course offers a broad introduction to contemporary global capitalism, emphasizing the inherent and inseparable intertwining of politics and economics,
power and wealth, the state and the market. It begins with an overview of the recent history of globalization and its continuous creation and destruction of asset
bubbles. The core of the course is made up of a broad analysis of global trade, global finance and development, with special attention to subjects such as free trade,
the WTO, foreign aid, money, and financial crisis. We conclude the course with a close look at the contemporary global political economy in crisis, its politics, and
the future of global capitalism.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: four short papers and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 35 (expected: 30). Preference given to Political Science and Political Economy majors.
International Relations Subfield
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR PAUL
PSCI 230 American Political Thought (Not offered 2011-2012)
What makes political thought "American"? Is there something distinct about the American political imagination that shapes how we think about liberty, equali-
ty, and government? And who exactly is the "we"? This course examines these questions and others by exploring the evolving relationship between concep-
tions of "the frontier" and the idea of representation throughout American history. We shall see that debates over how to represent the community lead almost
inescapably to the question of the proper boundary of the community - of who gets included or excluded from membership in the polity. We will explore the
Founding period in detail, and then move on to examine several expansions of the public sphere in the 19th and 20th centuries, including those related to race,
gender, class, and nationality. How do these openings in the political realm reflect differing notions of freedom, justice, and property? In conclusion we will ask
how the meaning of "America" may be affected by recent debates over immigration and "la frontera" to the south.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: class participation, presentation, three 5- to 7-page papers.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Preference given to Political Science majors.
American Politics and Political Theory Subfields.
PSCI 231 Ancient Political Thought (Same as Philosophy 231) (Not offered 2011-2012)
The core activity of this seminar is the careful reading and sustained discussion of selected works by Plato and Aristotle, but we will also engage such other
thinkers as Epictetus and Augustine, and, from a political and theoretical point of view, selections from the Hebrew Bible and New Testament. Among the
questions that we will address: What is justice? How can it be known and pursued? How is political power generated and exercised? What are the social and
ethical prerequisites--and consequences--of democracy? Must the freedom or fulfillment of some people require the subordination of others? Does freedom
require leading (or avoiding) a political life? What distinguishes that kind of life from others? What does it mean to be "philosophical" or to think "theoretically"
about politics? Although we will attempt to engage the readings on their own terms, we will also ask how the vast differences between the ancient world and our
own undercut or enhance the texts' ability to illuminate the dilemmas of political life for us.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: three 6- to 8-page papers.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 35 (expected: 18). Preference given to Political Science majors.
Political Theory Subfield
REINHARDT
PSCI 232(F) Modern Political Thought (Same as Philosophy 232)
This course offers an overview of major thinkers and texts in modern political thought by considering their relationship to a defining theme of the modern era:
Enlightenment. Although the Enlightenment is often identified simply as a historical period-the eighteenth century-Enlightenment can also be understood in
terms of the revolutionary projects, political ideals, republican institutions and liberal aspirations that came to the fore during this period. Course readings will
240
begin with early modern texts that mark the shift away from medieval power structures towards more rationalized forms of political organization. We will then
turn our attention to new conceptions of the state, society, and public life, with a particular focus on the emergence of the individual as the subject of political
theory and practice. Conflicts between Enlightenment and counter-Enlightenment positions will be highlighted, with extended discussions of key theorists who
put forward a critique of the Enlightenment either from the right or the left. The thinkers we will read include Niccolo Machiavelli, Thomas Hobbes, John Locke,
Adam Smith, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Immanuel Kant, Edmund Burke, David Hume, Justus Mser, Joseph de Maistre, Mary Wollstonecraft, Olympe de
Gouges, John Stuart Mill, Friedrich Hegel, and Karl Marx.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: active class participation, and three 6- to 8-page papers.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 21). Preference to Political Science majors and concentrators in Political Theory.
Political Theory Subfield
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR NJOYA
PSCI 233(F) Marx Beyond Marxism
"I am not a Marxist." Karl Marx made this famously enigmatic statement in the late 19th century, in response to an accusation by French social reformers that a
group of revolutionary communists who described themselves as "Marxists" had taken their orders directly from him. Much to the contrary, he suggested, trans-
formative political movements are always the product of actually existing material conditions, and never simply commanded from the top-down by a single
prominent thinker. And yet, in the wake of the Soviet Union and similar socialist experiments, it cannot be denied that particular versions of "Marxism," often
centered around a single charismatic leader or vanguard elite, have wielded considerable influence over popular attempts to overcome capitalism. If it is possible
then, that just as in the 19th century, much of the 20th century socialist ideologies were also irreducible to "Marx himself," what might be gained by rethinking
these ideas in a more creative manner today? We broach this question by revisiting the dialogues Marx participated in, so as to consider their effect on political
thought, and to think through how they might inform new inquiries today. In keeping with Marx's own emphasis on actually existing situations, in each meeting
we will juxtapose a selection from his work with a reading from a modern or contemporary interlocutor. By doing so, we will learn about the context from which
his thought emerged and later developed in a multiplicity of directions: addressing the "good" Marx and the "bad" Marx alike will allow for us to develop a sense
of what went wrong with much of 20th century socialism as well as what might remain salvageable in alternate approaches today. Those we will consider in
dialogue with Marx include Kant, Hegel, Engels, Proudhon, Stirner, Feuerbach, Lenin, Mao, Pannekoek, Bernstein, Benjamin, Gramsci, Luxembourg, Kollontai,
Althusser, Marcuse, Negri, Debord, Deleuze, Foucault, Zizek, Badiou, Ranciere and Agamben.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: class discussion and three essays (6-8 pages).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Preference given to political science majors and sophomores.
Political Theory Subfield
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR J. ADAMS
PSCI 234 Rastafari: Dread, Politics, Agency (Same as Africana Studies 302 and Religion 261) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under AFR 302 for full description.) ROBERTS
PSCI 236(S) Sex, Gender, and Political Theory (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 236)
This course offers a feminist reading of some of the most important concepts and theoretical concerns in the study of politics: freedom, justice, equality, obliga-
tion, alienation and objectification. Each of these terms will be evaluated from the perspective of its potential to address social inequities of sex, gender, race and
class. Is welfare a problem for freedom theory? In what way might a pregnancy be experienced as a form of alienation, and how does this pose a challenge for
theories of justice? Is it possible to treat another person as equal and at the same time an object of one's sexual desire? We will identify the analytical tools and
strategies that feminist theorists have employed in order to bring these and other concerns into political theory scholarship, reconstructing traditional ideas of
politics and public life in the process. Theorists whose work we will read include Susan Moller Okin, Nancy Hirschmann, Martha Nussbaum, Iris Marion Young,
Drucilla Cornell, Gayatri Spivak, Dorothy Roberts, Judith Butler, Linda Zerilli and Catherine Mackinnon.
Format: discussion. Requirements: one oral presentation and three papers (3 pages, 7 pages and 8-10 pages).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 21). Preference to Political Science majors and concentrators in Political Theory.
Political Theory Subfield
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF NJOYA
PSCI 237(F) Just War Theory, Terrorism, and Weapons of Mass Destruction (Sames as Philosophy 238) (W)
(See under PHIL 238 for full description.) WHITE
PSCI 238(F) Economic Liberalism and Its Critics (Same as Economics 299 and Political Economy 250)
(See under POEC 250 for full description.) BAKIJA and MAHON
PSCI 242(F) America and the Vietnam War (Same as Leadership Studies 242) (W)
Every American president from Franklin Roosevelt to John F. Kennedy sought to avoid a commitment of ground forces to Vietnam. Lyndon Johnson also feared
the consequences of a massive American commitment, but he eventually sent over half a million men to Vietnam. Richard Nixon hoped to conclude a peace with
honor when he assumed the presidency, but the war lasted for another four years with many additional casualties. This course examines the complex political
processes that led successive American presidents to get involved in a conflict that all of them desperately wanted to avoid. We will examine both the international
and domestic context of the war, as well as pay close attention to both South and North Vietnamese perspectives on the war. In addition, we will examine the
long-standing arguments among both historians and political scientists over how to explain and interpret the longest and most controversial war in American
history.
Format: seminar. Requirements: two 7-page papers, one 8- to 10-page paper, and active class participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to sophomore and junior Political Science majors and Leadership Studies concentrators.
International Relations Subfield
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF MCALLISTER and LAWRENCE
PSCI 247 Political Power in Contemporary China (Not offered 2011-2012)
The People's Republic of China presents us with two grand political narratives: socialism and democracy. In the Maoist era, a distinctive understanding of
socialism, which claimed to be a more genuine democracy, brought hope and, ultimately, tragedy to hundreds of millions of people. In the post-Mao era,
Chinese politics has been driven by the need to redefine socialism in the wake of the world-historic calamities of the Great Leap Forward and the Cultural
Revolution and, more recently, the end of the Cold War. The state cannot simply give up the socialist myth because without it the rationale for Communist Party
hegemony evaporates. But China's rulers cannot avoid political reform, both ideological and institutional, because to do so heightens the legitimacy crisis born
of Maoist failures. Within this context has emerged the contemporary Chinese democracy movement which, in all of its complexity, looks to both socialist
discourse and Western practice to create a new politics that checks tyrannical abuses of state power and engenders a civil society. What is Chinese democracy
now? What are its prospects and what is its relationship to the ideas of socialism?
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: two short papers and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 35 (expected: 35). Preference given to Political Science and Asian Studies majors.
Comparative Politics Subfield
CRANE
PSCI 248T The USA in Comparative Perspective (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
This course considers politics and society in the United States comparatively, from a variety of viewpoints and by authors foreign and American, historical and
contemporary. Important topics of comparison include: the colonial experience and independence; race relations and the African diaspora; nationalism and
national identity; war and state-building; American exceptionalism, religion, and foreign policy; the role of political and economic institutions; and the origins
and shape of the welfare state. (As the list suggests, the most common comparisons are with Latin America and Western Europe, but several of our authors look
beyond these regions.) Along the way, we also read short descriptive accounts by foreign observers, from Crvecoeur and Tocqueville to Jos Mart, Max
Weber, and Sayyid Qutb.
Format: tutorial. A lecture in the first week; then ten weeks of tutorial; then a discussion class in the final week. Requirements: five 5- to 6-page papers, five 1- to
2-page responses, and one 1-page essay for the final class.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to sophomores.
American and Comparative Politics Subfields
MAHON
241
PSCI 250 Theories of Comparative Politics (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course will deal with the debate between Karl Marx and Max Weber that organizes much of the contemporary study of comparative politics. The course is
divided into four sections. First, it begins with a close reading of Marx and Weber and a comparison of their modes of political analysis. It will engage the debate
between them about the source and nature of power. What is it, and where does it come from? Is it primarily "material" in content or largely "ideal"? What does
each think about the origins of capitalism, and what is at stake theoretically in their respective interpretations? Second, the course will consider how Marx and
Weber have influenced 20th century thinking about the relationship between capitalism and modernity. Is modernity intimately linked with capitalism, as Marx
would argue, or is it separate from it, as Weber would have it? To get at this question, we will read Karl Polanyi and Barrington Moore in this section. Third, the
course will address Marxist and Weberian treatments of states. What are they? Where do states come from? Do they originate in consent? In war? Are they
autonomous from or captured by social forces? In this section, we will read Charles Tilly, Theda Skocpol, Alfred Stephan, and Karl Schmitter. Finally, the
course will consider what comparative politics has to say about the nature and origins of collective political identities (national, ethnic, cultural). What are they
and where do they come from? Are they artifacts of the economy, as Marxists suggest, or do they come from states and religions, as Weber has it?
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: three papers.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 23). Preference given to Political Science majors.
Comparative Politics Subfield
M. MACDONALD
PSCI 254 Democracy in Comparative and Theoretical Perspective (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course deals with what democracy means and how it is achieved. It begins by weighing competing definitions of democracy. Democracy increasingly is
being viewed in procedural terms: democratic societies are societies that make decisions in particular kinds of ways, regardless of the substance of decisions.
While this view has deep roots in democratic theory and practice, it has competed historically with more substantive definitions of democracy, which emphasize
outcomes and, particularly, progress towards equality of outcomes. This course will examine this debate and consider the reasons why procedural definitions
currently are ascendant. Then the course considers what it means to understand democracy to be universally available. What does it mean to ditch the "pre-
conditions" that formerly were considered to be necessary prior to the making of democratic government and to conceive of democracy as a global force? Does
that mean that democracy is available to all societies or does that mean that the expansion of capital globally is being called "democracy?" To get at the stakes in
this question, the course will consider democracy in the United States and South Africa and democratic stirrings in Iran.
Format: seminar and lecture. Requirements: one 3-page paper, one 5- to 7-page paper, and one 10-page project.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected 20). Preference given to Political Science majors.
Comparative Politics Subfield
M. MACDONALD
PSCI 256(F) Politics of Africa (Same as Africana Studies 256)
This course provides a broad introduction to the politics of contemporary Africa, emphasizing along the way the diversity of African politics. It seeks to challenge
the widespread image of African politics as universally and inexplicably lawless, violent, and anarchic. This course begins by examining the nature and legacies
of colonial rule and nationalist movements. From there, we consider the African state, highlighting the factors that have made some states weak and others strong.
The course then turns to how ethnicity, class and civil society operate as bases of political mobilization. Finally, the course analyzes the causes, consequences and
limitations of the recent waves of political and economic liberalization across Africa.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: class participation, four short papers and final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 35 (expected: 30). Preference given to sophomores, Political Science majors and Africana Studies concentrators
Comparative Politics Subfield
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR MUNEMO
PSCI 257 Leaders in Africa: Prophets, Autocrats Tyrants (Same as Africana Studies 257 and Leadership Studies 257) (Not offered
2011-2012)
Independence across Africa produced an impressive list of first-generation rulers (Nkrumah, Nyerere, Senghor, Mandela, Banda, Houphouet-Boigny, Kaunda,
Kenyatta, Khama, to name a few). These courageous, charismatic and well-educated figures embodied the promise and hope of self-determination. Although
these leaders succeeded in challenging the colonial state and promised to bring freedom and development, within a decade of independence hope had turned to
despair as many of them re-invented themselves as autocrats while others succumbed to coups. Only a few succeeded. What went so terribly wrong? Why did
the promise of freedom turn so quickly into limited participation or outright repression? To answer these questions, this course examines the lives, political ideas
and leadership of several first-generation rulers in Africa.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: two 6-page papers and one 15-page research paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 27). Preference will be given to sophomores, Political Science majors and Leadership Studies concentrators.
MUNEMO
PSCI 262 America and the Cold War (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course examines the rise and fall of the Cold War, focusing on four central issues. First, why did America and the Soviet Union become bitter rivals shortly
after the defeat of Nazi Germany? Second, was one side primarily responsible for the length and intensity of the Cold War in Europe? Third, how did the Cold
War in Europe lead to events in other areas of the world, such as Cuba and Vietnam? Finally, could the Cold War have been ended long before the collapse of
the Soviet Union in 1989? Political scientists and historians continue to argue vigorously about the answers to all these questions. We examine both traditional
and revisionist explanations of the Cold War, as well as the new findings that have emerged from the partial opening of Soviet and Eastern European archives.
The final section of the course examines how scholarly interpretations of the Cold War continue to influence how policymakers approach contemporary issues
in American foreign policy.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: one medium length paper, an in-class midterm and final exam, and a series of short assignments.
No prerequisites. Political Science 202 is recommended but not required. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to Political Science majors and
Leadership Studies concentrators.
International Relations Subfield
MCALLISTER
PSCI 264(F) Politics of Global Tourism
A decade ago, tourism passed oil to become the world's most valuable export. This arguably frivolous activity accounts for more than 10 percent of global GNP,
and employs an enormous number of people. Tourism accounts for most of the revenue that the poorest countries receive; meanwhile, presidents and prime
ministers of nuclear-capable countries beg on TV for visitors. Where are the politics in this vast, complicated industry and why is no one paying attention? This
class explores various types of tourism, asking what happens in a tourist encounter, who benefits, who loses, and what changes. We will examine cases--Antigua
vs. Auschwitz, Angkor Wat vs. Alaska--to help us understand the process from the points of view of the tourists, the toured-upon, and the governments and
international organizations that oversee this industry. Our readings range from academic anthropology, economics, political science, and sociology (MacCannell,
Veblen) to magazine accounts (Kincaid, Krakauer).
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: two essays, one major presentation with accompanying write-up, active and constructive class participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected 30). Preference given to Political Science majors.
International Relations Subfield
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF SHANKS
PSCI 265(S) The International Politics of East Asia
This course examines the political, economic, and cultural determinants of conflict and cooperation in East Asia. Throughout the semester, we will examine three
distinct but inter-related aspects of international relations in East Asia: Security, economy, and culture by using some core concepts and theoretical arguments
widely accepted in the study of international relations. We will engage some of the central questions and issues in the current debate on East Asia. Do East Asian
countries seek for security and prosperity in a way fundamentally different from the Western system? Is there a single best way to maintain regional order and
cooperation across regions? Will a strong China inevitably claim its traditional place under the Sun? Will Japan continue to live as a nation with enormous
economic power but no military means? What is the choice for South Korea between security alliance with the United States and national reconciliation with the
North? Will North Korea survive? What should be done to dissuade the totalitarian regime in North Korea from acquiring nuclear capabilities and lead it to
different paths toward national survival? By the end of the semester, you will gain both a general perspective and substantive knowledge on East Asia.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: midterm exam, team debate, take-home final exam, class participation and other assignments.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 35 (expected: 30). Preference given to Political Science and Asian Studies majors.
International Relations Subfield
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF CRANE
242
PSCI 285(F) The Revolutionary Generation: Galaxy of Leaders (Same as History 354 and Leadership Studies 285)
(See under LEAD 285 for full description.) DUNN
PSCI 301(S) Environmental Policy (Same as Environmental Studies 309, History of Science 309 and Science and Technology Studies 309)
(See under ENVI 309 for full description.) LYNN
PSCI 308 In Search of the American State (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
`Ronald Reagan's pronouncement in 1981 that "government is not a solution to our problem, government is the problem" defined American politics for nearly
three decades. Skepticism of government has deep roots and strong resonance throughout American political history, yet in many ways the American state has
grown steadily larger and stronger. This course explores this conundrum by examining the American state, and its growth, in various arenas. We will assess
traditional theories about the weak American state in light of arguments about the state as: regulator of family and "private" life, adjudicator of relations between
racial and ethnic groups, manager of economic inequalities, insurer of security, and arbiter of the acceptable uses of violence and surveillance.
Format: seminar. Requirements: several short papers on class readings and a longer, 15- to 20-page paper with oral presentation.
Prerequisites: at least one class in American politics. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 17). Preference given to Political Science majors.
American Politics Subfield
MELLOW
PSCI 309(S) Problems and Progress in American Democracy
"I confess," French aristocrat Alexis de Tocqueville wrote in the introduction to his Democracy in America, "that in America I saw more than America. I sought
the image of democracy itself, with its inclinations, its character, its prejudices, and its passions, in order to learn what we have to fear or hope from its progress."
What would Tocqueville see if he returned to America today, almost 200 years later? What types of institutions, dynamics, and processes animate American
political life in the twenty-first century? With Tocqueville as a guide to thinking about political ethnography, this course investigates six central elements of
political life--religion, education, civic engagement, difference, representation, and crime and punishment--that simultaneously pose problems for and represent
sites of progress in American democracy. For each subject, we will ask several key questions. How has that particular aspect of political life changed in the recent
past? How might it change in the near future? Does it conform to how American politics is designed to work? To how we want American politics to work? Using
a diverse set of readings drawn from empirical political science, contemporary democratic theory, American political thought, historical documents, political
punditry (from the left and the right), and current events, our focus, like Tocqueville before us, is on teasing out both the lived experience--the character and
challenges--of American democracy and examining any disconnect between that experience and the ideals that undergird it. Among the many specific questions
we will consider are the extent to which America is a religious nation, whether recent changes in higher education have affected the health of democratic politics,
the effects of technology on civic engagement, and the place of the jury system in securing democratic justice. Throughout the semester, we will not only ap-
proach these questions from the joint perspectives of theory and practice but also seek to enrich our understanding by exploring American democracy as it
happens all around us with several exercises in the community at large.
Format: discussion. Requirements: two experiential projects with accompanying write-ups of at least 5 and 7 pages, six 2- to 3-page ethnographic reflections, and
class participation.
Prerequisites: a previous course in American politics or political theory or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19).
American Politics Subfield
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR CROWE
PSCI 310(F) Political Psychology (Same as Psychology 345)
Political psychology studies human nature so as to understand politics. For example, many political philosophers begin their political programs by asserting some
foundational claims about "human nature" which in turn led them to their justification for their vision of politics. For example, the enlightenment thinkers held
that science and technology would strengthen rationality and thereby making democracy more viable. On the other hand, those who defend authoritarian regimes
often do so by proclaiming that the general public is incapable of rationality and of self-rule and should therefor accept rule by their betters. Many of these
arguments turn on how rational people are and on their capacity for and willingness to pursue justice for all people. We explore what psychology tells us about
people as political citizens and as leaders. The course pays special attention to the powerful, but surprising, roles that emotions play in all aspects of politics.
Central to politics is the general issue of judgment, and its more important variants, moral and political judgment. If we are to trust ourselves to rule ourselves, how
well will we secure justice and liberty for one and all among us? Political psychology is one of the very oldest disciplines (it can be dated at least back to the early
classic Greeks, among them Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle). The issue of citizen competence for self and collective rule, then as now, was at the center of their
attention. So, it shall be in this course.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: a midterm, a term paper, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: a Political Science elective at the 200 or 300 level OR Psychology 101, 212, 221, 232, 242, 251, or 300-level course. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected
13).
American Politics Subfield
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR MARCUS
PSCI 311 Congress (Same as Leadership Studies 311) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
They soar high and fall hard. Some members of Congress establish political legacies, while others serve and are forgotten. Some lead without holding leader-
ship positions. Others occupy leadership positions but never lead. In an organization comprised of equals, how and why do some senators and representatives
acquire more power and authority than others? How does Congress, often considered to be the most powerful assembly in the world, organize itself so that it
can act as an institution and not just a platform for 535 individuals? And how does this institution promote, or hinder, the legitimacy, responsiveness, and
responsibility expected of a democratic governing institution?
Format: seminar. Requirements: class participation, several short papers, research paper.
Prerequisites: Political Science 201 or permission of instructor; not open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 14 (expected: 14). Preference given to political
science majors, political economy majors, and leadership studies concentrators.
American Politics Subfield
Research Course
C. JOHNSON
PSCI 314T Leadership in American Political Development (Same as Leadership Studies 314T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
From the Founding to the present, the American political order has undergone incredible, cataclysmic and thoroughgoing transformations, yet it has also proven
to be remarkably enduring. How can this be? Where do we find continuities and where upheavals? What accounts for the continuities, and what for the
changes? What sorts of transformations have been possible, and who or what has made them possible?
Finally, what are the costs of change (and of continuity)--and who pays them?
The goal of this tutorial is to assess American political change, or lack of, and to gain a sense of the role that individual leaders have played in driving change.
We will examine when and how individual agency and leadership has mattered vis--vis broader historical and contextual factors, including economic develop-
ments, demographic change, and constitutional and institutional parameters. After examining general models of change and of leadership, we will consider
specific case studies, such as civil rights for African-Americans, gender equality, labor demands, and social conservatism. We will consider some of the compli-
cated legacies of change. Finally, we will look at arguments that America has been "exceptional" - or, unlike other countries - as well as critiques of these
arguments, to help us gain an understanding of future prospects for political transformation.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: five lead essays, five critiques, one revision, and one final paper .
Prerequisites: previous course in American politics or American history. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to Political Science majors.
American Politics Subfield
MELLOW
PSCI 315(S) Parties in American Politics (W)
Political parties have played a central role in extending democracy and organizing power in the United States, yet their worth is a continuing subject of debate. In
one ideal formulation, parties not only link citizens to their government, they also provide the coherency and unity needed to govern in a political system in which
power is widely dispersed. But there is also an American tradition of antipathy toward parties. They have been criticized by some for inflaming divisions among
the people and for grid-locking the government. For others, political parties fail to offer citizens meaningful choices; the Republican and Democratic parties are
likened to a
choice between "tweedledee and tweedledum." This course will investigate this debate over parties by examining their nature and role in American political life,
243
both past and present. Throughout the course, we will explore such questions as: What constitutes a party? How have the parties changed over time? For whom
do they function? Why a two-party system, and what role do third parties play? Is partisanship good or bad for democracy? For governance? We will seek
answers to these questions both in seminar discussion and through substantial independent research projects.
Format: seminar. Requirements: weekly writing assignments, two 5-page papers, one 15- to 20-page paper, class presentation, and class participation.
Prerequisites: Political Science course at the 200 or 300 level or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 14 (expected: 14). Preference given to Political Science
majors.
American Politics Subfield
Research Course
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR MELLOW
PSCI 316(S) Policy Making Process (W)
Politics as usual. It's a phenomenon we all love to hate. But what does it mean? When government policy is decided by politics, does that mean the policy is
necessarily bad? Can we get rid of politics in policy making, or improve on it somehow? What would "politics as unusual" look like anyway? This class
examines the policy making process with particular emphasis on the United States: How do issues get defined as problems worthy of government attention?
What kinds of alternatives are considered as solutions to these problems? Why do we end up with some policies but not others? Do certain kinds of processes
yield better policies than others? How should we decide what constitutes a good policy?
Format: seminar. Requirements: several short papers, research paper, class participation.
Prerequisites: one course in political science or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 14 (expected 11). Preference given to students majoring in political
science, political economy, and to students with an interest in public policy.
American politics
Research Course
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR C. JOHNSON
PSCI 317(F) Environmental Law (Same as Environmental Studies 307)
(See under ENVI 307 for full description.) CASSUTO
PSCI 318 Voting Rights and Voting Movements (Same as Africana Studies 318) (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course is about the effort to establish and secure voting rights in the United States. It involves inquiry into parallel activities: the legal status of voting as
sought in court rulings through litigation, and community level activism organized to protest restrictive practices often at state and local levels where pivotal
decisions about voting policy originate. This course is an overview of this process and the pivotal convergences between the legal and organizing aspects. We
seek to better understand the main pillar in popular participation by study focused on distinctive moments in national development in an advanced democratic
state looking at the content of suffrage policy, the struggle to democratize, and the uneven results.
Format: discussion. Requirements: five short papers.
Prerequisites: Political Science 201 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected 19). Preference given to Political Science majors
American Politics Subfield
A. WILLINGHAM
PSCI 319(F,S) Marine Policy (Same as Environmental Studies 351 and Maritime Studies 351) (Offered only at Mystic Seaport.)
(See under MAST 351 for full description.) HALL
PSCI 323T Henry Kissinger and the American Century (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Perhaps no single individual has influenced the course of American foreign policy over the last fifty years more than Henry Kissinger. A refugee from Nazi
Germany, Kissinger emerged during the 1950's as one of America's most important scholars of international relations and nuclear strategy. During the 1960's
and 1970's, as National Security Advisor and later secretary of State, Kissinger was at the center of some of the important events of the Cold War. This tutorial
will examine Kissinger's thoughts on American policy and international relations as well as record in the Nixon and Ford administrations. In addition, we will
also look at how other scholars have assessed Kissinger's scholarship and his stewardship of American foreign
policy at crucial moments in the history of the Cold War.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: five 6-page papers and five 2-page responses for alternate sessions. In the tutorial session, essays will be read aloud or presented
in outline form.
Prerequisites: any one of the following: Political Science 120, 202, or 261. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected:10) Preference given to students with a strong back-
ground in political science, history, and or prior coursework in the area of American foreign relations. The course is not open to first year students.
International Relations Subfield
MCALLISTER
PSCI 325T Grand Strategy (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
What goals should states seek in international politics? What instruments should they use? How best can military force be employed? Does economic wealth
always translate to power and influence? These questions are central to grand strategy, the policy a state adopts to link the means it possesses with the ends it
seeks. This course examines the theory and practice of grand strategy through a careful examination of classic strategic theorists, including Sun Tzu, Thucy-
dides, Clausewitz, Jomini, Bismarck, Mahan and Mao.
It aims to identify common elements of grand strategy throughout history, while also highlighting the myriad ways in which the practice of grand strategy has
evolved over time.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: five 5-page tutorial papers and five 1- to 2-page responses.
Prerequisites: any one of the following: PSCI 201, 202, 203, 204, 223, 225, 229, 242 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10).
Preference given to Political Science majors. Not available for the Gaudino option.
International Relations Subfield
P. MACDONALD
PSCI 326 Empire and Imperialism (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
This course provides a critical overview of empire and imperialism in international politics from the eighteenth century to the present day. Key questions
include: why do states establish empires? Do empires provide political or economic gains? How are empires governed? What role does technology play in
driving and sustaining empires? How do empires end? What are the legacies of empire? The first section of the course examines these questions by consulting
the classic theoretical works on empire by Smith, Marx, Lenin, Seeley, Mackinder, Hobson, and Schumpeter. The second section explores these theories
through a structured historical comparison of imperial expansion and contraction in North America, Latin America, Asia and Africa. The final section explores
the contemporary relevance of the concept of empire for understanding American post-war foreign policy, including issues such as overseas basing, humanitar-
ian intervention, nation building and military occupation.
Format: discussion. Requirements: short response memos, midterm paper, final research paper, and class participation.
Prerequisites: one course in political science or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 14 (expected: 14). Preference given to Political Science and Political
Economy majors.
International Relations Subfield
Research Course
P. MACDONALD
PSCI 327 The Global Politics of Development and Underdevelopment (Same as Environmental Studies 329) (Not offered 2011-2012)
Consider a photograph taken from space of the Earth at night. What will you see? Great agglomerations of light in some parts of the world (North America,
Western Europe, parts of East Asia) contrasted with vast expanses of darkness in others (much of Central and South America, Southeast Asia and nearly all of
Africa). This pattern of light and darkness depicts a vastly unequal global distribution of technology, urban infrastructure, capital accumulation --in short, the
global patterns of development and underdevelopment. What makes some areas `light' and some areas `dark'? More importantly, how are these areas con-
nected--both within and across national boundaries-- through trade and capital flows, political authority, violence and the natural environment? What are the
relations between development and underdevelopment?
This course is an investigation of political, economic and societal growth (or lack thereof) and change in the Global North and Global South through the lenses
of Political Economy and Political Ecology. We will focus in particular on the global factors influencing development and underdevelopment, political-eco-
244
nomic connections across national borders, and the intersections of power, production and nature. During our course of study we will cover: global patterns of
inequality and their history; development strategies; the politics of population control; the intersections of power, violence, and nature; and finally, the prospects
of development for all.
Format: discussion. Requirements: two medium-length papers, one research paper, daily discussion questions, class participation.
Prerequisites: one course in international relations or development economics. Enrollment limit: 18 (expected: 18). Preference given to juniors and seniors.
International Relations Subfield
Research Course
PAUL
PSCI 328(F) Global Environmental Politics (Same as Environmental Studies 328)
(See under ENVI 328 for full description.) G. WHITE
PSCI 331T(F) Non-Profit Organization and Community Change (Same as Africana Studies 330T) (W)
Two converging realities create a political and intellectual problem: an evolving recognition of the vitality of private sector supported community organization
work; and the challenge that such organizations may have to assume a larger role due to reductions in public agency support and declining participation among the
poor and racial minorities. In the United States these agencies-essentially NGOs-play important roles in communities and movements, often modeling the very
programs adopted by the government. Some, like the Highlander Center, have near-mythical status in our memories about what it means to struggle for social
change; others, including HARYOU, were critical in structuring thought about anti-poverty strategies. In recent years some like Teach for America have plunged
into the thick of the effort to keep public education a viable option. This tutorial examines the role of non-profits and social justice work in the United States
focusing on the non-profit as a type, governance and staffing, fund-raising and persecution.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: five 3-page papers and a final paper of 15 pages.
Prerequisites: an interest in and experience with community-based organizations involved in advocacy work with adult citizens on race, economics, equity, or
other issues. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected 10). Preference given to Political Science majors.
American Politics Subfield
Research Course
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. A. WILLINGHAM
PSCI 332 Rethinking the Political (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
What is politics? The question, an important part of political theory at least since Socrates, has taken on renewed significance in recent years, as theorists have
sought to rethink the political in response to the most disastrous of twentieth century political developments, to assorted identity-based struggles that have
challenged prevailing political terms and arrangements, and to the transformations wrought by "globalization." This seminar engages some of the major at-
tempts at rethinking produced in the 20th and 21st centuries, particularly at those that challenge, rework, or seek to move beyond liberalism. We will pay
particular attention to the work of Carl Schmitt, probably the most probing and significant authoritarian thinker of the twentieth century, and to such figures as
Sheldon Wolin, Jacques Derrida, Jacques Rancire and, especially, Hannah Arendt. Among our questions: Can liberal pluralism be transcended or supplement-
ed without producing something akin to the fascism embraced by Schmitt? Does the tradition of radical democracy offer a distinctive and credible conception
of politics, or is it parasitic upon a liberalism it won't avow? Is there some essence, or sphere, or mode of being or acting that we can usefully call, "the politi-
cal"--and why is there such a preoccupation with the political now? Does this preoccupation help us better to engage the forces and circumstances that structure
politics in the contemporary world, or does it lead us to obscure them?
Format: discussion. Requirements: regular, engaged class participation and three 7- to 8-page papers.
Prerequisites: at least one prior course in political theory or philosophy, or permission of the instructor; not open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 19
(expected 14). Preference given to juniors and seniors concentrating in political theory.
Political Theory Subfield
REINHARDT
PSCI 334(S) Theorizing Global Justice
While economic exchanges, cultural convergence, and technological innovations have brought people in different parts of the world closer together than ever
before, globalization has also amplified differences in material wealth and social inequalities. Ill health, inadequate sanitation, and lack of access to safe drinking
water are increasingly common. Yet, more than ever before, the means exist in affluent regions of the world to alleviate the worst forms of suffering and enhance
the well-being of the poorest people. How are we to understand this contradiction as a matter of justice? What is the relationship between justice and equality, and
what do we owe one another in a deeply divided world? Course readings will engage your thinking on the central debates in moral philosophy, normative
approaches to international political economy, and grassroots efforts to secure justice for women and other severely disadvantaged groups. Key theorists include
John Rawls, Onora O'Neill, Thomas Pogge, Paul Farmer, Amartya Sen, Martha Nussbaum, Manfred Steger, Saskia Sassen, Susan George, Vandana Shiva,
Majid Rahnema and Gustavo Esteva.
Format: discussion. Requirements one oral presentation and three papers (3 pages, 7 pages and 8-10 pages).
Prerequisites: at least one course in political theory or philosophy or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 14). Preference to Political
Science majors and concentrators in Political Theory.
Political Theory Subfield
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR NJOYA
PSCI 335 Public Sphere/Public Space (Same as American Studies 302) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under AMST 302 for full description.) REINHARDT
PSCI 336(S) Biopolitics and Governmentality in Ancient Political Thought
The turn towards theories of biopolitics and governmentality in contemporary theories of state power and the increasingly diverse identities they administer is
often motivated by a desire to understand how liberal democracy exercises social and political control precisely in the name of freedom, equality, and recognition.
The ability of contemporary forms of power to produce identities rather than simply repress them means that not only normalized citizen identities but also raced,
gendered and otherwise deprivileged subjectivities are products of power, even while they seek and attain greater inclusion and self-determination. Most theoriza-
tions of such biopolitical and governmental processes are centered on the modern and contemporary eras, while courses on ancient political thought tend to ignore
such issues altogether. But in order to make sense of power and its increasingly complex applications and techniques, it is crucial to examine the context of
biopolitics and governmentality in ancient Greece and Rome as well. In this course, we will do just that, revisiting the archive of ancient political thought as well
as the primary contemporary theorists who have considered its relevance. In particular, we will engage the tension between Stoic and other pre-Platonic concepts
of "care for thyself" (epimelesthai sauto) and the Platonic and early-Christian emphasis on "knowing thyself" (gnothi sauton). We will also consider a topic that
has been of concern for biopolitical theorists in the post-9/11 period, the ancient Roman legal category of Homo Sacer ("bare life," "he who can be killed without
committing a crime"). Philosophers and theorists we read will include Plato, Aristotle, Seneca, Cassian, Epictetus, Laertius, Plutarch, Paul, Augustine, Aquinas,
Foucault, Arendt and Agamben.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: class discussion and three medium-length essays (6-8 pages).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 14). Preference given to political science majors and sophomores.
Political Theory Subfield
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M J. ADAMS
PSCI 337(F) Digital Political Theory: Technoculture and the 21st Century
After the Internet, how have the substantive concerns of political theory and activist thought changed with the rise of a public sphere structured less like a tradi-
tional hierarchy and more like a decentered network? Has the emergence of a cultural and political-theory blogosphere, beyond academic books or journal ar-
ticles, transformed the nature of this textual community, by giving rise to an emergent mode of real-time "live theory"? In what ways have network-centric
technologies contributed to the transformation of contemporary power relations and the consolidation of technoculture, thereby producing new objects of inves-
tigation? Is there a distinctive 21st century political theory? In this course, we will consider these and related questions vis--vis a range of recent theory texts that
illuminate the major events, social movements and aesthetic interventions that have shaped and been shaped by post-millenial technoculture. We begin the se-
mester with classic theories of technology and the public sphere as well as critical responses to them, most of which occurred prior to the intensification of the
Internet's influence after the 1990s. We then read current theoretical texts concerned with the relationship between politics and technoculture, considering cele-
bratory texts as well as more critical ones. Finally, we engage a range of events and movements that have been central to the emergence of today's "digital public
sphere," including the Zapatistas of the 1990s, the anti-globalization movement at the turn of the millenium and today, the Arab Spring. Theorists considered
include Kant, Rousseau, Marx, Habermas, Heidegger, Fraser, Warner, Benhabib, Berlant, Dean, Der Derian, De Landa, Cleaver, Hardt, Kroker, Kittler, Lovink,
245
Negri, Wark, Stiegler and Virilio.
Requirements: class discussion and six short essays (3-4 pages).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 14). Preference given to political science majors and sophomores.
Political Theory Subfield
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF J. ADAMS
PSCI 338 Garveyism (Same as Africana Studies 338) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under AFR 338 for full description.) ROBERTS
PSCI 339 Politics and Aesthetics (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
In recent years, political theorists have grown increasingly preoccupied with questions of what since the Romantic era has been called "aesthetics." In a moment
of global economic crisis, amidst continuing problems of war, violence, poverty, and injustice, this concern may seem puzzling, even fundamentally misplaced.
Yet just as Plato, for instance, famously connected questions of the good and the true to those of the beautiful (so that it is anachronistic to impute to him a
separation between political and aesthetic domains), some notable recent theorists claim that investigating aesthetic matters can enable us to gain a better under-
standing of political perceptions, ideals, aspirations, struggles, and possibilities. Among the main questions we will ask in this seminar is whether or not that
claim is persuasive. Along the way, we will we will pay sustained attention to such matters as the role of emotion, affect, and the senses in political life, the
nature of aesthetic judgment, its relationship to both political judgment and structures of power, and the similarities and differences between making art and
acting politically. We will also, of course, examine what it means to call something "aesthetic," and we will think about the limits of the aesthetic as a category of
analysis. Though we will regularly take up examples drawn from the worlds of art, politics, and the mass media, our central focus will be on the careful reading
of philosophical and critical texts, including Kant's Critique of Judgment and writings from among the following authors: Adorno, Arendt, Bal, Benjamin,
Bourdieu, Burke, Cavell, Danto, Deleuze, Dickie, Felski, Freud, Hegel, Heidegger, Hume, Mill, Nietzsche, Ramachandran, Rancire, Schiller.
Format: seminar. Requirements: regular class participation, several very short (1 page) response memos, one short paper (6 pages) and one longer final essay
(12-15 pages).
Prerequisites: open to juniors and seniors with at least one course in political theory or philosophy, or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 14 (ex-
pected: 14). Preference given to Political Science majors.
Political Theory Subfield
Research Course
REINHARDT
PSCI 342 Intolerance and Justice (Not offered 2011-2012)
Intolerance and justice are linked in that each defines what can and should be done to others, and what we expect in return. One of the goals of the Enlighten-
ment was to find a solution to the problem of intolerance and the violence that was and is its frequent companion. One core expectation was that progress would
result from expanding knowledge. Progress would enable reason to replace dogmatism and faith (especially fighting faiths), progress in understanding the new
economics of trade and the politics of liberality would produce commonwealths, producing more cosmopolitan societies marked by justice, enduring peace and
prosperity. Moreover, democracy would spread thereby integrating more nations into the democratic camp. And, the lives of the many would improve. That
vision has lost its promise. The 20th century, for all its economic and technological improvements, was also witness to terrible intolerance, attacks on civilians in
war, ethnic purging has continued even after the holocaust. Intolerance led to wars between states, to violence within states (such as Darfur, Sri Lanka, Bosnia to
name but three). Hence, the three questions posed by this course: 1) What are the most important factors that continue to produce intolerance; 2) Are the factors
that produce and strengthen justice and tolerance; and 3) What can be done to increase a society's tolerance and justice, both in the United States and abroad?
This course makes use of historical, political, and literary sources.
Format: seminar. Requirements: midterm examination, medium length research paper, and final examination.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit:16 (expected: 10). If overenrolled, preference given to Political Science majors.
Comparative Politics Subfield; American Politics Subfield
MARCUS
PSCI 345T(F) Cosmology and Rulership in Ancient Chinese Political Thought (W)
This class will involve students in close reading of, and exegetical writing about, core texts of ancient Chinese political thought. The purpose is to gain an under-
standing of a number of different perspectives on politics and leadership, especially Confucianism, Legalism and Taoism. While the primary focus will be on the
meaning of the texts in the context of their own times, contemporary applications of core concepts will also be considered. The class will begin with background
readings, since no prior work in Chinese philosophy or history is assumed. Then the class will read significant portions of the following canonical works: The
Analects, Mencius, the Daodejing, Zhuangzi, and Han Feizi.
Format: Tutorial. Requirements: five short (5 page) papers on each the core texts; five shorter (2 page) critiques of partner's paper. Participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Not available for the Gaudino option.
Comparative Politics Subfield; Political Theory Subfield
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF CRANE
PSCI 351(S) The New Left and Neoliberalism in Latin America (W)
Recent years have seen a resurgence of the political left in Latin America. This course examines major political figures, parties, and movements of the contempo-
rary left as well as the neoliberal positions and policies they largely oppose. We first read major polemics from both sides, before moving on to consider the
historical evolution of these ideas from the colonial period to the present, and then competing explanations for the recent rise of the left. After break, we look more
closely at particular countries and leaders, the latter including Hugo Chvez and Evo Morales, before turning to the most important contemporary policy debates
as well as discussions about what it might mean to be on the political left in Latin America today.
Format: lecture and discussion, plus one or two debates and two seminar classes. Requirements: three two-page reaction papers and a 15- to 18-page term paper.
Prerequisites: a course on Latin America and a course in Economics, or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit:14 (expected:14). Preference given to
Political Science majors.
Comparative Politics Subfield
Research Course
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR MAHON
PSCI 352T(S) Comparative Political Economy
This tutorial provides an introduction to comparative political economy by focusing on an enduring puzzle: the spread of capitalism led to both transitions to
democracy and dictatorship/authoritarianism. How is it that the expansion of markets led to the birth of democracy in some countries, but dictatorships in others?
What, if any, is the relationship between economic development and the organization of power (regime type)? Does economic development lead to the spread of
democracy? Or is economic crisis the key to understanding the conditions under which dictatorships fall? To answer these questions we read works by Moore,
Lipset, Schumpeter, Przeworski, Rueschemeyer et al., Haggard & Kaufman, among others.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: five 5-6 page lead essays, five 1-2 page response papers, one 10-12 page revised lead essay.
Prerequisites: one of the following: Political Science 201, 202, 203, 204, 229, 250, 254, 256, 333 or the permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (ex-
pected: 10). Preference will be given to Political Science and Political Economy majors.
Comparative Politics subfield
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF MUNEMO
PSCI 353(F) Why States Fail: Political Violence at the End of the 20th Century
This course considers the origins of political violence and state failure at the end of the 20th century. It seeks to address why there was a resurgence of political
violence at the dawn of the 21st century. Toward that end, we begin by considering competing explanations of political violence (ethnicity, democratization,
natural-resource endowments, and predatory elites). We then move on to the empirical section of the course in which we cover case studies of state failure in parts
of Eastern Europe, Africa and the Middle East.
Format: seminar/discussion. Requirements: seminar participation, two oral presentations and a research paper.
Prerequisites: one of the following: Political Science 201, 202, 203, 204, 229, 250, 254, 256, 333 or the permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 14 (ex-
pected: 14). Preference given to Political Science majors.
Comparative Politics Subfield
Research Course
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF MUNEMO
246
PSCI 354(S) (formerly 245) Nationalism in East Asia (Same as Asian Studies 245 and History 318)
Nationalism is a major political issue in contemporary East Asia. From anti-Japanese demonstrations in China, to tensions on the Korea peninsula, to competitive
elections in Taiwan, to debates in Japan about the possibility of a woman ascending the Chrysanthemum Throne, national identity is hotly debated and politically
mobilized all across the region. This course begins with an examination of the general phenomena of nationalism and national identity. It then considers how
nationalism is manifest in the contemporary politics and foreign relations of China, Japan, South Korea, North Korea and Taiwan.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: two 5-page papers, class participation, final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to Political Science and Asian Studies majors.
Comparative Politics Subfield
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR CRANE
PSCI 355T Realism (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Realism in politics is both an approach to international relations and a political sensibility. As a sensibility, it values limits, questions good intentions, and worries
about grand ambitions. It takes the basic contours of human behavior as given and beyond the control of actors to alter, perhaps giving rise to a kind of passivity
in response. The realist sensibility tends to doubt the efficacy of human action, to believe that attempts to improve the terms of human interaction not only are
doomed to fail but also are likely to make things worse. Realists are not necessarily conservative--a few are radical--but they have learned much from conser-
vatives. By temperament, they are not confident of the capacities of human agencies.
Realism also is a distinct approach to the conduct and the study of international relations. Realists have basic tenets--states are primary actors and operate to
increase their relative power in a world in which anarchy puts a premium on self-help--that guide their thinking about international relations, but the readings
on realism in international relations will highlight the underlying politics of realists. We will consider the realist emphasis on power, the status of morality, the
relationship between power and morality, what critics of realists have to say about the realist treatment of these issues, and how realism in international relations
connects with realism as a political sensibility. We will read works by Carr, Greene, Kissinger, Lenin, Machiavelli, Mearsheimer, Orwell, and Waltz.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: five 7-page papers, alternating weeks with tutorial partner.
No prerequisites. Political Science 202 or 203 is recommended. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to Political Science majors.
International Relations Subfield
M. MACDONALD
PSCI 360 The Political Thought of Frantz Fanon (Same as Africana Studies 402 and Philosophy 360) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under AFR 402 for full description.) ROBERTS
PSCI 365(S) U.S. Grand Strategy (Same as Leadership Studies 365) (W)
This course examines how U.S. leaders have conceived of their nation's place in the world and sought to use power to achieve national objectives. We will
consider military affairs, economics, and diplomacy, but the class is mostly concerned with ideas. How have leaders from James Madison to George W. Bush
thought about U.S. vulnerabilities, resources, and goals, and how have those ideas influenced foreign policy decisions? How did key leaders balance competing
objectives and navigate difficult international circumstances? Which leaders were successful in managing U.S. statecraft, and which were not? Which leaders
developed coherent grand strategies? What lessons might we derive for our own times from studying this history? The course will sweep across American history
but will not attempt to be exhaustive in any way. Rather, it will focus on certain moments that highlight changing grand strategic thought. We will carefully
consider, for example, the drafting of the U.S. Constitution, continental expansion in the Manifest Destiny period, the Civil War, overseas expansion in the late
nineteenth century, the presidency of Woodrow Wilson, the Second World War, the Cold War, and the "War on Terror."
Possible texts include Hamilton, Madison, and Jay, The Federalist Papers; Alfred Thayer Mahan, The Influence of Sea Power Upon History; George Kennan,
American Diplomacy; Richard Immerman, Empire for Liberty; Henry Kissinger, Diplomacy; James McPherson, Tried by War: Abraham Lincoln as Commander
in Chief; and a collection of primary sources.
Format: seminar. Requirements: attendance and active participation in class; two short essays and one longer research paper (approximately 15 pages).
Prerequisites: PSCI 120 or PSCI 202 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 14 (expected: 14). Preference given to PSCI majors and Leadership Studies
concentrators.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF LAWRENCE
PSCI 369 (formerly 269) Human Rights in International Politics and Law (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
The idea that all humans have rights simply because they are human-independent of anything they might do or achieve-has transformed local and international
politics, probably permanently. This concept's place in international politics, its strengths and limitations, depend on how people use it. Beginning with the
18th-century's transatlantic movement to abolish slavery, we will examine international movements and institutions that have affected what human rights mean,
to whom, and where. Readings draw on philosophy (what are rights), history (who acted?) and international politics (how does one affect politics elsewhere),
but as a political science class we emphasize politics. Who benefits from the idea of human rights? Who loses?
Format: seminar. Requirements: two essays on common topics, a turn as class discussion leader, an independent research paper; active and constructive partici-
pation in class.
Prerequisites: Political Science 202 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 18 (expected 18). Preference: open to Political Science majors or those with
permission of instructor.
International Relations Subfield
Research Course
SHANKS
PSCI 371 Women Activists and Social Movements (Same as Africana Studies 371, INTR 371, and Women's, Gender and
Sexuality Studies 370) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under INTR 371 for full description.) JAMES
PSCI 382 The Art of Political and Historical Inquiry: American Foreign Relations (Not offered 2011-2012)
How do political scientists, historians, and international relations theorists effectively carry out original and productive research projects? This course seeks to
introduce students to the practical methods of political and historical inquiry. Working almost exclusively with primary sources and recently declassified docu-
ments, this class will examine selected aspects of American foreign relations. Rather than simply reading existing scholarly literature in this area, the goal of this
class is to enable students to produce original scholarship based on an examination of primary documents instead of through a reliance on secondary sources. In
consultation with the professor, students will have the option of pursuing either individual or engaging in collective research projects.
Format: research seminar. Evaluation will be based on weekly research assignments, class participation, and a final research paper of 25-30 pages.
Prerequisites: any of the following courses: Political Science 262, Political Science 242, History 262, History 263, History 358 or permission of instructor.
Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to upper-level Political Science and History majors, as well as students with a demonstrated interest in
American foreign policy and international studies.
International Relations Subfield
Research Course
MCALLISTER
PSCI 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
Open to junior majors with permission of the department chair.
SENIOR COURSES
PSCI 410(F) Senior Seminar in American Politics: Interpretations of American Politics
Current assessments of the state of American politics vary widely. Though recent polls show that as many as 60 percent of Americans think that the country is
headed down the wrong-track, it is not clear what that means. Critics on the left worry that the United States is on an imperial quest, extorting resources from the
global many for the advantage of an elite few. Critics on the right worry that the U.S. has abandoned the traditions that made it strong and has entered a period of
moral decay. What are we to make of these different assessments? What do left and right see when they survey the nation, and why is what they see so different?
Any diagnosis of contemporary maladies is premised on a vision of what a healthy functioning republic looks like. Our task in the seminar is to uncover and
interrogate those visions. We will do this by exploring different interpretations of American politics, each with its own story of narrative tensions and possible
resolutions. We will then use our investigation of how different authors, and different traditions, understand the nation to help us assess contemporary politics and
come to our own conclusions about what animates it.
247
Format: seminar. Requirements: brief weekly writing assignments; two short essays; a 15-page research paper; and oral presentation.
Prerequisites: at least one class in American politics. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected 12). Preference given to senior political science majors.
American Politics Subfield
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR C. JOHNSON
PSCI 420(F) Senior Seminar: Ending the Vietnam War
By the end of 1968, there was a broad consensus within the American government and the wider public that the Vietnam War was unwinnable. Nevertheless, it
took four more years to bring the war to a close. Whether the war could have ended earlier, or whether the peace settlement represented a betrayal of our South
Vietnamese allies, are questions that continue to be fiercely debated by historians and political scientists. This course will examine the diplomacy of war termina-
tion and the strategy for ending the war pursued by Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger. Working primarily with the Foreign Relations of the United States series
and other primary sources, students in this capstone will collaborate with the instructor to collectively produce an original work of scholarship on the final years of
the Vietnam War.
Format: seminar. Requirements: class participation, two short papers and a final research paper.
Prerequisites: PSCI 202. Enrollment limit: 14 (expected: 10). Preference given to senior Political Science majors and Leadership Studies concentrators.
International Relations Subfield
Research Course
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M MCCALLISTER
PSCI 420(S) Senior Seminar in International Relations: The Liberal Project in International Relations
The most powerful actors in the international system are liberal ones, and a liberal project around open trade and investment, international organizations and
democratic states dominates the global agenda. This course is an investigation into this liberal international relations project, engaging both theory and practice.
We will discuss signature liberal theorists both classic and current (e.g. Immanuel Kant, John Stuart Mill, Jeffrey Sachs, Anne-Marie Slaughter) as well as their
critics (e.g. Karl Marx, Carl Schmitt, Hans Morgenthau). We will also attend to empirical evaluations of signature liberal efforts around peace promotion, eco-
nomic growth and development, and democratic governance as well as discuss the successes and failures of transnational liberalism as a global social movement.
Format: seminar. Requirements: student presentations, two/three short papers, long final research paper, class participation.
Prerequisites: senior standing in Political Science major or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 16 (expected 16). Preference given to senior Political Sci-
ence majors concentrating in International Relations.
International Relations Subfield
Research Course
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF PAUL
PSCI 430(F) Senior Seminar in Political Theory: Visual Politics (Same as ArtH 329)
Even casual observers know that appearances matter politically and that the saturation of politics by visual technologies, media, and images has reached unprece-
dented levels. Yet the visual dimensions of political life are at best peripheral topics in contemporary political theory. This new course explores both why that is
and how our understanding of politics and political theory might change if visuality were made central to our inquiries. Treating the visual as a site of power and
struggle, order and change, we will examine not only how political institutions and conflicts shape what images people see and how they make sense of them but
also how the political field itself is visually constructed. Through these explorations, which will consider a variety of visual media, genres, and examples, we will
also take up fundamental theoretical questions about the place of affect and the senses in political life. Readings will include relevant excerpts from ancient and
modern theorists but our primary focus will be contemporary and will bring political theory into conversation with such fields as art history and criticism, commu-
nications, film theory, psychoanalysis, and cognitive science. Possible authors include Allen, Arendt, Azoulay, Bal, Barthes, Benjamin, Buck-Morss, Butler,
Connolly, Crimp, Damsio, Deleuze, Dewey, Elkins, Fried, Hobbes, Machiavelli, Merleau-Ponty, Mitchell, Mulvey, Noe, Plato, Rancire, Rogin, Rose, Rous-
seau, Scott, Sontag, Spinoza, Zizek.
Format: seminar. Requirements: class participation, regular short response papers and exercises, and a 15-page final essay.
Prerequisites: junior or senior standing and prior coursework in political theory, cultural theory, or visual studies; or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 16
(expected: 15). Preference given to senior Political Science majors with concentration in Political Theory, then other Political Science and Art History majors.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR M. REINHARDT
PSCI 440(F) Senior Seminar in Comparative Politics: The War in Iraq
This senior seminar will consider rival explanations for why the United States went to war in Iraq and why the venture did not go as planned. Why did the U.S.
government opt for war in Iraq: was it fear of weapons of mass destruction and ties to alQaeda or the appeal of oil or the pursuit of geopolitical advantage or the
influence of domestic lobbies, moral appeals, or imperialist impulses? And are the problems with the invasion the result of American mismanagement or the
predictable effect of the invasion itself?
Format: seminar. Requirements: readings, class presentation, and research paper.
Prerequisites: PSCI 204 or PSCI 250. Enrollment limited: 15 (expected 15). Preference given to senior Political Science majors with concentration in Compar-
ative Politics.
Comparative Politics Subfield
Research Course
Hour: 1:102:25 TF M. MACDONALD
PSCI 481(F)-W33-482(S) Advanced Study in American Politics
A year of independent study under the direction of the Political Science faculty, to be awarded to the most distinguished candidate based upon competitive
admissions. The candidate, designated the Sentinels of the Republic Scholar, receives a research stipend to cover costs associated with the proposed project.
The Sentinels Scholar may submit her/his essay for consideration for honors in Political Science.
Admission is awarded on the basis of demonstrated capacity for distinguished work and on the proposal's promise for creative contributions to the understand-
ing of topics on the federal system of government. Anyone with a prospective proposal should contact the department chair for guidance.
PSCI 493(F)-W31-494(S) Senior Thesis
The senior major, having applied for and been accepted into the honors program during the second semester of the junior year, will devote the senior year to
researching and writing a substantial and original work of scholarship, under the supervision of a faculty mentor to be assigned by the department. The final work
will be submitted for evaluation by a committee made up of the faculty supervisor and two additional readers to be chosen by the department, in consultation with
the supervisor. Thesis writers will not only work with their advisors but will participate in a weekly honors seminar supervised by a faculty member in political
science. The seminar (which is one component of the 493-W31-494 designation and not a separate course) will provide a focused forum for the exchange of ideas
among the honors students, who will regularly circulate sections of their theses-in-progress for peer review and critique. The faculty seminar leader's primary role
is one of coordination and guidance.
Research Skills Course
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF MAHON
PSCI 495(F)-W32, W32-496(S) Individual Project
With the permission of the department, open to those senior Political Science majors who are not candidates for honors, yet who wish to complete their degree
requirements by doing research--rather than taking the Senior Seminar--in their subfield of specialization. The course extends over one semester and the
winter study period. The research results must be presented to the faculty supervisor for evaluation in the form of an extended essay.
Prerequisites: two elective courses in the major's subfield specialization.
PSCI 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
Open to senior Political Science majors with permission of the department chair.
PSYCHOLOGY
(Div. II, with some exceptions as noted in course descriptions)
Chair, Professor BETTY ZIMMERBERG
Professors: FEIN, HEATHERINGTON, KASSIN*, KAVANAUGH***, KIRBY, M. SANDSTROM, SAVITSKY**, P. SOLOMON**, ZAKI.
ZIMMERBERG. Associate Professor: N. SANDSTROM. Assistant Professors: CROSBY*, HANE, KORNELL, STROUD. Senior Lecturer:
ENGEL. Visiting Assistant Professors: PERILLOUX, A. SOLOMON.
MAJOR
For the degree in Psychology, students must complete a minimum of nine courses as outlined below:
248
1) PSYC 101 Introductory Psychology
2) PSYC 201 Experimentation and Statistics
3) Three 200-level courses, with at least one from each of the following groups.
Group A COGS/PHIL/PSYC 222 Minds, Brains, and Intelligent Behavior: An Introduction to Cognitive Science
NSCI 201/BIOL 212/PSYC 212 Neuroscience
PSYC 221 Cognitive Psychology
Group B PSYC 232 Developmental Psychology
PSYC 242 Social Psychology
PSYC 252 Psychological Disorders
PSYC 272 Psychology of Education
Either PSYC 221 or 222, but not both, can count towards the three required 200-level courses.
4) Three 300-level courses from at least two of the areas listed below:
Area 1: Behavioral Neuroscience (courses with middle digit 1)
Area 2: Cognitive Psychology (courses with middle digit 2)
Area 3: Developmental Psychology (courses with middle digit 3)
Area 4: Social Psychology (courses with middle digit 4)
Area 5: Clinical Psychology (courses with middle digit 5)
Area 6: Other/Interdisciplinary Psychology (courses with middle digit 6)
Area 7: Educational Psychology (courses with middle digit 7)
At least one of these courses must be from among those carrying the format designation Empirical Lab Course.
5) PSYC 401 Perspectives on Psychological Issues
Students who place out of Psychology 101 are still required to take nine courses to complete the major.
The department recommends that students take Psychology 201 in their sophomore year. The department requires that 201 be completed by the end of the
junior year.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN PSYCHOLOGY
Students who are candidates for honors need take only two 300-level courses from two different areas, but they must enroll in Psychology 493-W31-494 and
write a thesis based on original empirical work. Presentation of a thesis, however, should not be interpreted as a guarantee of a degree with honors. Guidelines for
pursuing the degree with honors are available from the department.
STUDY ABROAD
With some advance planning, studying abroad (especially for one semester) can easily be worked into the psychology major. To facilitate this, we recommend
that students:
1) meet with the Study Abroad advisor (Professor Heatherington) as soon as they decide that they are interested in studying abroad
2) take Psychology 201 (Experimentation and Statistics) in the sophomore year
3) think ahead to the 300-level courses they are interested in taking so that they can fulfill the 200-level prerequisites before they go away or, if possible,
while they are away. In our experience, study abroad programs in the following places are most likely to offer psychology courses: England, Ireland,
Scotland, Spain, Australia, New Zealand, Hawaii, and Scandinavia. Students should procure the descriptions of the psychology courses they are consid-
ering taking and bring them to their meeting with the advisor.
There are some costs to studying away, particularly for the year. This limits students' opportunities to choose the particular 300-level courses they would like to
take and they must sometimes settle for those that are open, those which happen to be offered, or those for which they have the prerequisites, once they return in
their senior year. Many students who are keen on psychology begin doing research with professors during their junior year, and for some this leads to an honors
thesis in the senior year, summer research, etc. If you are going away for the entire year and do not make such connections with a professor ahead of time (i.e.,
before you go), you may lose out on some of these opportunities to deepen your involvement in the major on campus. On the other hand, studying abroad can be
an invaluable learning experience, so you need to think carefully, in consultation with your advisor and/or the Study Abroad advisor, about the costs and benefits
of it. Very occasionally, a student who just begins taking psychology courses late in the sophomore year and wishes to go abroad for the year finds that he/she is
not able to do both, or is restricted in the choice of study-abroad programs.
COURSE NUMBERING RATIONALE
As is the case in all departments, the first digit of a Psychology course number indicates the relative level of the course. Where appropriate, the second digit
corresponds to the Areas listed above.
PSYC 101(F,S) Introductory Psychology
An introduction to the major subfields of psychology: behavioral neuroscience, cognitive, developmental, social, personality, psychopathology, and health. The
course aims to acquaint students with the major methods, theoretical points of view, and findings of each subfield. Important concepts are exemplified by a study
of selected topics and issues within each of these areas.
Format: lecture. Requirements: two lab reports, unit quizzes, and a final exam.
No prerequisites. No enrollment limit (expected: 160).
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF Members of the Department
PSYC 201(F,S) Experimentation and Statistics (Q)
An introduction to the basic principles of research in psychology. We focus on how to design and execute experiments, analyze and interpret the results, and write
research reports. Students conduct a series of research studies in different areas of psychology (e.g., social, personality, cognitive) that illustrate basic designs and
methods of analysis.
Format: lecture/lab. Requirements: papers, exams, and problem sets.
Prerequisites: Psychology 101. Enrollment limit: 22 per section. Not open to first-year students except with pemission of instructor. Preference given to Psycholo-
gy majors. Two sections each semester--students must register for the lab and lecture with the same instructor.
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR, 1:10-2:25 MR Lab: 1:10-3:50 T,W First Semester: FEIN, KORNELL
8:30-9:45 TR, 8:30-9:45 MWF Lab: 1:10-3:50 W Second Semester: M. SANDSTROM, P. SOLOMON
PSYC 212(F) Neuroscience (Same as Biology 212 and Neuroscience 201)
A study of the relationship between brain, mind, and behavior. Topics include a survey of the structure and function of the nervous system, basic neurophysiolo-
gy, development, learning and memory, sensory and motor systems, language, consciousness and clinical disorders such as schizophrenia, Parkinson's disease,
and Alzheimer's disease. The laboratory focuses on current topics in neuroscience.
Format: lecture, three hours a week; laboratory, every other week. Evaluation will be based on a lab practical, lab reports, two hour exams and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Psychology 101 or Biology 101; open to first-year students who satisfy the prerequisites, or by permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 72 (ex-
pected: 72). Preference given to sophomores and to Biology and Psychology majors.
Satisfies one semester of the Division III requirement.
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR Lab: 1-4 M,T,W N, SANDSTROM and H. WILLIAMS (lecture) MARVIN (labs)
PSYC 221(S) Cognitive Psychology
This course will survey the properties and processes that make up normal human cognition. Topics include perception, attention, learning, memory, language,
judgment, decision making, reasoning, and problem solving.
Format: lecture. Requirements: one in-class midterm and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Psychology 101 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 50 (expected: 50).
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF KORNELL
249
PSYC 222(F) Minds, Brains, and Intelligent Behavior: An Introduction to Cognitive Science (Same as Cognitive Science 222 and
Philosophy 222)
(See under COGS 222 for full description.) KIRBY
Satisfies one semester of the Division II requirement.
PSYC 232(F) Developmental Psychology
An introduction to the study of human growth and development from conception through emerging adulthood. Topics for discussion include prenatal develop-
ment, perceptual and motor development, language acquisition, memory and intellectual development, and social and emotional development. These topics form
the basis for a discussion of the major theories of human development, including early experience, social learning, psychoanalytic, cognitive-developmental, and
ethological models.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: participation in on-line discussion, one short paper on children's television, two midterm exams and a cumulative final
exam.
Prerequisites: Psychology 101. Enrollment limit: 50 (expected: 50). Preference given to sophomores and junior Psychology majors. Open to first-year students.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR HANE
PSYC 242(S) Social Psychology
A survey of theory and research in social psychology. Topics include the self, social perception, conformity, attitudes and attitude change, prejudice, aggression,
altruism, attraction and love, intergroup conflict, and cross-cultural issues. Special attention is given to applications to political campaigning, advertising, sports,
the media, law, business, and health.
Format: lecture. Requirements: two hour exams and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Psychology 101. Enrollment limit: 50 (expected: 50). Open to first-year students.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR, 1:10-2:25 MR PERILLOUX
PSYC 252(F,S) Psychological Disorders
A study of the phenomenology, etiology, and treatment of the major forms of psychological disorders: the schizophrenias, dissociative disorders, affective disor-
ders, anxiety disorders, personality disorders, alcoholism, and others. The course emphasizes an integrative approach which incorporates and analyzes theories
and research from family, biological, genetic, and sociocultural perspectives.
Format: lecture. Requirements: two hour exams and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Psychology 101; open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 50 (expected: 50).
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR First Semester: STROUD
11:00-12:15 MWF Second Semester: HEATHERINGTON
PSYC 272(S) Psychology of Education
This course introduces students to a broad range of theories and research on education. What models of teaching work best, and for what purposes? How do we
measure the success of various education practices? What is the best way to describe the psychological processes by which children gain information and exper-
tise? What accounts for individual differences in learning, and how do teachers (and schools) address these individual needs? How do social and economic factors
shape teaching practices and the educational experiences of individual students? The course will draw from a wide range of literature (research, theory, and first
hand accounts) to consider key questions in the psychology of education. Upon completion of the course, students should be familiar with central issues in
pre-college education and know how educational research and the practice of teaching affect one another.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: two exams and a final project.
Prerequisites: Psychology 101. Enrollment limit: 50 (expected: 50). Preference given to Psychology majors and those who plan to become teachers.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR ENGEL
PSYC 315(S) Hormones and Behavior (Same as Neuroscience 315)
In all animals, hormones are essential for the coordination of basic functions such as development and reproduction. This course studies the dynamic relationship
between hormones and behavior. We will review the mechanisms by which hormones act in the nervous system. We will also investigate the complex interactions
between hormones and behavior. Specific topics to be examined include: sexual differentiation; reproductive and parental behaviors; stress; aggression; and
learning and memory. Students will critically review data from both human and animal studies. All students will design and conduct an empirical research project.
Format: Empirical Lab Course. Requirements: presentations and participation in discussions, short papers, midterm and final exams, written and oral presentation
of the research project.
Prerequisites: Psychology 212 (same as Biology 212 or Neuroscience 201). Enrollment limit: 16 (expected: 16). Preference given to Psychology majors and
Neuroscience concentrators.
Satisfies one semester of the Division III requirement.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF Lab: 1:10-3:50 T N. SANDSTROM
PSYC 316 Clinical Neuroscience (Same as Neuroscience 316) (Not offered 2011-2012)
Diagnosing and treating neurological diseases is the final frontier of medicine. Recent advances in neuroscience have had a profound impact on the understand-
ing of diseases that affect cognition, behavior, and emotion. This course provides an in-depth analysis of the relationship between brain dysfunction and disease
state. We will focus on neurodegenerative disorders including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and Huntington's disease. We will consider diagnosis
of disease, treatment strategies, as well as social and ethical issues. The course provides students with the opportunity to present material based upon: (1) review
of published literature, (2) analysis of case histories, and (3) observations of diagnosis and treatment of patients both live and on videotape. All students will
design and conduct an empirical research project.
Format: Empirical Lab Course. Evaluation will be based on position papers, class participation, and research project report.
Prerequisites: Psychology 212 (same as Biology 212 or Neuroscience 201). Enrollment limit: 16 (expected: 16).
Satisfies one semester of the Division III requirement.
P. SOLOMON
PSYC 318(F) Image, Imaging and Imagining: The Brain and Visual Arts (Same as INTR 223 and Neuroscience 318)
This course will study the intersections of neuroscience and art. The brain interprets the visual world and generates cognitive and emotional responses to what the
eyes see. It is also responsible for creating mental images and then directing the artist's motor output. We will first examine the neural mechanisms of how we
perceive what we see. We will investigate how visual artists have used or challenged perceptual cues in their work. Understanding how the brain perceives faces
will be used to analyze portraiture. We will consider the influence of neurological and psychological disorders on artistic work. We will examine neuroimaging
studies questioning whether the brains of visual artists are specialized differently from non-artists. Finally, we will explore how contemporary artists are using
brain images in their artwork, and how "outsider" artists have portrayed brain syndromes and mental states. Students will create their own artwork in response to
the course material, culminating in a class exhibit. The class will include field trips to local museums.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on a midterm, several presentations, and a final project.
Prerequisites: PSYC 101, ArtH 101-102 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 12). Preference: for registration under INTR, Studio Art
majors; for registration under PSYC or NSCI, Psychology majors and Neuroscience concentrators.
Satisfies one semester of the Division III requirement.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF ZIMMERBERG
PSYC 322(F) Concepts: Mind, Brain, and Culture
Every time we see something as a kind of thing, every time that we decide that an object is a cup rather than a glass, when we recognize a picture of a familiar face
as a picture of ourselves, or even when we understand speech, we are employing categories. Most categorization decisions are automatic and unconscious, and
therefore have the illusion of simplicity. The complexity of these decisions, however, becomes apparent when we attempt to build machines to do what humans
perform so effortlessly. What are the systems in place that allow us this extraordinary ability to segment the world? Are they universal? How does conceptual
knowledge differ across cultural groups? How do concepts affect our perception? How do the categories of experts differ from the categories of novices? Do
children have the same kind of conceptual knowledge as adults? How are categories represented in the brain? In this course, we explore various empirical find-
ings from cognitive psychology, cognitive neuroscience, and anthropology that address these questions.
Format: Empirical Lab Course. Requirements: short papers, class presentation, and research paper.
Prerequisites: Psychology 221 or 222 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 16 (expected: 16). Preference given to Psychology majors and Cognitive
Science concentrators.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR Lab: 1:10-3:50 W ZAKI
250
PSYC 324T Great Debates in Cognition (Not offered 2011-2012)
The field of cognition is filled with controversies about how the mind really works. For example, is there sufficient evidence for a system in vision that can
become aware of things without actually "seeing" them? Is it necessary to assume that babies come into the world armed with innate linguistic knowledge? Are
humans inherently rational? Can we make inference about the mind using neuroimaging? These debates, and others that we will consider, help fuel scientific
discovery in cognition in interesting ways. In this class, we will consider some of these contemporary debates, weigh evidence on both sides, and discuss the
implications for what we know about the mind.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: Students will meet in pairs with the instructor for an hour each week. Evaluation will be based on weekly papers and oral
arguments.
Prerequisites: Psychology 221 or 222 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to Psychology majors and Cognitive
Science concentrators.
ZAKI
PSYC 326(S) Choice and Decision Making
One aspect of "being human" is that we often make choices that we know are bad for us. In this course we survey theoretical and experimental approaches to
understanding our strengths and weaknesses as decision makers. Topics include normative decision theories, biases in probability judgments, "fast and frugal"
heuristics, impulsiveness and selfcontrol, addictions and bad habits, gambling, and moral decision making.
Format: seminar. Requirements: essay papers and class participation.
Prerequisites: Psychology 221 or 222 or permission of instructor. Permission is typically given to students who have successfully completed Economics 110.
Enrollment limit: 16 (expected: 16). Preference given to senior Psychology majors who need the course to fulfill the major.
Satisfies one semester of the Division II requirement.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR, 1:10-3:50 W KIRBY
PSYC 327 Human Learning and Memory (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course covers the principles underlying human learning and memory. One of the major themes will be what people can do to make their learning more
efficient and long-lasting. In addition to "what works," we will also examine what people think works. Memory is complex and often unintuitive, and we will
examine people's misconceptions, particularly about how to study. We will approach these issues from a theoretical perspective and a practical perspective (e.g.,
by discussing the implications of cognitive psychology for education). Consistent with what is known about learning and memory, students will be expected to
be active participants in their own learning.
Format: Empirical Lab Course; seminar with scheduled lab. Requirements: seminar and lab attendance, an original empirical research project (conducted in
small groups), a written report of the research project (written individually), shorter written assignments, an in-class presentation of the research project, mid-
term and final exams, and class participation.
Prerequisites: Psychology 201 and Psychology 221 or 222, or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 16 (expected: 14). Preference given to Psychology
majors.
KORNELL
PSYC 331T Risk and Resilience in Early Development (Not offered 2011-2012)
Children are often viewed as vulnerable members of our society, worthy of great care and protection. Paradoxically, equally commonplace is the perception that
children are hearty and resilient individuals who more readily adapt to change than adults. This contradiction is most evident during early development, when
the remarkable plasticity of the rapidly developing brain offers infants and young children an exquisite sensitivity to contextual forces, both positive and nega-
tive. This tutorial explores the risk and protective factors, both within and outside of the young child, that give rise to continuity and change in early develop-
ment and focuses on the challenges of translating risk and resilience research into programs that optimize development. Evidence drawn from theories of early
experience and developmental psychopathology will frame our review of the literature on prenatal risk factors, including teratogens and maternal stress; genetic
influences, including gene-by-environment interactions; infant risk factors, including medical fragility and temperament; caregiving risk factors, including ma-
ternal and paternal factors and childcare settings; socioeconomic risk factors, including poverty; and child abuse and neglect. Tutorial assignments will focus
heavily on critical evaluation of the quality of the research and to the translation of the research to applied programs.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: Students will meet in pairs with the instructor for one hour each week. Each week, students will either compose a position paper
based on the week's readings, or respond to the position paper of their partner.
Prerequisites: Psychology 201 and Psychology 232 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to Psychology majors.
HANE
PSYC 332(F) Cognitive Development
In this course we consider how mental abilities, such as language, memory, thinking and imagination develop during the childhood years. We begin by asking
how infants, who do not have language, make sense of their world and then move on to examine the development of language, memory, reasoning, and imagina-
tion. Throughout these discussions, we consider the impact of biology (e.g. changes in the brain) and culture on cognition, as well as the similarities and differ-
ences in the cognitive abilities of normally developing children and children with developmental problems (e.g., autism).
Format: seminar. Requirements: two hour exams, thought papers, and a final 10- to 15-page paper.
Prerequisites: Psychology 201 and Psychology 232 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 16 (expected: 16). Preference to Psychology majors.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR KAVANAUGH
PSYC 334T Magic, Superstition, and Belief (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
In the 2008 presidential campaign, Barack Obama played a ritual game of basketball on each election day while John McCain kept a lucky feather in his pocket
throughout the election season. These are but two striking examples of the millions of people who regularly engage in ritualistic or superstitious behavior. But
why? How did the mind evolve to support both logical reasoning and magical thinking? In this tutorial, we explore that question by examining how beliefs,
emotions, and imagination have interlocked in the course of human development. We will discuss and debate how the capacity to imagine facilitates problem
solving, why magical thinking continues in to adulthood, and how our beliefs in both natural and supernatural phenomena are related to the evolutionary forces
that shaped the human mind.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: Students will meet in pairs with the instructor for one hour each week and be fully prepared to discuss the material. Each week,
one member of each pair will either write a 6- to 8-page paper (five papers in total), or respond to the partner's paper. Emphasis will be placed on constructing
critical written and oral arguments.
Prerequisites: Psychology 221 or 232 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to Psychology majors.
KAVANAUGH
PSYC 335(S) Early Experience and the Developing Infant
The period from conception to age three is marked by impressive rapidity in development and the plasticity of the developing brain affords both fetus and infant
an exquisite sensitivity to context. This course delves into the literature that highlights the dynamic interactions between the developing fetus/infant and the
environment. The course readings span a range of disciplines and cover a diversity of hot topics in the study of prenatal and infant development, including
empirical research drawn from the developmental, neuroscience, psychopathology, and pediatric literatures.
Format: empirical lab course. Requirements: active class participation, regular thought papers and class presentations, and a written report and accompanying
presentation of an independent research project.
Prerequisites: Psychology 201, Psychology 212, and Psychology 232 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 16 (expected: 16). Preference given to
Psychology majors and Neuroscience Concentrators.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR Lab: 2:35-3:50 MR HANE
PSYC 336 Adolescence (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Why do we define adolescence as a distinct stage of development? What are its perils and accomplishments? What internal and external forces make adoles-
cence such a volatile and formative stage of life? The course considers a range of empirical and theoretical material, as well as fiction and film, in order to
identify and understand the behavior and experience of adolescents. Topics include: identity, sexuality, romantic love, intellectual growth, family relationships,
psychological problems, education, and variation between cultures.
Format: seminar. There will be a midterm paper and a group project that will involve several pieces of writing.
Prerequisites: Psychology 232 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 16 (expected: 16). Preference given to Psychology majors and those who plan to
become teachers.
ENGEL
251
PSYC 340T(S) Interdisciplinary Approaches to Social Psychology (W)
This tutorial will examine new and emerging interdisciplinary approaches to the study of important social psychological issues. Its focus will be on the connec-
tions between social psychology and disciplines such as neuroscience, biology, cognitive psychology, political science, organizational behavior, educational
psychology, and cross-cultural and multi-cultural psychology. Examples of topics to be examined include: Neuroscience and prejudice; culture and the self;
education and diversity; biology and altruism; politics and attitude change. We will explore the benefits and challenges of taking interdisciplinary approaches to
studying these issues.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: tutorial papers and responses to partner's tutorial papers, in alternating weeks; participation in tutorial discussions.
Prerequisites: Psychology 242. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to Psychology majors.
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. FEIN
PSYC 341 Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 339) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(W)
This course will examine social psychological theories and research that are relevant to the understanding of stereotypes, prejudice, and discrimination. We will
take a variety of social psychological perspectives, emphasizing sociocultural, cognitive, personality, or motivational explanations. We will examine the impact
that stereotypes and prejudice have on people's perceptions of and behaviors toward particular groups or group members and will explore a variety of factors
that tend to exacerbate or weaken this impact. We also will consider some of the sources of stereotypes, prejudice, and discrimination and some of the processes
through which they are maintained, strengthened, or revised. In addition, we will examine some of the effects that stereotypes, prejudice, and discrimination can
have on members of stereotyped groups, as well as some implications of the social psychological research findings for issues such as education and business
and government policies. A major component of this course will be the examination of classic and ongoing empirical research.
Format: Empirical Lab Course. Requirements: weekly brief papers, oral reports, two longer papers.
Prerequisites: Psychology 201 and 242. Enrollment limit: 16 (expected: 16). Preference given to senior, then junior Psychology majors.
FEIN
PSYC 344 Advanced Research in Social Psychology (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course will focus on the process of doing original, empirical social psychological research on specific topics in the field. We will concentrate on two
content areas of research: (1) stereotypes and prejudice, particularly as they touch on issues concerning the academic achievement of women and people of
color, and on the role of self-esteem in stereotyping and prejudice, and (2) interpersonal suspicion, including an examination of factors that might reduce suspi-
cion in interracial or cross-cultural dyads or groups. Students will research and critically analyze and integrate the relevant literatures concerning these topics,
and will design and conduct original research to test empirically several hypotheses that emerge from these literatures. We will examine a variety of types of
research design and statistical techniques.
Format: Empirical Lab Course. Requirements: a series of papers, written and oral reports of research.
Prerequisites: Psychology 201 and Psychology 242. Enrollment limit: 16. Preference given to Psychology majors.
FEIN
PSYC 345(F) Political Psychology (Same as Political Science 310)
(See under PSCI 310 for full description.) MARCUS
PSYC 346(S) Environmental Psychology (Same as Environmental Studies 346)
This is a course in social psychology as it pertains to the natural environment. We will consider how the environment influences aspects of human psychology
(e.g., the psychological implications of humans' disconnect with nature), as well as how human psychology influences the environment (e.g., why some people
engage in environmentally destructive behaviors despite holding pro-environmental attitudes). At the core of this course is an attempt to examine various ways in
which research and theory in social psychology can contribute insights to understanding (and encouraging) environmentally responsible behavior and sustainable
practices, both here at Williams and globally. Because human choice and behavior play such an important role in environmental problems, a consideration of
human psychology may therefore be an important part of the solution.
Format: empirical lab course. Requirements: a series of papers, written and oral reports of research.
Prerequisites: Psychology 242 recommended. Enrollment limit: 16 (expected: 16). Preference to Psychology major and Environmental Studies concentrators.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF Lab: 1:10-3:50 T SAVITSKY
PSYC 347 Psychology and the Law (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course deals with applications of psychology to the legal system. Relevant psychological theory and research address the following controversies: scientif-
ic jury selection, jury decision-making, eyewitness testimony, child witnesses in abuse cases, hypnosis, lie-detector tests, interrogations and confessions, the
insanity defense, and the role of psychologists as trial consultants and expert witnesses. Observations are made of videotaped trials, demonstrations, and mock
jury deliberations.
Format: seminar. Requirements: two hour exams and class participation.
Prerequisites: Psychology 242. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20).
KASSIN
PSYC 348(F) Evolutionary Psychology
This course will provide a solid theoretical foundation for the study of psychology from an evolutionary perspective. We will apply to humans the same lens that
evolutionary biology has applied to other species. This analysis allows us to explore human behavior at multiple levels of causation. During this course, we will
survey topics ranging from mating to menopause, jealousy to food preferences, and cheater-detection to kinship. The course will begin with an introduction to the
underpinnings of evolutionary theory and will then delve into more specific areas of human functioning. As part of the course, students will have an opportunity to
conduct original research in the area.
Format: Empirical Lab Course. Evaluation will be based on class participation, short written responses, a research proposal, and written and oral reports of re-
search.
Prerequisites: Psychology 242 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 16 (expected: 12). Preference given to Psychology majors.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR Lab: 1:10-3:50 T PERILLOUX
PSYC 349 Progress and Problems in Intergroup Interaction (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course will examine literature on intergroup interaction, ranging from classic work on "the contact hypothesis" to recent work that traces the physiological
correlates of intergroup interaction. We will discuss the current challenges of intergroup interaction, and the ways in which good intentions can sometimes
backfire in these situations. We will focus on interactions across specific group-based differences, such as race/ethnicity, sexuality, and disability, and in specific
settings, such as schools and workplaces.
Format: seminar. Requirements: twice weekly reaction papers, periodic oral presentations, research paper.
Prerequisites: Psychology 201 and 242 or consent of instructor. Enrollment limit: 16 (expected: 16). Preference will be given to Psychology majors.
CROSBY
PSYC 351(F) Childhood Peer Relations and Clinical Issues
An exploration of the important ways peer relationships influence children's emotional, cognitive, and social development. We consider various aspects of child-
hood peer rejection, including emergence and maintenance of peer difficulties, short- and long-term consequences, and intervention and prevention programs. A
variety of research methodologies and assessment strategies will be considered. All students will design and conduct an empirical research project based on the
concepts discussed.
Format: Empirical Lab Course. Requirements: weekly response papers, midterm exam and a written/oral report of research.
Prerequisites: Psychology 201 and either Psychology 232 or 252. Enrollment limit: 16 (expected: 16). Preference given to Psychology majors.
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M Lab: 1:10-3:50 W M. SANDSTROM
PSYC 352(F) Clinical and Community Psychology
A study of the theory, methods, and professional issues in clinical and community psychology. In addition to academic work (primary source readings and class
discussions), the course aims to enable students to apply their experience in academic psychology to field settings and to use their fieldwork experience to critical-
ly evaluate theory and research. The course includes a supervised fieldwork placement arranged by the instructor in a local mental health or social service agency.
Format: seminar. Requirements: field work (six hours per week), two 5-page position papers, and a 12- to 15-page final paper.
Prerequisites: Psychology 201 and either Psychology 232 or 252. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15). Preference given to senior, then junior, Psychology majors;
you MUST have permission of instructor to register for this course.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR HEATHERINGTON
252
PSYC 356(S) Advanced Topics in Personality and its Disorders
This course explores whether normative and extreme personalities can be explained within a single integrative theory. We begin by building an evidence-based
account of `human nature' -- i.e., of those tendencies and capacities that all normal humans share, across diverse cultures and life histories. Next we study how
genes, life events, and cognition can modify those tendencies and capacities to produce the individual differences that we call personalities. Finally we consider
whether the personality disorders are qualitatively different from normative personality styles, or differ merely by degree. Material will be drawn from many
psychological subdisciplines, including biological, trait, evolutionary, comparative, cognitive, psychodynamic, and social psychology.
Format: mixed lecture/seminar. Requirements: class participation, frequent short response papers, a midterm exam, and a capstone paper.
Prerequisites: Psychology 252 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference to Psychology majors.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF A. SOLOMON
PSYC 357(S) Depression
This course will provide students with a comprehensive understanding of depression. Topics will include assessment, models of etiology and course, effective
approaches to prevention and intervention, and depression in specific populations. Readings will expose students to seminal works in the field as well as current
methods and research findings. All students will design and conduct an empirical research project based on the readings and concepts discussed. Throughout the
course, students will evaluate current research based on theory, methodological rigor, and potential impact on prevention and intervention efforts.
Format: seminar. Requirements: class participation, in-class short written responses, weekly response papers, midterm exam, an original empirical research proj-
ect, a written report of the research project, and an oral presentation of the research project.
Prerequisites: Psychology 201 and Psychology 252. Enrollment limit: 16 (expected: 16). Preference will be given to Psychology majors.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR Lab: 1:10-3:50 W STROUD
PSYC 361 Psychology of Nonviolence (Not offered 2011-2012)
Nonviolence refers to choice behavior in interpersonal interactions in which physical and psychological injury to others is rejected as an option. In this course
we will study theories of nonviolence, and evaluate the empirical support for their central empirical claims of psychological benefits to the practitioner, attitude
change in the adversary, and positive exemplary effects on social interaction. Topics include anger and self-control, aggression, evil, conflict resolution, empa-
thy, and forgiveness.
Format: discussion/seminar. Requirements: class attendance and participation, discussion leadership, weekly response papers, short essays, and a final paper.
Prerequisites: any 200-level course in Psychology or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 10). Preference given to Psychology majors.
KIRBY
PSYC 372(F) Advanced Seminar in Teaching and Learning
This advanced seminar will give students an opportunity to connect theory to practice. Each student will have a teaching placement in a local school, and partici-
pate in both peer and individual supervision. In addition, we will read a range of texts that examine different approaches to teaching, as well as theory and research
on the process of education. What is the best way to teach? How do various theories of child development and teaching translate into everyday practices with
students? Students will be encouraged to reflect on and modify their own teaching practices as a result of what we read as well as their supervision. Questions we
will discuss include: What is the relationship between educational goals and curriculum development? What is the relation between substance (knowledge, skills,
content) and the interpersonal dynamic inherent in a classroom setting? How do we assess teaching practices and the students' learning? What does it take to be
an educated person?
Format: seminar. Requirements: This course involves a field placement, weekly readings, as well as seminar discussion, supervision, and a graded journal.
Prerequisites: Psychology 232 or Psychology 272 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 16 (expected: 16). Preference given to Psychology majors and
those who plan to become teachers.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W ENGEL
PSYC 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
Open to upperclass students with permission of the instructor and department. Students interested in doing an independent study should make prior arrange-
ments with the appropriate professor. The student and professor then complete the independent study proposal form available at the Registrar's Office and
should submit it to the department chair for approval prior to the beginning of the drop/add period.
PSYC 401(F) Perspectives on Psychological Issues
This course-the psychology department's senior seminar-considers several important contemporary topics from diverse psychological perspectives. These topics
will be introduced via popular books or films, and we will analyze them more deeply with original research articles from across multiple perspectives and subdis-
ciplines of psychology. The course will primarily be discussion-based, and the students will be leading these discussions.
Format: seminar. Requirements: participation in class discussions, choosing relevant research articles, and three position papers.
Prerequisites: only open to seniors. No enrollment limit (expected: 15 per section). This course is required of all senior Psychology majors.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR Members of the Department
PSYC 493(F)-W31-494(S) Senior Thesis
Independent study and research for two semesters and a winter study period under the guidance of one or more members of the department. After exploring the
literature of a relatively specialized field of psychology, the student will design and execute an original empirical research project, the results of which will be
reported in a thesis. Detailed guidelines for pursuing a thesis are available from the department and on our web site.
Prerequisites: permission of the thesis advisor.
PUBLIC HEALTH
Coordinator, Associate Professor LOIS BANTA
Advisory Committee: Professors: DARROW, D. GOLLIN***, C. JOHNSON, SHANKS, SHORE-SHEPPARD*, ZIMMERBERG. Associate Pro-
fessors: BANTA, GEHRING, KLINGENBERG, WATSON. Assistant Professors: DUBOW, HANE, MUNEMO, WILSON. Adjunct Associate
Professor: HONDERICH. Visiting Assistant Professor: J. PEDRONI. Lecturer: GUTSCHOW***.
Public health seeks to understand, and also to protect and improve, health at the level of a community or population. Communities make decisions and allocate
resources that, intentionally or not, fundamentally shape human life. For example, great reductions in sickness and early death have come from social interven-
tions with relatively low financial cost, such as physically separating drinking water from sewage, or distributing aspirin, condoms, mosquito nets, vaccines or
soap, or sharing new ideas about life's possibilities. The way a society is organized affects the way that social and scientific knowledge is distributed within it;
access to that knowledge shapes health at the individual level. At its heart, the study of public health focuses on questions about relationships between science and
society, and between reality and possibility: what effective public health policy is and how we can measure its effectiveness; what the relationship is, and ought to
be, between research and policy; how we reconcile important moral and economic claims, or balance other values that compete with maximizing health; what
counts as disease, over time and among cultures; how we think about cause and responsibility; what constitutes a healthy environment; how our fundamental
beliefs determine our approaches to health decisions; and how such decisions ought to be made.
Public health draws on theory and applied research in the social sciences, natural sciences and humanities. Specialized subjects within public health include
epidemiology, population history, environmental health, disease prevention, aging, biostatistics, reproductive and family health, health policy, health education,
and the politics of health-related research. A good foundation in the study of public health would include at least one course devoted to the field as a whole and one
course in statistics, supplemented by courses that provide grounding in demographic history and processes, decision-making, science and health, and humanistic
and ethical dimensions of the field. It also would include field experience. The advisory committee on public health suggests that the following categories of
courses serve as a distributive guide for students interested in acquiring a foundation in the field.
Core Course
INTR 150 Dimensions of Public Health (Not offered 20112012; to be offered 20122013)
Courses in Statistics
ECON/POEC 253 Empirical Methods in Political Economy
STAT 101 Elementary Statistics and Data Analysis
STAT 201 Statistics and Data Analysis
STAT 231 Statistical Design of Experiments
STAT 358T Introduction to Biostatistics
STAT 440 Categorical Data Analysis
253
Demography: Population Processes
ECON 380 Population Economics
HIST/AFR 103 The City in Africa
HIST 466 Imagining Urban America, Three Case Studies: Boston, Chicago, and L.A.
PSCI 324 Genocide, Exile, and Famine
Decision-Making by Institutions and Individuals
ANTH 243 Dilemmas of Humanitarian Interventions
ECON 205 Public Economics
ECON/WGST 207 Economics of HIV/AIDS
ECON 230 Economics of Health and Health Care
ECON 381T Health in Poor Countries
ECON 468 Your Money or Your Life: Health Disparities in the United States
[ECON 469 Economics of Global Health and Population  last offered Spring 2009]
ECON 503 Public Economics
PSCI 209 Poverty in America
PSCI 228 International Organizations
PSCI 316 Policy Making Policy
PSYC 242 Social Psychology
PSYC 326 Choice and Decision Making
SOC 265 Drugs and Society
Science and Medicine
ANTH/REL/WGST 272 Sex in Society: The Cultural Construction of Reproduction
BIOL 132 The Human Genome
BIOL 133 The Biology of Exercise and Nutrition
BIOL/ENVI 134 The Tropics: Biology and Social Issues
BIOL 313 Immunology
BIOL 315 Microbiology
CHEM 112 Chemistry of Tropical Diseases: Charting the Course from Traditional to Modern Medicines
CHEM 115 AIDS: The Disease and Search for a Cure
CHEM/ENVI 341 Toxicology and Cancer
HIST 374 American Medical History
HIST/WGST 378 The History of Sexuality in America
HSCI 320/HIST 293 History of Medicine
PSYC 317T Nature via Nuture
PSYC 331T Risk and Resilience in Early Development
PSYC 335 Early Experience and the Developing Infant
PSYC 353 Behavioral Medicine
Bioethics and Interpretations of Health
COMP 242T Reading and Writing the Body
[HIST 336 Victorian Psychology  last offered Spring 2008]
PHIL 227 Death and Dying
PHIL 213 Biomedical Ethics
PHIL/WGST 228 Feminist Bioethics
PHIL 229 Ethics and Genetics
PHIL 274T Ethics of Human Experimentation
[PHIL/WGST 311T Power, Pain & Pleasure  last offered Fall 2007]
PHIL 337 Justice in Health Care
REL/ASST/WGST 248 Body Politics, Gender, and Religion in South Asia
RLSP 301 Cervantes's Don Quixote
SOC 204 Health, Illness, and Biomedicine
WGST/PHIL 212 Ethics and Reproductive Technologies
Field Experience (Winter Study Classes)
ANSO 13 Epidemiology, Public Health and Leadership in the Health Professions
BIOL 11 Global Health: Why We Should Care
BIOL 12 Pathophysiology of Diseases of the Heart
ECON 25 Gender & Social Activism in Senegal
PSCI 15 Infectious Diseases, Public Health Crisis and Human Development
PSCI 21 Fieldwork in Public and Private Nonprofits
PSCI 25 Williams in New Orleans
SPEC 14 Emergency Medical Technician
SPEC 19 Medical Apprenticeship
SPEC 24 Eye Care and Culture in Nicaragua
RELIGION (Div. II)
Chair, Professor DENISE K. BUELL
Professors: BUELL, DARROW, DREYFUS. Associate Professor: HAMMERSCHLAG*, Assistant Professors: HIDALGO, JOSEPHSON**,
SHUCK. Lecturer: GUTSCHOW***.
MAJOR
The major in Religion is designed to perform two related functions: to expose the student to the methods and issues involved in the study of religion as a
phenomenon of psychological, sociological, and cultural/historical dimensions; and to confront students with the beliefs, practices, and values of specific
religions through a study of particular religious traditions. It is a program that affords each student an opportunity to fashion his/her own sequence of study within
a prescribed basic pattern constructed to ensure both coherence and variety. It consists of at least nine semester courses as follows:
Required sequence courses
Religion 101 Introduction to Religion
Two seminars, one that explores a central topic of contemporary critical inquiry in the study of religion (courses numbered 270-299) and one that explores a
body of theory in the study of religion (courses numbered 300-310)
Religion 401 Issues in the Study of Religion
Elective courses
Five additional courses in Religion are to be selected in such a way that at least one course is taken in both the Western and non-Western traditions. Students
will construct their sequence in consultation with departmental advisors and subject to their approval. In order to achieve a deep coverage of a particular religious
tradition or set of related problems in the study of religion, students are urged to select three electives that together have some kind of coherence, be it cultural,
historical, or topical. Related courses from other departments or programs may be included among the three courses, and the point of coherence can be the subject
of research papers in the senior seminar.
Students are advised to elect additional courses in related fields (e.g., psychology, sociology, anthropology, art, history, philosophy) in order to gain a clearer
understanding of the social and cultural contexts in which religions appear.
For those who wish to go beyond the formally-listed courses into a more intensive study of a particular religious tradition, methodological trend, or religious
phenomenon (e.g., ritual, symbol-formation, mysticism, theology, etc.), there is the opportunity to undertake independent study or, with the approval of the de-
partment, to pursue a thesis project.
The value of the major in Religion derives from its fostering of a critical appreciation of the complex role religion plays in every society, even those that
consider themselves non-religious. The major makes one sensitive to the role religion plays in shaping the terms of cultural discourse, of social attitudes and
behavior, and of moral reflection. But it also discloses the ways in which religion and its social effects represent the experience of individual persons and commu-
254
nities. In doing these things, the major further provides one with interdisciplinary analytical tools and cross-cultural experience and opens up new avenues for
dealing with both the history of a society and culture and the relationships between different societies and cultures. What one learns as a Religion major is there-
fore remarkably applicable to a wide range of other fields of study or professions.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN RELIGION
The degree with honors in Religion requires the above-mentioned nine courses and the preparation of a thesis of 75+ pages with a grade of B+ or better. A
thesis may combine revised work done in other courses with new material prepared while enrolled either in Religion 493-W31 or Religion W31-494. Up to
two-thirds of the work in the thesis may be such revised work, but at least one-third must represent new work. The thesis must constitute a coherent whole either
by its organizing theme or by a focus on a particular religious tradition. Candidates will also be expected to present the results of their thesis orally in a public
presentation. Students who wish to be candidates for honors in Religion will submit proposals and at least one paper that may be included in the thesis to the
department in the spring of their junior year. Students must normally have at least a 3.5 GPA in Religion to be considered for the honors program.
The chair will serve as advisor to non-majors.
STUDY ABROAD
The Williams College Religion Department encourages potential majors to study abroad in order to enhance their education and gain international perspec-
tives on religious studies. There are many excellent study abroad opportunities offering students a variety of possible experiences: among them cultural immer-
sion, field work, intensive language learning, independent study, participation in another educational system. Many of our majors study in the Williams College
Oxford Program, but our majors also regularly pursue a semester or year-long study in other programs.
REL 101(F,S) Introduction to Religion
An examination of the structure and dynamics of certain aspects of religious thought, action, and sensibility--employing psychological, sociological, anthropo-
logical, and philosophical modes of inquiry--the course offers a general exposure to basic methodological issues in the study of religion, and includes consider-
ation of several cross-cultural types of religious expression.
Format: lecture/discussion. Assessment will be based on brief essays, a more substantial midterm paper and final essay-based exercise.
Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 15-25).
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF, 2:35-3:50 MR First Semester: DREYFUS, SHUCK
1:10-2:25 MR Second Semester: DARROW
THE JEWISH TRADITION
REL 201(F) The Hebrew Bible (Same as Comparative Literature 201 and Jewish Studies 201)
The Hebrew Bible is perhaps the single most influential work in the history of Western philosophy, literature, and art. But the overwhelming presence of the text in
nearly every aspect of modern culture often obscures the sheer brilliance of its narrative technique as well as the complex interplay between law, history, prophe-
cy, and poetry. This course offers a comprehensive introduction to the literary, historical, and theological aspects of the Hebrew Bible with an eye towards devel-
oping a sophisticated understanding of the text in its ancient context. Through the close reading of substantial portions of the Hebrew Scripture in translation and
the application of various modern critical approaches to culture and literature, students will explore fundamental questions about the social, ritual, and philosophi-
cal history of ancient Israel, as well as the fundamental power of storytelling that has resonated across two millennia.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, short written assignments, and two to three longer papers.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 40). Preference given to Jewish Studies concentrators, Religion and Comparative Literature majors.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR DEKEL
REL 202(S) Moses: Stranger in a Strange Land (Same as Comparative Literature 214 and Jewish Studies 202)
As chieftain, priest, prophet, and lawgiver all in one, Moses occupies the central place in the history of Israelite and Jewish leaders. However, he is a somewhat
unlikely candidate for such an important role. He is God's chosen leader among the enslaved Israelites, but he is raised as an Egyptian prince. He is a spokesman
for his people, but he is slow of speech. He is the lawgiver and first judge of his nation, yet he is quick-tempered and impatient. The story of the most revered
figure in the Jewish tradition, who nevertheless remains an outsider to the very end, has fascinated commentators and inspired countless artistic and literary
interpretations. This course will engage in a close study of the figure of Moses by examining the biblical narrative of his life and career from Exodus through
Deuteronomy with an eye towards understanding the complex and often contradictory portrait of this self-described "stranger in a strange land." We will also
examine some of the ancient legendary and folkloric accounts about Moses, as well as philosophical and allegorical treatments in Hellenistic Jewish, early Chris-
tian, and Muslim biographies. We will then proceed to investigate key modern reconfigurations and critiques of Moses in several genres, which may include
renaissance visual depictions, literary works by Sigmund Freud, George Eliot, Thomas Mann, and Zora Neale Hurston, and even musical and cinematic rendi-
tions. All readings are in translation.
Format: seminar. Requirements: class participation, short written assignments, and two or three longer papers.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to students who have already taken a course in biblical literature.
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR DEKEL
REL 203 Judaism: Innovation and Tradition (Same as Jewish Studies 101) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
What is the relationship between modern notions of Jewish identity, thought and practice and the Hebrew Bible? How does the modern Reform movement link
itself to the laws of the rabbinic sages? Are there consistent values and ideals that mark Jewish moral thought throughout its history? What elements of the
Jewish tradition have enabled its elasticity and historic persistence? By providing an introduction to the traditions of Jewish thought and practice through the
ages, this course will take up these questions. Though the course's method of progression will be primarily chronological, commencing with myths of Israel's
beginnings and culminating with contemporary debates over Jewish identity, we will additionally emphasize the strong ties between methods of Jewish thought
and practices and the surrounding cultural environments in which they developed. We will approach the tradition not only with historical concerns, but with
literary and philosophical aims as well. We will analyze the interpretive strategies, theological presuppositions, and political aims that accompany the tradition
both in its continuities and its ruptures. Finally, we will consider the extent to which we can speak of Judaism under the category of religion, considering as well
the other categories that have been proposed for Judaism, Jews and Jewishness, such as nation, people, race and ethnicity, and the motivations behind such
designations. Texts will include the Hebrew Bible, Holz (ed), Back to the Sources; Halbertal, People of the Book; Mendelssohn, Jerusalem; Hertzberg (ed), The
Zionist Idea; Levi, Survival in Auschwitz as well as excerpts and articles available in a course packet.
Format: lecture/discussion. Assignments will include participation in class discussion, three short papers (5-7 pages) and a take-home final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 15). Preference given to Religion majors and Jewish Studies concentrators.
HAMMERSCHLAG
REL 204 Endtimes: Messianism in Modernity (Same as Jewish Studies 204 and Philosophy 204) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
The sociologist Zygmunt Bauman has described modernity as the period of the world's disenchantment, when God absconded and religion was either rational-
ized or reduced to the category of superstition. Ironically, this very disenchantment might help to explain the persistence of the concept of the messianic in even
the most secular branches of modern European thought. One of Judaism's most powerful and elastic concepts, the notion of the messiah saw a variety of
radically different interpretations between the 17th and 20th centuries. This course will consider the range of modern interpretations of the messiah, taking as its
concrete starting point the Sabbatian Heresy of the 17th century and concluding with Derrida's philosophical development of the concept of the messianic as
pure interruption. The course's aim is to use messianism as a focal point around which to consider the dynamic relationship between philosophy and Judaism in
modernity. This course will expose the mutual influences of these two forces, illustrating both how Enlightenment conceptions of progress helped to create the
notion of "messianism" understood as an abstract idea, and how the modern/post-modern philosophical conception of the "messianic" as a force that interrupts
time is dependent upon historical studies of the messianic dimension of traditional Judaism. The readings for each class will not generally exceed 40 pages but
will require close attention. Authors to be read include GWF Hegel, Immanuel Kant, Hermann Cohen, Franz Rosenzweig, Gershom Scholem, Walter Benja-
min, and Jacques Derrida.
Format: seminar. Requirements will include regular participation, weekly writing assignments of 2-3 pages, and a final 12- to 15-page paper an approved topic
of the student's choice.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to Religion majors and Jewish Studies concentrators.
HAMMERSCHLAG
REL 205 Ancient Wisdom Literature (Same as Classics 205, Comparative Literature 217 and Jewish Studies 205) (Not offered 2011-2012)
The Biblical books of Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Job are often grouped together under the Hebrew category of hokhmah, `wisdom.' Although these books are
very different in content, they can all be interpreted as meditations on ethical and practical philosophy. In this way, they represent the Hebrew Bible's canonical
embrace of a widespread Near Eastern literary phenomenon. From the instructional literature of Egypt and Mesopotamia to Greek didactic poetry and fables,
255
ancient Mediterranean cultures offer a wide range of texts that engage the issues of personal behavior, leadership, and justice. Starting with the central wisdom
books of the Hebrew Bible and moving through relevant material from the Apocrypha, New Testament, and the Egyptian and Babylonian traditions, this course
will examine the literature of wisdom throughout the ancient world with an eye toward understanding its various social, political, and philosophical contexts.
We will then consider the Greek wisdom tradition in such texts as Hesiod's Works and Days, Aesop's fables, and fragments from the pre-Socratic philosophers.
Finally, we will explore the influence of these ancient sources on later expressions of wisdom in medieval European literature, as well as more recent examples
such as Benjamin Franklin's Poor Richard's Almanack. All readings are in translation.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: evaluation will be based on class participation, short written assignments, and two longer papers.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference will be given to students who have already taken a course in ancient literature.
DEKEL
REL 206 The Book of Job and Joban Literature (Same as Comparative Literature 206 and Jewish Studies 206) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
The Book of Job has often been described as the most philosophical book of the Hebrew Bible. The story of one man's struggle to understand the cause of his
suffering and his relationship to God represents the finest flowering of the Near Eastern wisdom literature tradition. Through its exploration of fundamental
issues concerning human suffering, fate and divinity, and the nature of philosophical self-examination, Job has served as a touchstone for the entire history of
existential literature. At the same time, the sheer poetic force of the story has inspired some of the greatest artistic and literary meditations in the Western
tradition. This course will engage in a close reading of the Book of Job in its full cultural, religious, and historical context with special attention to its literary,
philosophical, and psychological dimensions. We will then proceed to investigate key modern works in several genres that involve Joban motifs, themes, and
text both explicitly and implicitly. These texts will include Franz Kafka's The Trial, Archibald MacLeish's J.B., Robert Frost's "Masque of Reason," Carl
Jung's Answer to Job, and William Blake's Illustrations to the Book of Job. All readings are in translation.
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, weekly short written assignments, and two longer papers.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit:19 (expected: 19).
DEKEL
REL 207 From Adam to Noah: Literary Imagination and the Primeval History in Genesis (Same as Classics 207, Comparative
Literature 250 and Jewish Studies 207) (Not offered 2011-2012)
How long did Adam and Eve live in the Garden of Eden? What was the mark of Cain? Why did Enoch not die? Who was Noah's wife? How did Giants
survive the Flood? These are only a few of the fascinating questions that ancient readers and interpreters of the Book of Genesis asked and attempted to answer.
The first ten chapters of Genesis present a tantalizingly brief narrative account of the earliest history of humankind. The text moves swiftly from the Creation to
the Flood and its immediate aftermath, but this masterful economy of style leaves many details unexplained. This course will explore the rich and varied literary
traditions associated with the primeval history in the Genesis. Through a close reading of ancient non-canonical sources such as the Book of Enoch, Jubilees,
and the Life of Adam and Eve, as well as Jewish traditions represented in Josephus, Philo, and Rabbinic literature and other accounts presented in early Chris-
tian and Gnostic texts, we will investigate the ways in which the elliptical style of Genesis generated a massive body of ancient folklore, creative exegesis, and
explicit literary re-imagining of the early history of humankind. We will then turn to several continuations of these variant traditions in medieval and early
modern literature, with particular attention to the extensive material on the figures of Cain and Noah. All readings are in translation.
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation and several writing assignments.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit:19 (expected:19). Preference will be given to students who have already taken a course in Biblical literature.
DEKEL
REL 209 The Legend of the Wandering Jew (Same as Comparative Literature 209 and Jewish Studies 209) (Not offered 2011-2012)
The story of the Jewish man who drove Christ away when he stopped to rest for a moment on his way to the Crucifixion and was doomed to roam the earth until
the Advent is one of the most enduring and productive tales of the Middle Ages. Alternately a shoemaker, carpenter, or even doorkeeper to Pontius Pilate, the
Wandering Jew appears in the folklore, literature, and visual arts of every region and era in European history. This course will explore the rich and varied
traditions associated with this legend from its pre-history in the Hebrew Bible and the Gospels up through its early modern and Romantic heyday. In readings
ranging from medieval chronicles and Reformation pamphlets to works by Chaucer, Schiller, Shelley, and Hans Christian Andersen, we will trace the evolution
of this mysterious wanderer from reviled figure of anti-Jewish polemic, to righteous convert and missionary, to learned sage. Along the way we will also
examine the intersection of the tale with such legendary figures as Cain, Prester John, and the Wild Huntsman. We will then turn to several modern literary
reflections and contemporary artistic renderings of the story. All readings are in translation.
Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation and several writing assignments.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit:19 (expected:19). Preference will be given to students who have already taken a course in Biblical literature.
DEKEL
THE CHRISTIAN TRADITION
REL 210 Reading Jesus, Writing Gospels: Christian Origins in Context (Same as Classics 210 and Comparative Literature 213) (Not offered
2011-2012) (W)
What were the religious and cultural landscapes in which Christianity emerged? How did inhabitants of the ancient Mediterranean world speak about the
concept and significance of religion? How have scholars of early Christianity answered these questions? What are the implications of their various readings of
early Christian history? In the first half of this course, we shall address these questions by examining the formation of Christianity from its origins as a Jewish
movement until its legalization, using a comparative socio-historical approach. In the second half of the course, we shall examine the earliest literature produced
by the Jesus movement and consider it within a comparative framework developed in the first half of the course.
Format: lecture/discussions. Requirements: one class presentation; three 3-page papers, one 5- to 7-page paper, and a final paper (15 pages).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 10). Preference given to sophomores but is open to all classes.
BUELL
REL 211 The New Testament (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course examines the twenty-seven writings that constitute the distinctively Christian portion of Christian scriptures, known as the New or Christian Testa-
ment (see Religion 201 for a course on the Hebrew Bible, the portion of the Christian Bible whose writings are scripture for both Jews and Christians). This
course introduces students to a range of methods of biblical interpretation, to cultivate an understanding of the texts in the ancient historical and literary contexts
of the Roman Empire, Judaism, and emerging Christian communities in which individual New Testament writings were composed and interpreted. The course
also explores the process by which this collection of writings became authoritative for Christians.
Format: lecture and discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, brief weekly writing exercises, 5- to 7-page historical exegesis paper, and a final
exam.
No prerequisites, open to all classes. No enrollment limit (expected: 25).
BUELL
REL 212(F) The Development of Christianity: 30-600 C.E. (Same as History 324) (W)
This class will introduce you to the history, writings, practices, and structures of early Christians between 30-600 CE. Who were "Christians" and how did they
understand and define themselves in this time period? What historical and cultural factors influenced the ways in which Christians were perceived, could imagine
themselves, and lived? While this class addresses the basic flow of events and major figures in early Christian history, it will also require you to develop a critical
framework for the study of history in general. In addition, you will gain significant experience in the critical analysis of primary source materials. Special attention
will be paid to the incredible diversity of early Christian thought and practice. Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: evaluation based on attendance, active
participation in class, regular brief writing exercises; two textual analysis papers (3 pages each); one historical analysis paper (5 pages); essay-based take-home
final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to sophomores considering a major in Religion or History, then senior and junior majors
in these departments.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF BUELL
REL 213 Divine Kingship in the Ancient Mediterranean (Same as Anthropology 258, Classics 394, and History 394) (Not offered
2011-2012)
(See under CLAS 394 for full description.) RUBIN
256
REL 217 Apocalypse Now and Then: A Comparative History of Millenarian Movements (Same as History 476) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under HIST 476 for full description.) BERNHARDSSON
REL 218(S) Gnosis, Gnostics, Gnosticism (Same as Classics 218, Comparative Studies 218 and History 331) (W)
What is gnosis and Gnosticism? Who were the Gnostics? Salvation by knowledge, arch-heresy, an eternal source of mystical insights and experiences, secret
esoteric teachings available only to a few. All these and more have been claims made about gnosis, Gnostics, and Gnosticism. This course will introduce you to
the key ancient texts and ideas associated with Gnostics as well as to the debates over and claims made about Gnosticism in modern times. We shall explore
neoplatonic, Jewish, and Christian thought, as well as modern spiritualism and esotericism. We shall also ask about how ancient Gnostics relate to later religious
groups such as the Knights Templar and modern Theosophists. Readings include: Nag Hammadi writings in English, Irenaeus, Against All Heresies; David
Brakke, The Gnostics; Elaine Pagels, The Gnostic Gospels; Karen King, What is Gnosticism? and The Secret Revelation of John.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: periodic reflection papers, 2 textual analysis papers, 2 historiographical analysis papers, and a final paper that entails a
revision and expansion of an earlier paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to students with prior coursework in biblical or other ancient literature or history.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF BUELL
REL 220(S) The Reformations in Early Modern Europe (Same as History 330)
This course tracks the major developments in Christian thought from the Reformations to the nineteenth century. We will begin by examining the background to
the Reformations across Europe and across denominations of Christianity, showing how the Reformations along with their precursors indirectly helped to usher in
a world that placed greater emphasis on the value of selfhood and moral autonomy, encouraged the emergence of the Enlightenment and scientific rationality, and
helped to lead to the cultural and political re-alignment of nation-states.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will consist of several short papers (1500 words), a final paper (3000-3500 words), and thoughtful interaction.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20).
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR SHUCK
REL 221 Post-Enlightenment Christian Thought (Not offered 2011-2012)
Christianity in the Western world has undergone numerous challenges since the early eighteenth century. Many thinkers have turned inward, developing pietis-
tic theologies compatible with the modern world, while others have searched for an adequate expression of Christianity after the "Death of God." Another,
remarkably resilient strand has actively turned against the Enlightenment in ironic ways, appropriating modern technologies, for example, while repudiating
scientific discoveries that undermine their belief. This course will examine these issues, along with a careful consideration of the way gender, identity, and
community have come to play a powerful role in contemporary expressions of Christian belief.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will consist of several short response papers, thoughtful interaction, a midterm, and a 10-page final paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 15).
SHUCK
REL 222(F) Europe From Reformation to Revolution: 1500-1815 (Same as History 226)
(See under HIST 226 for full description.) WOOD
NORTH AMERICAN RELIGIONS
REL 224(S) U.S. Latina/o Religions (Same as American Studies 224 and Latina/o Studies 224) (D)
(See under LATS 224 for full desciption.) HIDALGO
REL 225 Religions of North America (Same as American Studies 225) (Not offered 2011-2012)
Scholars have written much about the history of religion in North America, but the effort has been fraught with many oversights. Recent scholarship has begun
to take account of the fact that most religions in North America either did not emerge from European sources, or have existed long before the arrival of Euro-
peans. Indeed, many religions have grown out of the American soil during the past several centuries-what some would call the product of religious "cross-fertil-
ization," and what others would deem as religious and cultural thievery, i.e. colonialism. This course follows a modified historical trajectory, one that strives to
allow the voices of forgotten "others" to speak, bringing questions of colonialism, identity, and the importance of religious community to the forefront.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will consist of several short response papers, thoughtful interaction, a midterm, and a 10-page final paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 15). Open to all.
SHUCK
REL 226(F) New Religions in North America (Same as American Studies 226)
This course explores contemporary North America religions from a historical, sociological, and philosophical perspective. We will examine the historical and
contemporary experiences of America's ever-expanding religious diversity, prominently featuring the voices of those traditionally excluded from older, Protes-
tant-informed accounts of American religion. The focus of the course will be the exploration of the ever-expanding variety of new religions in North America,
challenging students to engage the numerous cultural, philosophical, and methodological issues involved with the study of marginal religions. New religions
often highlight cultural anxieties, e.g. loss of identity in contemporary secular societies, responses to new technologies, changing gender roles, globalization, etc.
The study of new religions becomes, then, a closer, reflexive examination of contemporary American culture and its underlying tensions. For example, the
Ralian Movement claims to have cloned the first human. Wicca, on the other hand, offers critiques of environmental depredation and traditional gender roles. In
sum, we will explore the historical roots of the current boom in new religions, detail contemporary issues, and outline the possible forms new and emerging
religions may assume in the coming years. This course will also have a website dedicated to the exploration of new religions, providing links to interesting sites,
basic resources, and student essays/projects.
Format: lecture/discussion. Students will be evaluated on the basis of their writing and presentation projects, three 5- to 7-page essays, along with their thoughtful
discussion of the key issues raised in the course.
Open to all classes without prerequisite. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 15).
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF SHUCK
REL 227(S) Utopias and Americas (Same as American Studies 227, Environmental Studies 227 and Latina/o Studies 227)
Where does the term "new world" come from? What do we mean by "utopia," "utopian," and "utopianism?" What relationships exist between the people who
imagine utopias and the lands they inhabit? How do the dynamics of utopia and utopianism impact different peoples as they have created, participated in, been
excluded from, and lived under the governments and cultures of the Western hemisphere and the United States of America in particular? This course considers the
relationship between the utopian imaginations and the imaginations of the lands and peoples in the Western hemisphere. We will spend some time studying
utopian theory, ancient proto-utopias, and utopias in Latin America, though our main focus will be particular examples of utopianism in the U.S.A. While the
U.S.A. is the main focus of the class, students are encouraged to pursue and bring to class utopian perspectives from other parts of the Americas. Students are also
strongly encouraged to take questions from class and engage utopian images not listed on this syllabus but pertinent to our classroom learning.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on class participation, short weekly writing assignments, a 5-page midterm paper, and a 10- to 15-page final research
paper examining an American utopia.
No prerequisites. Enrollment: 19 (expected: 12).
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR HIDALGO
REL 228T North American Apocalyptic Thought (Same as American Studies 228T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Apocalyptic thought pervades much of contemporary American culture, whether among Protestant evangelicals, new religions, novelists and filmmakers, or
even scientists and environmentalists who warn of ecological catastrophe and the deadly consequences of nuclear proliferation. This course will introduce,
using historical, sociological, and philosophical accounts, how North Americans have thought about and continue to think about questions of the End, both in a
cultural and in a personal sense.
Format: tutorial. Evaluation will be based upon written work, critiques, and thoughtful participation. Requirements: each student will write and present orally,
five 1,000-word essays every other week on the readings for the week and a final 2,000- to 2,500-word essay. Students not presenting will be expected to
critique their colleague's work.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10).
SHUCK
257
THE ISLAMIC TRADITION
REL 230 Reading Reading: An Introduction to the Qur'an and Islam (Same as Comparative Literature 260) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
One of the two most consequential texts in human history, the Qur'an is more conscious of itself as text and the work of interpretation that is part of the life of a
text. Because it is God's most important sign (and also because it is relatively short) millions have memorized it and the art of Qur'anic recitation is one of the
supreme Islamic performing arts. Nevertheless it is primarily as a text that the Qur'an exists in itself and in the minds of Muslims. The text of the Qur'an will
thus be the focus of this course, reading it extensively, intensively and repeatedly throughout the semester. We will attend to the structure and variety of styles
and topics in the text and to the Qur'an's understanding of itself in relation to other forms of literary expression. We will place the form and content in the
context of seventh century c.e. Arab society and attend to the life of the Prophet (PBUH) that provides one crucial framework to the text. Through the lens of
tafsir, Qur'anic commentary, we will also use the text to give an initial survey of some of the main theological, philosophical, mystical and legal developments
in the Islamic tradition. Finally we will explore some of the aspects of the place of the text in the life of Muslims, including the development of calligraphy and
recitation.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: three essays (6-8 pages) based on class materials (at least one will have a revision process). Students able to read the
Arabic text may substitute work in a collateral reading group of the Qur'an in Arabic for one of the essays.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 10). Open to all.
DARROW
REL 231(S) The Origins of Islam: God, Empire and Apocalypse (Same as Arabic 231 and History 209)
The rise of Islam in the seventh-century C.E. is usually seen, by both Muslim and non-Muslim historians, as a total break with the past. This course will challenge
that assumption by placing the rise of Islam in the context of the history of late antiquity (c. 300-700 C.E.). The first half of the course will examine the impact of
Judeo-Christian monotheism in the ancient world, the rise of confessional empires, articulation of new ideas about holiness and its relation to sexuality and the
transformations undergone by Judaism, Christianity, Zoroastrianism and Manichaeism. We shall examine the conversation of these traditions with classical pa-
ganism and philosophy, the internal struggle within traditions to define rules of interpretation, the impact of ascetic, iconoclastic and apocalyptic ideas and, finally,
polemics among the traditions. Special attention will be given to borderlands (Armenia, Syria, and Arabia), where the problems of regionalism and religious
diversity were prominent. We will then examine the career of Muhammad (PBUH) in the context of Arabia, the spread of the Islamic empire into Christian and
Iranian worlds, the impact of apocalyptic expectations, the fixation of religious decision-making within the tradition and the question of conversion and religious
diversity within the commonwealth of Islam. The course will end with the flourishing of the Abbasid empire in the ninth century. This course will make use of the
Antioch 2000 exhibit at the Worcester Art Museum.
Requirements: one 5-page paper, self-scheduled final, and a final research project. Each class will use a case study approach focusing on one textual, artistic, or
architectural artifact.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 20). Open to all.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF DARROW
REL 233 Islamic Mysticism: The Sufis (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Studying Sufism, the mystical tradition of Islam, is an excellent introduction to the Muslim world. The Sufis represent a delightful and many-faceted spiritual
tradition that both enriches and criticizes orthodox Islam. This course will explore the origins of Sufism in the ascetic and revolutionary piety of the early Islamic
community; the systematization of the Sufi path to God; Sufi themes in art and poetry; the development of the Sufi orders and techniques of ecstasy, both at high
and popular levels. We will read in the classics of Sufi poetry and thought, including Rumi, Attar, Suhrawardi, and Ghazali; we will also explore the Sufi
theosophy of Ibn Arabi. We will conclude with an examination of contemporary Sufi life in Pakistan, Egypt and Turkey.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: four 5- to 7-page papers based on the readings and revised in editing workshops.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19).
DARROW
REL 234(F) Shi'ism Ascendant? (Same as Arabic 234)
This course will be a survey of Islamic history from the Shi'ite perspective or better perspectives. The purpose is to provide a survey of issues in Islamic social and
intellectual history from the Shi'ite margin. On that margin, Shi'ism has always been an alliance of the dispossessed and the intellectuals (assuming the latter are
not among the former) and functioned in Islam to provide a vocabulary of revolution, a highly developed philosophy of religion, and a pietistic fervor in contrast
to which Sunnism emerged. One consequence, intended or not, of recent U.S. actions in the Middle East has been to inflame the Sunni/Shi'ite conflicts and raise
fears of Shi'ite ascendancy. But sectarian conflict is, in fact, the exception rather than the rule in Islamic history because Sunnis and Shi'a have in most places been
separated or lived relatively peacefully together where they intermixed. This is the fourth time in Islamic history when the specter of an ascendant Shi'ism has
occupied the Muslim community. This course will compare the three earlier putative episodes of Shi'ite ascendancy in the eighth (in Iraq), tenth (in Egypt) and
sixteenth centuries C.E. (in Iran) and set these in conversation with contemporary developments. We will focus on the role of early Shi'ism as the vocabulary of an
alternative vision of the legitimacy of the Islamic state, the ideas of the imamate and martyrdom, the emergence of Isma'ili and Twelver versions of Shi'ism, the
conversion of Safavid Iran to Shi'ism, ecumencial efforts in the mid twentieth century, the Iranian revolution of 1979 and after.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation based upon class participation and two short (4-6 page) essays and a final research paper (12-15 pages).
No prerequisites, open to all classes. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 15).
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR DARROW
REL 235 Muhammad and the Rise of Islam (Arabic 206 and History 206) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under HIST 206 for full description.) BERNHARDSSON
REL 236 The Greater Game? Central Asia and its Neighbors Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow (Same as Asian Studies 236 and History 216)
(Not offered 2011-2012)
The collapse of the Soviet Union, the recognition of untapped mineral wealth, and Islamic resurgence have all led to an increased focus on Central Asia and its
neighbors, Russia, China, the Middle East. This course will be an introduction to the Caucasus, the Central Asian Republics, Xinjiang and Mongolia and the
interests of their neighbors, including now the United States in those areas. This will be a lecture course that will introduce the salient themes and issues that are
necessary for understanding these areas. The course will inevitably be deeply comparative focusing on themes of "the clash of civilizations," the construction of
national identities, notions of ethnicity and the treatment of ethnic minorities, resurgent religious movements, and the relation of state and civil society. This
course will also function as an introduction to doing social scientific research on these areas and special attention will be devoted to the preparation of a research
paper.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: weekly responses, three short essays (4-6 pages), and one research paper (12-15 pages).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 15). Preference given to first-year students and sophomores.
DARROW
REL 238 Gender Remade: Muslim Women and Narratives of Subjection (Same as Anthropology 257 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality
Studies 257) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under ANTH 257 for full description.) LOAN
REL 239(F) The Modern Middle East (Same as History 207 and Jewish Studies 217) (D)
(See under HIST 207 for full description.) BERNHARDSSON
THE SOUTH-ASIAN TRADITIONS
REL 242 Buddhism: Concepts and Practices (Not offered 2011-2012)
This introductory course examines Buddhism from a double perspective. On the one hand, it studies the tradition descriptively, examining some of its religious,
philosophical, historical and sociological aspects. On the other hand, this course also seeks to bring out the personal relevance of Buddhist ideas, ensuring that
they are not just considered as objects but also as partners in an ongoing conversation. We start by examining the Theravada tradition of South and South-East
Asia through which we seek to understand some of the basic Buddhist ideas such as no-self, suffering and its origin, and the possibilities for freedom. We then
move to the Indian and Tibetan Mahayana traditions, which are characterized by an increase in the importance of compassion on the basis of the bodhisattva
ideal. In dealing with Buddhism in Tibet, we focus more particularly on the tantric aspects of its tradition. Throughout the course, we are careful to consider
Buddhism not just as a set of thought provoking ideas that can be studied in abstraction from their implementation, but as being based on socially inscribed
practices. We examine a broad range of practices, ranging from so-called popular rituals to the practices of virtuosi. In particular, we examine meditation in the
258
Theravada and Tibetan Tantric traditions. In this way, we gain a realistic appreciation of the nature, role and difficulties of such a practice, and dispel some of its
misunderstandings.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: full attendance and participation and two 4-to 6-page essays.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 30).
DREYFUS
REL 244(F) Mind and Persons in Indian Thought (Same as Asian Studies 244)
In this course, we follow the conversation among Indian philosophers concerning the self and the nature of consciousness. We start with some of the Hindu views
about the self and the mind and consider their ethical implications. We then consider a range of Buddhist critiques of these views, focusing more particularly on
the Madhyamaka philosophy, which radicalizes the critique of the self into a global anti-realist and skeptical stance. We also examine the Yogacara school, which
offers a process view of reality focusing on the analysis of experience. We conclude by considering some of the later Hindu holistic views of the self as responses
to the Buddhist critique. In this way we come to realize that far from being the irrational foil of "the West," Indian tradition is a rich resource for thinking through
some of the central ideas that have challenged philosophers in both traditions.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: full attendance and participation, three short essays (6 pp.).
Prerequisite: prior exposure to Buddhism or philosophy, or permission of the instructor. Enrollment: 18 (selection on the basis of relevant background) (expected:
18).
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M DREYFUS
REL 245(S) Tibetan Civilization (Same as Asian Studies 247) (D)
Often depicted as Shangrila, a mythical and ideal country, Tibet has had the dubious privilege of being a focus of Western fantasies. One cannot but wonder about
the motives and sources of this mythology. Although this course examines these representations, its main focus is an immersion in the cultural and historical
aspects of Tibetan civilization, which give students the tools with which to understand Tibetan culture from the inside. As such this course is part of the Exploring
Diversity Initiative. We first consider the early history of Tibet, the introduction of Buddhism, the relations between Buddhism and the indigenous religion, and
some of the stages in the development of Tibetan Buddhism. We also examine the historical developments that led to the development of the institutions (such as
the Dalai-Lama) unique to Tibet and some of the aspects of the culture that these institutions helped to create (such as gender roles, family structure and social
stratification). Finally, we consider the more recent tragic events and examine the profound transformations that they have brought. Throughout the course, we
consider the central role of the complex interaction between Buddhism and politics in Tibetan history, both in the pre-modern period and in more recent times,
when the Tibetan people have faced the challenge of how to use their institutions and culture to resist oppression. In this way, we get a footing in the Tibetan
world, and the indispensable assessment of Western representations of Tibet becomes not just an exercise in self-reflection but also a gate to a better understanding
of a remarkable but tragically threatened civilization. This course, which explores in depth the Tibetan cultural and the tragic cross-cultural misunderstanding that
threaten its integrity, is part of the Exploring Diversity Initiative.
Format lecture/discussion. Requirements: full attendance and participation, three 6-page essays.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 30).
Hour: 8:30-9:45 MWF DREYFUS
REL 246 India's Identities: Religion, Caste, and Gender (Same as Anthropology 246 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 246)
(Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
India is a nation based on difference whose multiple and fragmenting identities are often framed as unified oppositions: Hindu/Muslim, Rich/Poor, Secular/
Religious, Male/Female. This course will deconstruct the media's popular representations of these and other identities in order to complicate the notion of a
diverse Indian nation. It will highlight the range of identities and social practices among India's booming population that have produced critical axes of differ-
entiation such as gender, caste, ethnicity, and religious sect. It begins by considering how the colonial principle of "divide and rule" provides an object lesson in
the ways that difference can be used to sustain both social hierarchy and political rule. It describes how this logic of difference produced the tragedy of Partition
and its legacy for the operation of gender and religion on the subcontinent. We critically examine the class and religious divisions that led to the birth of three
nations--India, Pakistan, and subsequently Bangladesh--and the particular logic of communalism and religious violence in modern India. Throughout, the
course attends to the subjective experience of being Hindu, Muslim, or Sikh, untouchable or upper caste, as well as male or female as a way of understanding
the way that difference shapes individual agency and lives across India. It seeks to empathize or at least understand the perspective of both victims and perpetra-
tors of communal and gendered forms of violence in India today. This course fulfills the Exploring Diversity Initiative by theorizing the ways in which differ-
ence has been used to effect profound historical, social, and individual changes in the Indian subcontinent.
Format: seminar. Requirements: participation in bi-weekly class blog, class discussion, oral presentation, final paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20.) Preference given to seniors, as well as majors in Religion, Anthropology, and Women's, Gender and
Sexuality Studies.
GUTSCHOW
REL 248(F) Body Politics, Gender and Religion in South Asia (Same as Anthropology 248, Asian Studies 248 and Women's, Gender and
Sexuality Studies 249) (D)
This course examines the relationship between body, gender, and religion or community in South Asia, using three countries--India, Sri Lanka, and Bangla-
desh--and three major religions--Hinduism, Buddhism, and Islam--as its focus. It begins by unpacking the critical theories in which the human body serves as
map for society and vice versa. It then examines the South Asian discourses linking body with nation, population, or purity. It explores a South Asian sociology of
the body that occasions solidarity as well as social suffering and structural violence. Along the way, it looks at a diverse set of practices that count or control bodies
to produce social cohesion including yoga, sex selection, family planning, monasticism, and fundamentalism. The body emerges as a lens through which to view
the production of a politics of identity as much as fragmentation or social hierarchy.
Format: seminar. Requirements: writing on class blog, final paper, participation in class discussion and presentations.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 25). Preference given to majors in Religion, Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies, Asian Studies and An-
thropology.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR GUTSCHOW
REL 249 Spiritual Crossroads: Religious Life in Southeast Asia (Same as Anthropology 233 and Asian Studies 233) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(D)
(See under ANTH 233 for full description.) JUST
EAST ASIAN TRADITIONS
REL 250(S) Scholars, Saints and Immortals: The Religious Life in East Asia (Same as Asian Studies 250) (D)
In East Asian cultures, as in the United States, popular conceptions of morality typically take their shape, not from explicit rules, but from moral paragons--styl-
ized figures that are said to embody a distinctive cluster of virtues. For example, American Christians invoke not only Jesus, but also a pantheon of "secular
saints" as diverse as Martin Luther King Jr. and General Patton, George Washington and Cesar Chavez. This course will explore the cultural functions of moral
paragons and philosophies of virtue in East Asia by introducing students to examples from Chinese and Japanese history, ranging from Confucian articulations of
the ideal scholar-bureaucrat to Buddhist conceptions of the Bodhisattva to Taoist immortals. It will also address the history of ethical thought in East Asia, focus-
ing particular attention on conceptions of "Virtue Ethics." This approach has come to be seen by some contemporary analytic philosophers as a way out of the
impasse produced by ethical relativism and the loss of theological rationales for moral action. Readings will include Euro-American philosophers such as
Nietzsche and MacIntyre as well as primary texts in translation by Chuang-tzu, Confucius, Shantideva and others. This course fulfills the Exploring Diversity
Initiative by providing students with tools for cross-cultural analysis of ethics and moral paragons, as part of how societies manage difference and articulate
hierarchies of privilege and power.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: active participation, short writing assignments, midterm, and a take-home final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 20). Preference given to Religious Studies and Asian Studies majors.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MW JOSEPHSON
REL 251 Zen Buddhism: History and Historiography (Not offered 2011-2012)
Because mystifying references to Zen are strewn throughout American popular culture-from episodes of the Simpsons to names of perfumes and snack foods-
most Americans have an image of Zen Buddhism that is disconnected from anything actually practiced in East Asia. This course offers a corrective to this
image by familiarizing students with both the history of Zen and the historiographical roots of these popular perceptions. This course will examine the origins of
Zen (Ch'an) in China, trace its transmission to Japan, and cover its development in both cultural contexts. It will conclude with an examination of Zen's unique
259
role in American popular culture. The course will enrich the conventional image of Zen by addressing its involvement with power and governance, gods and
demons, mummies and sacred sites, sex and violence, nationalism and scholarship. Texts will include selections from primary works in translation (The Plat-
form Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch, The Gateless Barrier, The Lancet of Seated Meditation) as well as selections from secondary literature including Suzuki,Zen
and Japanese Culture, Victoria, Zen at War, and Faure, The Rhetoric of Immediacy.
Format: lecture/discussion. Assignments will include participation in class discussion, short response papers (2-3 pages), a mid term exam, and a take-home
final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 30). Preference given to Religion and Asian Studies majors.
JOSEPHSON
REL 252(S) The Path to Enlightenment: Zen and Zen Art In China and Japan (Same as ArtH 376 and Asian Studies 376) (W)
(See under ARTH 376 for full description.) JANG
REL 255 Buddhism in Society (Same as Asian Studies 255) (Not offered 2011-2012)
Rather than focus on abstract and disembodied ideas, this course examines Buddhism as lived by actual people in particular social contexts. After an initial
introductory section on the main ideas and practices of the tradition, we examine the roles that Buddhism has played in the traditional societies of Sri Lanka and
Thailand where it is often connected with magical and shamanistic practices. We also consider the complex relation that Buddhism has entertained with the
political realm, focusing more particularly on the place of statecraft in the Buddhist ethical universe. We then move to consider the transformations that Bud-
dhism undergoes in contemporary Thai and Sri Lankan societies, examining the changing role of monks and laity, the resurgence of the nun order as well as the
rise of Buddhist social activism. Throughout the course we track key issues and themes in the development and transformation of Buddhism over time-from the
ancient to the modern world- and in relation to its changing social contexts. We conclude by examining some of the transformations of Buddhism in the West.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: Full attendance and active participation; three 6 page papers.
No prerequisites. Enrollment: 30 (expected: 25).
DREYFUS
REL 256 Engendering Buddhism: How Women and Men Shape and Are Shaped by Buddhism (Same as Anthropology 256, Asian
Studies 256 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 256) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
This course looks at how gender has shaped Buddhism as well as how Buddhism has shaped gender. Most generally, it considers the myriad ways that Buddhist
soteriology and practice produce the very gender differences they purport to overcome. How have the Buddha and his far-flung disciples institutionalized
gender differences in spite of their putative goal of transcending duality? We examine the varying experiences of women and men in Buddhist societies and
literatures as a lens by which to analyze the pervasive operation of social and gender hierarchies. Last but not least, we discuss how well feminist and American
revisions of Buddhism have transformed gender and other forms of difference. Our analysis revolves around several interdependent themes. (1) How do female
and male bodies become the subject of a specific set of Buddhist gazes? What does Buddhist discourse say about the possibility of gaining enlightenment in the
female body? (2) How do gender divisions reflect deeper social divisions such as class and race in Buddhist discourse? (3) How have feminist deconstructions
of Buddhism transformed gender and social hierarchies in the contemporary world? This course fulfills the Exploring Diversity Initiative by seeking to theorize
the ways that Buddhism has produced and reinscribed gender differences and social hierarchies.
Format: seminar. Requirements: two midterm papers, weekly Blackboard participation, final research papers, and class participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). Preference given to Religion majors, Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies concentrators, and seniors.
GUTSCHOW
REL 257 Gods and Demons in East Asian Religion (Not offered 2011-2012)
Scholars usually distinguish between three different religious traditions in East Asia: Buddhism, Confucianism, and Daoism (with Shinto standing in for Dao-
ism in the Japanese case). Yet, this tradition-based approach ignores the rich landscape of East Asian religion, which encompasses another world of gods and
demons only loosely connected with established institutions. Even today, at popular sites all over China, Taiwan, Japan and Korea, people offer incense to a
heterogeneous collection of supernatural entities-sometimes called gods, goddesses, demons, immortals, ancestors or even buddhas. The "same" entity can be
simultaneously a beneficent god to one group and a malevolent demon to another. Rather than being static, this rich tapestry is constantly in evolution, elevating
historical heroes (or philosophers) to godhood, while other once popular deities are demoted and dismissed as monsters. This course will address this stratum of
"popular" religion in East Asia. Focusing on contemporary scholarship on China and Japan, we will take a multi-disciplinary approach to this material to
provide a very different picture of East Asian religion as a lived tradition.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active participation, class presentations, one 15-page research paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to Religion and Asian Studies majors.
JOSEPHSON
REL 259 Japanese Religions and the State (Same as History 214) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
For most of Japanese history religion and government have been closely intertwined. This course will examine the parallel evolution of political structures and
religious institutions in Japan, beginning with the articulation of the mythological narrative of divine sovereignty in the Kojiki (712) and ending with the separa-
tion of Shinto from the state after World War Two. It will situate concepts such as law, punishment, emperor and nation within the context of wider politico-
religious discourse. We will address issues of religion and violence, nationalism and utopian imagery, and will raise larger questions about the relationship
between human religiosity and power.
Texts to be considered will include selections from law codes and primary works in translation (the Kojiki, The Constitution of Prince Shotoku, The Tale of the
Heike, The Propagation of Zen for the Protection of the State, and The Constitution of the Empire of Japan) as well as secondary works (Botsman, Punishment
and Power in the Making of Modern Japan, Hardacre, Shinto and the State, Victoria, Zen at War).
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: active participation, three short writing assignments of 3-5 pages, one 15-page research paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to Religion, Political Science and Asian Studies majors.
JOSEPHSON
TRADITIONS OF AFRICA AND THE AFRICAN DIASPORA (See also courses listed REL 311-315)
REL 261 Rastafari: Dread, Politics, Agency (Same as Africana Studies 302 and Political Science 234) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under AFR 302 for full description.) ROBERTS
REL 262(F) Music in African Religious Experience (Same as Africana Studies 121 and Music 129) (D)
(See under MUS 129 for full description.) OKIGBO
REL 265(S) Sacred Cinema: Black Religion and the Movies (Same as Africana Studies 316)
(See under AFR 316 for full description.) R. MANIGAULT-BRYANT
COMPARATIVE INQUIRY
REL 270T(F) Father Abraham: The First Patriarch (Same as Jewish Studies 270) (W)
The figure of Abraham in the Hebrew scriptures is interesting for at least two reasons: he comes first and seems more universal rather than particular. He first
received the covenant and the promise of the land of Israel, but before the full revelation of the Torah to Moses. He fathers both the Jewish people and the Arabs
and the significance of that wider identity was later captured both by Christianity in the work of Paul and in the Qur'an where Muhammad identified with Abra-
ham as the prototypical and non-sectarian monotheist prophet. This course will trace the figure of Abraham by a close and multidisciplinary reading of the Jewish,
Pagan, Christian and Muslim sources on Abraham. Our task is not to decide on the historicity of Abraham, but rather to explore the history of the figure and his
continuing relevance for today in understanding Jewish/Christian/Muslim conflict and cooperation. We will begin with an intensive reading of the Genesis mate-
rial on Abraham (12-25), where the issues of idolatry and monotheism, the covenant and circumcision, relations of the patriarch to his women and sons, and
primal model of faith all are articulated. We will then turn to later Jewish developments in the figure of Abraham in midrash and apocalypse. We will then explore
the view of Abraham in the classical world, the uses made of Abraham by Christianity as it broke from an emerging Rabbinic Judaism and the development of
Abraham's specific connection with the view of the afterlife. We will then treat the figure of Abraham in the Qur'an and later Islamic traditions. We will conclude
with an examination of the cult surrounding Abraham in the city of Hebron, a currently contested site on the West Bank where we will consider the current
religious practice regarding Abraham by both Jews and Muslims. The purpose of this tutorial is to read closely a variety of primary religious texts and to explore
the variety of tools available for the reading of those texts.
260
Format: tutorial. Requirements: each student in the tutorial will write and present orally five 5- to 7-page essays every other week on the readings for the week and
a final 7- to 10-page essay. Students not presenting an essay will be responsible for offering an oral critique of the work of their colleague. Evaluation will be based
on written work and critiques.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Open to all.
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. DARROW
REL 271 Religion and the Modern Literary Imagination (Same as Comparative Literature 271 and English 271) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(W)
In this course we will examine themes of religious life such as ritual, sin, redemption, evil, magic, heresy, prophecy, faith and devotion as they appear as sources
of conflict and reflection in novels, poems and short stories from the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Our task will be to consider first, how literary form can
be used as a tool to conceptualize religious experience, but second the ways in which literature, in its expressions of wonder and despair, converges or conflicts
with the aims of worship and religious performance, producing either modern sacrament or idol. Of the novels, stories and poems that we will read, some will
arise directly out of the Christian, Jewish and Islamic traditions, while others will have more explicitly tangential, or even heretical relations with these tradi-
tions. We will consider a range of novelists from Dostoevsky to Cynthia Ozick and Orhan Pamuk and a range of poets from Gerard Manley Hopkins to Wallace
Stevens and Paul Celan. Assignments will be both critical and creative. You will be asked to think like a writer and a critic and thus to try your hand at writing a
sestina as well as a personal essay.
Format: seminar. Assignments will include bi-weekly response papers of 1-2 pages, a short essay of 5-7 pages and a final writing assignment of 8-10 pages.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to first-year students and Religion majors.
HAMMERSCHLAG
REL 273(S) Charisma and Celebrity (Same as Anthropology 222) (W)
(See under SOC 320 for full description.) VALIANI
REL 274(F) Ritual, Power and Transgression (Same as Anthropology 299) (W)
(See under ANTH 299 for full description.) D. EDWARDS
CONTEMPORARY CRITICAL INQUIRY
REL 282T Immortality and the Soul in Ancient and Medieval Thought (Same as Philosophy 220T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under PHIL 220 for full description.) MCPARTLAND
REL 283(F) Religion and Capitalism (Same as Political Science 140) (W)
(See under PSCI 140 for full description.) PAUL
REL 284(F) What's At Work? (W)
Curse for sin, opposite of fun, or curiously peripheral, as in the now conventional career advice, "Do what you love and the money will follow," work has
generally gotten short shrift, at least by the male authors with soft hands one usually reads in college. This course will examine shifting attitudes and approaches to
human labor in the history of western thought. We will begin with a multifaceted consideration of why we work and the ways in which approaches to human labor
intertwined with reflections on human inequality, especially slavery and its justification, and the identification between poverty and the resistance to hard work.
With the abolition of slavery and consequent arrival of modernity, two trends are strikingly added to the traditional discourses on work: the workplace as the
public site for the achievement of justice, e.g., a living wage, workplace safety and equality of opportunity; and the articulation of individual identity and worth in
the context of work, e.g., notions of profession, career and status.
The legacy of both those trends is still very much with us, but the twentieth century dislodged the focus on humans as laborers in favor of a view of them as
consumers. That is in part a consequence of the continuing shift from a production to a service economy, but also is intimately connected with the fortunately
incomplete licensing of desire and leisure that are becoming the hallmark of both our current consumer economy and workplace. These competing issues leave us
with the central split in American society between the slightly larger portion of Americans who say they 'get a sense of identity from their jobs' and the remaining
significant minority who describe their jobs as 'just what they do for a living.' This course will explore some of the reasons for this fundamental cleavage. In
addition to readings in the classics of Western thought including the Bible, Hesiod, Plato, Aristotle, St. Augustine, Hobbes, Rousseau, Adam Smith, Kant, Hegel,
Marx, Nietzsche, Freud and Weber, we shall explore contemporary portrayals of work and workplaces in literature and film and conclude with contemporary
authors including Svendsen, Muirhead, Florida, Gini, Lindsay, Sennett.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: 4 essays (4-6 pages) in different genres: philosophical, ethnographic, ethical case study, personal reflection.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 15).
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF DARROW
REL 285T (formerly 305) Haunted: Ghosts in the Study of Religion (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
Haunting offers a powerful way to speak about forces that affect us profoundly while remaining invisible or elusive. "What is it that holds sway over us like an
unconditional prescription? The distance between us and that which commands our moves-or their opposite, our immobility-approaches us: it is a distance that
closes in on you at times, it announces a proximity closer than any intimacy or familiarity you have ever known" (Avital Ronell, Dictations: On Haunted
Writing [1986] xvi-xvii). The figure of the ghost has been developed by those seeking to grapple with the ongoing effects of modern slavery, colonialism,
state-sponsored terrorism, the holocaust, and personal trauma and loss. Building upon the insights about memory, history, and identity that haunting has been
used to address, this course will challenge you to explore the study of religion by way of its "seething absences." We shall ask how the study of religion has
endeavored to address loss, trauma, and its persistent effects, what "holds sway" over various approaches to the study of religion, as well as how "religion"
constitutes its own ghostly presence, haunting other domains.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: meeting in pairs, each student will either write and present a paper or respond to their partner's paper. Each student will write
and present two 1-page papers, five 5-page papers, and five oral critiques (based on written notes) of their partner's paper. Students will revise two papers.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to Religion majors.
BUELL
REL 286 (formerly 308) Shopping: Desire, Compulsion and Consumption (Not offered 2011-2012)
If the workplace was the essential site of modernity, then the shopping mall is the quintessential site of postmodernity; the place where consumption trumps
production and, it has been argued, our only remaining public space. This course will focus on the experience of shopping, focusing on three themes. First we
will explore the manufacturing of desire on which consumption must depend. We will critique the tired critiques of advertising and explore in more depth the
neurotic and erotic dimensions of the creation of desire for objects. We will then turn to some comparative and historical analysis contrasting the experience of
shopping in traditional bazaars and contemporary malls, as well as exploring the history of consumerism from the eighteenth century through the current
phenomena of globalization. Finally, we will explore the place of shopping in our collective imaginations, attending especially to the relation between the
gendering of the shopping experience and expressions of contempt and outrage toward consumerism, with a special focus on the discourse on Christmas in
American society.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: three essays (4-6 pages) and one ethnographic account (4-6 pages).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 40 (expected: 20). Open to all.
DARROW
REL 287 The Dynamics of Globalization: Society, Religion and the Environment (Same as Environmental Studies 287) (Not offered
2011-2012) (D)
This course offers a theoretical reflection on the social, cultural and environmental dynamics of globalization and their consequences for the nature and place of
religion. Rather than argue for or against globalization, we examine the nature of this new configuration and its relation to (post)modernity, asking questions
such as: What are the cultural and social dynamics of globalization? What are the effects on the nature of the state and the political practices that take place in the
global world? What are its environmental consequences? We then shift to examining the role of culture in general and religion in particular, arguing that its
renewed relevance is a function of the socio-cultural transformations that globalization brings about, particularly the loss of community and the atomization of
individuals in an ever more inter-connected world. In this way, we come to understand some of the dominant features of the global age, the role of cultural
differences and the growing concern for questions of meaning and personal identity. We conclude by examining some of the perspectives created by the new
religious expressions that attempt to respond to this situation, from personal spiritual quests as manifested in interest in Buddhism, ecology or mountain climb-
261
ing, to various forms of fundamentalism, such as Evangelicalism, the fastest growing religious movement in the Americas, and the most radical forms of
Islamicism. Reading list: Harvey, The Condition of Postmodernity; Castells, The Rise of the Network Society; Bauman, Globalization; Kivisto, Multicultural-
ism in a Global Society; Casanova, Public Religions in the Modern World; Ortner. Life and Death on Mt. Everest. Matthews, Global Culture/ Individual
Identity. Shuck, Mark of the Beast. Roy, Globalized Islam.
Requirements: a class presentation and a research paper (15 pages).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 22 (expected: 22). Preference given to Religion majors and Environmental Studies concentrators.
DREYFUS
REL 288(S) The Embodied Mind: A Cross-Cultural Exploration (Same as Philosophy 288)
This course examines some of the central questions raised by the study of the consciousness: the place of intentionality, the role of emotions, the relation with the
body, the nature of subjectivity, the scope of reflexivity, the nature of perceptual presence, etc. In confronting these difficult questions, we do not proceed purely
theoretically but consider the contributions of various observation-based traditions, from Buddhist psychology and meditative practices to phenomenology to
neurosciences. We begin by examining some of the central concepts of Buddhist psychology, its treatment of the mind as a selfless stream of consciousness, its
examination of the variety of mental factors and its accounts of the relation between cognition and affects. We also introduce the practice of meditation as a way to
observe the mind and raise questions concerning the place of its study in the mind-sciences. We pursue this reflection by examining the views of James, Husserl,
Sartre and Merleau-Ponty, particularly as they concern the methods for the study of the mind and the relation between consciousness, reflexivity and the body. In
this way, we develop a rich array of analytical tools and observational practices to further our understanding of the mind. But we also question the value of these
tools based on first person approaches by relating them to the third person studies of the mind. In this way, we come to appreciate the importance of considering
the biology on which mental processes are based and the light that this approach throws on the nature of consciousness. We conclude by considering the relation
between first and third person studies of the mind, focusing on the concept of the embodied mind as a fruitful bridge between these different traditions.
Format: seminar. Requirements: regular practice of meditation, a class presentation, a short essay (6p) and a long final research paper (15 p.).
Prerequisites: some background in either psychology, cognitive sciences, philosophy or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 18 (expected: 12). Selec-
tion on the basis of relevant background.
Hour: 7:00-9:40 p.m. M DREYFUS and CRUZ
REL 289T (formerly 309) Exile, Homecoming and the Promised Land (Same as Comparative Literature 309T and Jewish Studies 491T
(Not offered 2011-2012)(W) (D)
In terms of vocabulary and metaphor, the Jewish experience of exile pervades modern, western discourse on the experience of being alienated, severed, and
separated from one's national and natural homeland. Thus in this course we will take the Jewish experience of exile (galut) as our point of departure for a
broader discussion of these themes as they relate to other diasporic communities. As a consequence of increased mobility, political instabilities, economic
insecurity and the proliferation of means of communication, the state of Diaspora increasingly characterizes populations across the globe, from Africa, Asia,
South America, and Europe. While we will not focus specifically on these communities, one of our tasks will be to discover how the Jewish experience shapes
the discourse on exile and Diaspora that pervades modern discussions of displacement and emigration. We must further consider what is at stake politically and
philosophically in privileging the Jewish experience, especially given the post-1948 community of Palestinian refugees. To illuminate this discussion we will
draw on the literature of the Jewish tradition from the Hebrew Bible and rabbis to Twentieth Century accounts and reflections of Franz Kafka, Walter Benjamin
and Emmanuel Levinas, as well as materials that reflect the voices of other refugee communities. We will then move to examine the relationship of the notion of
the homeland to that of the promised land. We will consider the ambivalence in the nineteenth and twentieth century concerning discourse of blood and soil, and
the consequent possibility that exile and rootlessness could signal positively.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: meeting in pairs, each student will either write and present a paper or respond to their partner's paper. Each student will write
and present a 5-page paper on alternating weeks. On the weeks in which the student is not presenting, she will be expected to write a 1- to 2-page critique/re-
sponse to her classmate's paper. The final assignment will be an 8- to 10-page paper that expands on an issue or question raised in class.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to Religion majors. This course will also serve as the capstone course for senior Jewish
Studies Concentrators.
HAMMERSCHLAG
REL 290T Explorations of the Afterlife (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
From Heaven to Hell, Valhalla to Hades, the Fields of Aaru to the Land of Yellow Springs, all cultures have generated images of other worlds that lie beyond
death. By considering examples from a range of different cultures, this tutorial will guide students on an exploration of the topographies of these shadow-lands.
In an effort to map the continuities and discontinuities between these visions of the hereafter, we will consider them as reflections of existing social hierarchies,
examining their underlying assumptions about punishment and redemption, family, and ethics. Along the way, we will discuss culturally specific notions of
death and mourning, attitudes towards the bodies of the dead, and controversies about the nature of the soul. Texts will include selections from primary works in
translation, such as Virgil's Aeneid, Dante's Inferno, and The Tibetan Book of the Dead, as well as selections from secondary literature, including Teiser's The
Scripture on the Ten Kings, Gauchet's The Disenchantment of the World, and Bremmer's The Rise and Fall of the Afterlife.
Format: tutorial.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to Religious Studies and Asian Studies majors.
JOSEPHSON
REL 296(F) The History of the Holocaust (Same as History 338 and Jewish Studies 338)
(See under HIST 338 for full description.) GARBARINI
BODY OF THEORY (300-310)
REL 300(S) Dialectics and the Archaeology of Knowledge
How might one perform a philosophical study of history? How do ideas (including philosophical, artistic and religious movements) advance over time? What
makes something "thinkable" in one era, but inconceivable in another? What contemporary intellectual foundations rest on false universals?
This course will address these questions and provide students with methods for exploring the historical dimension of religion. It will focus on two approaches to
the philosophy of history inspired by Kant. One school (Hegel, Marx) has focused on tracing dialectical formations as the background against which all history
unfolds. Another school (Foucault, Agamben) performs "philosophical archeology," which Foucault described as "the history of that which renders necessary a
certain form of thought."
This course will introduce students to these intertwined bodies of theory, which promise to do nothing less than expose bare the very foundations of knowledge
and transform the study of history from the stringing together of events into a philosophical enterprise. Thinkers to be considered may include: Kant, Hegel, Marx,
Engels, Nietzsche, Foucault, Agamben, and Jameson.
Format: seminar. Requirements: regular participation and attendance, short writing assignments, class presentations, 10- to 15-page final paper.
Prerequisites: ?. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15). Preference given to Religion, Philosophy and Comparative Literature majors.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W JOSEPHSON
REL 301 Word Virus: Cultural Theory after the Linguistic Turn (Same as Comparative Literature 301) (Not offered 2011-2012)
"My general theory since 1971 has been that the Word is literallya virus, and that it has not been recognized as such because it has a achieved a state of relatively
stable symbiosis with its human host." (William S. Burroughs 1986, 47). Parallel movements in continental European and Anglo-American philosophy
(known popularly as "the linguistic turn") led to an interdisciplinary emphasis on the way in which language constitutes reality. Language could no longer be
thought of as simply a mechanism for the transmission of "facts." Increasingly, theorists recognized that differences in language created incommensurable
worlds of meaning; that specialized forms of linguistic discourse are both determined by and constitutive of their putative objects. Accordingly, linguistic
phenomena have taken center stage not only in philosophy, but also in the study of culture and society. The influx of these new theories of language has also
dramatically reshaped the discipline of religious studies. By examining the linguistic turn and its implications for the study of cultural phenomena, this course
will introduce advanced students to some of the most important theoretical approaches to come out of this movement. Authors whose work will be considered
include: Ludwig Wittgenstein, Ferdinand de Saussure, Benjamin Whorf, George Lakoff, Claude Lvi-Strauss, Jacques Derrida, Roland Barthes, Paul Ricoeur,
Mikhail Bakhtin, Luce Irigaray, Richard Dawkins, and Dan Sperber.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active participation, class presentations, short writing assignments, and a take-home final exam.
Prerequisites: Religion 101 or Comparative Literature 117 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15). Preference given to Religion and
Comparative Literature majors.
JOSEPHSON
262
REL 302T Philosophy of Religion (Same as Philosophy 281) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under PHIL 281 for full description.) BARRY
REL 303 (formerly 280) The Turn to Religion in Post-Modern Thought (Same as Jewish Studies 280 and Philosophy 282) (Not offered
2011-2012) (W)
As thinkers of the 20th century came to question the Enlightenment ideal of human self-sovereignty, both for its intellectual and political consequences, many
turned back to religious imagery and concepts in pursuit of alternate modes of conceptualizing the human being. This course will examine some such endeavors
in the fields of philosophy, psychoanalysis and literature. While none of the texts we examine will be explicitly theological, all will, in some form or another,
make use of theological notions such as revelation, redemption, or sacrifice. In examining these texts we will be asking some fundamental questions: What
meaning do religious concepts have when emptied of dogmatic content? How effective are these concepts when employed in the service of cultural critique?
How might such efforts reflect back on the theorizing and practice of religions in contemporary society? We will, furthermore, analyze the very category of the
post-modern by considering its relationship to the Enlightenment, debating whether this relationship is one of continuity, rupture or both, and dissecting the
critique that post-modern philosophy's concern for religion is a sign of its nostalgic or reactionary nature. Readings will include Immanuel Kant's Religion
within the Limits of Reason alone, Friedrich Nietzsche's Twilight of the Idols, Jacques Lacan's Feminine Sexuality, as well as essays by Luce Irigaray, Georges
Bataille, Emmanuel Levinas, Jean-Franois Lyotard and Jacques Derrida.
Format: discussion. Requirements will include regular participation and four writing assignments: three shorter papers of 3-5 pages on a question assigned by
the instructor and a longer essay of 12-15 pages on an approved topic of the student's choice.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference given to Religion and Philosophy majors and Jewish Studies concentrators.
HAMMERSCHLAG
REL 304 From Hermeneutics to Post-coloniality and Beyond (Same as Comparative Literature 344 and English 386) (Not offered
2011-2012) (D)
This course explores and critiques some of the resources offered by "Theory" for making sense of our contemporary situation, focusing on the nature of inter-
pretation and its role in the construction of the self in a global world. We start with Gadamer's hermeneutics, which offers a classical formulation of the philoso-
phy of liberal arts education, stressing the importance of questioning one's prejudices. Although this approach offers important resources for understanding
ourselves in a world of cultural differences, it also has limitations, which we explore through the works of Derrida, Foucault and Said. In this way, we question
some of the notions central to understanding ourselves such as identity and difference, suggesting some of the difficulties in the ever more important yet prob-
lematic project of knowing oneself. We also suggest that representation is not innocent but always implicated in the world of power and its complexities,
particularly within the colonial and postcolonial contexts explored by Said. We conclude with a critique of the constructivist paradigm central to this course
done from the point of view of cognitive sciences and suggest that the future of "Theory" may well be in a dialogue with the emerging mind sciences. This
course, which theorizes the possibilities of cross-cultural understanding, is part of the Exploring Diversity Initiative.
Reading list: H.G. Gadamer, Truth and Method. F. Saussure, Course in General Linguistics. J. Derrida, Of Grammatology. P. Rabinow, Foucault Reader. E.
Said, Orientalism. Agamben, Homo Sacer.
Format: seminar. Requirements: full attendance and participation, three essays (6 pages).
Prerequisite: some familiarity with philosophy and/or theory is recommended. Enrollment limit: 18 (expected: 18). Selection based on the basis of relevant
background.
DREYFUS
REL 305(S) (formerly 284) Foucault (W)
Michel Foucault was first and foremost a scholar of power. His ironic "genealogies" of how the Enlightenment promised freedom but instead delivered intricate
and perilous technologies of control have inspired philosophers, intellectual historians, and even novelists. Yet for all of this Foucault is often thought of as having
posited a helpless subject trapped in an inescapable web. Worse, scholars such as Rosie Braidotti have seen this subject as a uniquely masculine maneuver-ignor-
ing women's struggles. This course will consider Foucault and his own "mentors," Heidegger, Nietzsche, and Kant, among others, as well as exploring such
central questions as Foucault's views on gender and sexuality. We will also examine whether Foucault was able--as he intended--to move beyond "resistance"
in his later writings and help post-Enlightenment individuals engender a more empowered sense of subjectivity.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based upon: active classroom engagement (students are expected to take a major role in class discussions as this is a seminar
course), two response papers of 1500 words, a takehome midterm exam, and a final, 15page (~3,750 word) paper.
No prerequisites, although some work in Continental Philosophy will be helpful. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 10). Preference given to Religion majors.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF SHUCK
REL 306 Feminist Approaches to Religion (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 307) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
What does feminist theory have to offer the study of religion? How have participants in various religious traditions helped to produce and enact feminisms?
Feminisms and religion(s) have a long though often troubled history of interconnection. In this course, we shall explore a range of feminist and queer theoretical
analyses that have either emerged out of particular religious contexts or have been applied to the study of religious traditions and practices. We shall consider
how conflicts within feminism--especially those pertaining to issues of sexuality, gender, race, class, nationality, ethnicity, and religious affiliation--make a
difference for the ways that religion is interpreted and practiced.
Format: seminar. Requirements: evaluation based on attendance, active participation in class, 3-page "position" paper for seminar discussion; 5-7 page analyti-
cal essay; peer-review of analytical essay draft; presentation of final paper-in-progress; 15 page final research paper or equivalent project.
Prerequisites:either WGST 101 or REL 101, or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 10). Preference given to majors and prospective
majors in Religion and/or Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies.
BUELL
REL 307 Thinking Gods: Cognitive Theories of Religion (Not offered 2011-2012)
Although it is still in its infancy, the so-called "cognitive turn" has already become one of the most exciting contemporary developments in the study of religion.
During the past twenty years, scholars influenced by cognitive science have begun to formulate new models and challenge old assumptions about human
religiosity and its relationship to the mind. In so doing, they have articulated theories about the evolutionary origins of religious concepts, reassessed the role of
memory and of counterintuitive explanations in the perpetuation of religious ideas, and developed new concepts such as "theological incorrectness" and "sys-
tematic anthropomorphism." By examining the cutting-edge work produced by members of this movement on both sides of the Atlantic, this seminar for
advanced students will trace the historical roots of the cognitive turn and introduce some of its most important recent products. Authors to be considered include
Sigmund Freud, Ludwig Feuerbach, Jean-Pierre Dupuy, D. Jason Slone, Pascal Boyer, Veikko Anttonen, Scott Atran, Richard Dawkins, Dan Sperber, and
Ilkka Pyysiinen.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active participation, class presentations, short writing assignments, and a take-home final exam.
Prerequisites: Religion 101 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit 19 (expected: 15). Preference given to Religion majors and Cognitive Science concen-
trators.
JOSEPHSON
REL 308 Nietzsche and Religion (Not offered 2011-2012)
Few thinkers have been as controversial or as outspoken about religion as the nineteenth century German theorist/philologist Friedrich Nietzsche. His work was
not understood during his lifetime, or so he thought, and there are definitely controversies surrounding the way the writings of Nietzsche ought to be applied in
the early twenty-first century. We will see Nietzsche as a lonely curmudgeon who hated his rigid, Lutheran upbringing, as well as his sister, Elisabeth Frster-
Nietzsche. But we will also see the many fruitful dialogues created by his fractured personality and vitriolic books which, perhaps despite his intentions, speak
to religion in both a destructive and constructive way, as well as to later thinkers.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will consist of two 5- to 6-page response papers, a midterm exam, and a 10- to 15-page final paper, and thoughtful participation.
No prerequisites; open to all. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 15). Preference given to Religion majors.
SHUCK
REL 309 (formerly 273) Scriptures and Race (Same as Africana Studies 309 and Latina/o Studies 309) (Not offered 2011-2012)
What are "scriptures" and what is "race"? What do we presume when we use the word "scriptures"? What do we now mean and what has often been meant by
the term "race"? How and why did these two terms come to have any relationship to each other? Why, in the violent encounters of peoples, did these categories
come to implicate each other? How and why do peoples engage "scriptures"? In what ways have "scriptures" informed how peoples imagine themselves and
others? How did "scriptures" and race" inform each other in modern colonialisms and imperialisms? In this course, we will examine the ways that "scriptures"
263
have been employed in order to understand and develop notions of "race," and we will examine how ideas about "race" have informed the concept of "scrip-
tures" as well as practices of scriptural interpretation. While this course will focus on the relationships between constructions of "race" in the post-1492 Ameri-
can world and "Christian scriptures," we will also consider other historical moments and places where "race" is engaged, as well as other texts and practices
identified with "scriptures." We will be especially attentive to dynamics of power, especially in the contexts of modern colonialism and imperialism.
This course will be mostly discussion-based, with grading based upon participation, short writing exercises, a 5-8 page take-home midterm essay, and a 10-15
page final review essay.
No prerequisites.
HIDALGO
REL 310(F) Womanist/Black Feminist Thought (Same as Africana Studies 310 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 310) (D)
(See under AFR 310 for full description.) R. MANIGAULT-BRYANT
This course will fulfill the body of theory seminar requirement for Religion majors.
REL 311 Black Ministerial Imaginations: Griots, Athletes, and Maestros (Same as Africana Studies 311) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under AFR 311 for full description.) J. MANIGAULT-BRYANT
This course DOES NOT fulfill the body of theory seminar requirement for Religion majors; this course will count as an elective towards the major in Religion.
REL 315(S) The Sociology of Black Religious Experience (Same as Africana Studies 305 and Sociology 305)
(See under AFR 305 for full description.) J. MANIGAULT-BRYANT
This course DOES NOT fulfill the body of theory seminar requirement for Religion majors; this course will count as an elective towards the major in Religion.
REL 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
REL 401(F) Issues in the Study of Religion
To be conducted as a working seminar or colloquium. Major issues in the study of religious thought and behavior will be taken up in a cross-cultural context
enabling the student to consolidate and expand perspectives gained in the course of the major sequence. Topics will vary from year to year. In keeping with the
seminar framework, opportunity will be afforded the student to pursue independent reading and research.
Requirements: class reports, papers, and substantial research projects. Topic for 2011-12 to be determined.
Prerequisites: senior Religion major status or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15).
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W HIDALGO
REL 405(F) Kings, Heroes, Gods, and Monsters: Historical Texts and Modern Identities in the Middle East (Same as Arabic 410, History 410
and Jewish Studies 410) (D) (W)
(See under HIST 410 for full description.) BERNHARDSSON
This course will fulfill an elective towards the major in Religion.
REL 493(F)-W31; W31-494(S) Senior Thesis
REL 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
See French, Italian, Spanish for searchable course listings!
ROMANCE LANGUAGES (Div. I)
Chair, Associate Professor SOLEDAD FOX
Professors: BELL-VILLADA, NORTON*, ROUHI. Associate Professors: S. FOX, FRENCH**, MARTIN, PIEPRZAK. Visiting Professor: NI-
CASTRO. Visiting Associate Professor: PITCHER. Visiting Assistant Professors: BROSSILLON, GOODBODY. Lecturers: DESROSIERS.
Teaching Associates: BOIVAN, CAD, RENEDO, THIBAULT.
FRENCH
MAJOR--French Language and Literature
The French major seeks to provide training in literary and cultural analysis and linguistic expression through the study of selected texts from the French-speak-
ing world. Emphasis is placed on the changes in form and subject matter from the early modern period to the contemporary era.
The major consists of nine courses above the 102 level. One of these courses must be the 400-level senior seminar during the student's final year at the College.
Students entering the major program at the 200-level may, with the permission of the Department, choose as part of their major program, one course in Art
History, History, Philosophy, Comparative Literature or other subjects that relate to and broaden their study of French. Students entering the major program at a
very advanced level may, in some cases and with the permission of the Department, include two such courses in their major program.
Working with the major advisor, the student will formulate a curricular plan that will ensure balance and coherence in courses taken. Such balance and coher-
ence will be based on the above areas of literary and cultural investigation. Prospective majors should discuss their program with the major advisor by the end of
their sophomore year. This is especially imperative for students who are planning to spend a part or all of their junior year in France.
Inasmuch as all courses in French assume the active participation of each student in discussions conducted in the foreign language, regular attendance at class
meetings is expected.
MAJOR--French Studies
The major in French Studies is an interdisciplinary program that provides students with the opportunity to acquire skills and knowledge embracing the cultural,
historical, social, and political heritage of France and the Francophone world. The program allows for an individualized course of study involving work in several
departments and the opportunity to study abroad.
Students electing the French Studies major should register with the French Studies faculty advisor during their sophomore year. At that time they should
submit a feasibility plan that articulates their projected program.
The French Studies major consists of ten courses satisfying the following requirements:
1) at least three courses in French language and/or literature above the French 102 level;
2) the senior seminar during the student's final year at the College;
3) Electives: The remaining courses needed to complete the major must be drawn from at least three different departments and relate primarily to an aspect of
the culture, history, society, and politics of France and the Francophone world. These courses will be selected in consultation with members of the Department of
Romance Languages. Appropriate electives might include:
History 331 The French and Haitian Revolutions
Religion 301 Psychology of Religion
All courses in French literature and language above the 103 level.
4) at least two literature courses that are taught in French.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN FRENCH
Honors candidates are required to have maintained a GPA of 3.5 in the major to qualify for submitting a thesis proposal.
By May 15th of their junior year, candidates will have found a thesis advisor, and given the Department a three- to five-page proposal and a preliminary
bibliography. (In some cases, and upon consultation with the Department, candidates will have the option to choose a second reader in addition to their primary
advisor; for example, when the thesis is interdisciplinary enough in nature that it requires the expertise of an additional reader).
This proposal will be discussed by the Department; by June 1st, the candidate will be informed whether he/she can proceed with the thesis, and if so, what
changes need to be made to the focus and scope of the project. The summer before the senior year will be spent compiling a more detailed bibliography and
reading.
Upon their return to Williams, candidates will devote to their theses two semesters of independent study (beyond the nine courses required for the major) and
the winter study period of their senior year (493-W31-494). The thesis will be written in French and will usually not be shorter than fifty pages. By the end of the
Fall semester, students will normally have a clear outline of the project, have done substantial research, and produced the draft of at least the first half of the
264
project. During January this draft will be suitably rewritten and edited with a view to a final version, while the candidates will also begin work on remaining
chapters.
Candidates will submit what they have written to the department on the last day of Winter Study.
On the Tuesday of the first week of the spring semester candidates will make a presentation of the project at a departmental colloquium in French. The thesis
will be promptly discussed and evaluated to determine whether or not the student should continue in the honors program. The second semester of independent
thesis work will be spent writing more chapters, as well as revising, rewriting, and polishing the project where necessary. The completed thesis in its final form
will be due on April 25th. At the end of the Spring term, the student will present and defend the final project before members of the Department and others by
invitation. The grade will be awarded once members of the Department have consulted after the defense.
THE CERTIFICATE IN FRENCH
The Certificate in French Language and Cultures consists of a sequence of seven courses for which the student must earn a cumulative grade average of B or
higher. In addition, the student must take a proficiency test and achieve a score of "Advanced." The test will be administered by the department once a year during
the month of April to all students desirous of obtaining the Certificate. Those interested should express their intent to the chair of the department by March 1 or
earlier.
For students with no prior study of French, the course sequence will consist of RLFR 101-102, RLFR 103, RLFR 104, and three additional courses, with at
least one of these at the 200-level or higher taken at Williams. For students starting the sequence at RLFR 103, five additional courses must be taken, including at
least three French courses at the 200-level or higher. For all students starting at the French 103 level or higher, two electives may be taken in other departments:
one elective should be in French or Francophone culture (art, literature, theatre, music) and the other in French or Francophone civilization (history, political
science).
See French Studies Major description above for list of possible electives in other departments.
PLACEMENT
A placement test in French is administered at Williams at the opening of the fall semester. Incoming first-year students who register for any French course
above the 101-102 level must take this test, regardless of their previous preparation.
STUDY ABROAD
French majors are strongly advised to complete part of the requirements for the major by studying abroad either during the academic year or the summer. Most
American study-in-France programs require applicants to have completed a fifth-semester, college-level French course (French 105, for example) before they go
abroad. A special affiliation with the Hamilton Junior Year in France program enables Williams students (who have completed 105) to participate in a compre-
hensive academic and cultural experience in a French-speaking environment. Credit for up to four courses towards the major can be granted at the discretion of
the Department: normally 2 major credit for one semester and up to 4 major credits for a full year or two semesters. The final assignment of credit will be
authorized in consultation with the student's major advisor once the student has returned to Williams. Such credits can only be determined by review of course
format, course materials, and evidence of satisfactory academic performance. Students interested in studying abroad need to consult with faculty members in
French by the second semester of their first year. Early planning is essential. Because the academic quality of certain programs of study in France may well be
beneath the pedagogical standards normally associated with a Williams education, students will receive major credit for only those programs recommended by
the Department. Please consult a faculty member to find out which programs are acceptable. Normally, the Department does not administer proficiency exams
(for study abroad) to any student who has not completed a French course at Williams.
LANGUAGE AND CIVILIZATION COURSES
RLFR 101(F)-W088-102(S) Introduction to French Language and Francophone Cultures
This year-long course offers a complete introduction to the French language and is designed to help you become fully conversant in French by focusing on four
fundamental language skills: listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Through daily practice, class activities, interactive discussion, listening exercises, written
work, reading assignments, video-observations, and film-viewing, you will quickly gain confidence and increasing facility with your abilities to speak and under-
stand both spoken and written French. In addition, our study of grammar, vocabulary, and communication skills will be organized around an engaging and dy-
namic introduction to a variety of French-speaking cultures around the world, from France and Belgium, to Qubec and Martinique, to Sngal and Morocco.
Format: the class meets five hours a week. Evaluation in both semester-long courses will be based on active class participation, workbook exercises and composi-
tions, chapter tests, midterms, and final exams. Students registered for 101-102 are required to attend and pass the sustaining program during the winter study
period. Credit granted only if both semesters are taken. For students who have taken less than two years of high school French. Conducted in French.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). If overenrolled, preference will be given to first- and second-year students and those with compelling
justification for admission.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MTWRF First Semester: MARTIN
9:00-9:50 MTWRF Second Semester: BROSSILLON
RLFR 103(F) Intermediate Studies in French Language and Francophone Cultures
As a continuation of French 101-102, this first-semester intermediate course is designed to help you improve your French, while at the same time learning more
about French and Francophone cultures, politics, literature, and film. Through the active study and daily practice of listening, speaking, reading, and writing in
French, you will: continue developing communication skills necessary to function in daily life; learn to express your opinions and ideas; improve your command
of spoken and written French through a revision of important grammatical structures; strengthen your reading and writing skills in order to prepare you for further
study of literary texts; and develop an increased vocabulary and cultural appreciation of French-speaking cultures around the world.
Format: class meets five hours a week. Conducted in French. Requirements: active class participation, workbook exercises and compositions, short papers,
chapter tests, midterm, and final exam.
Prerequisites: French 101-102 or examination placement. NOTE: Students should seriously consider taking French 103 AND 105 if they intend to enroll in more
advanced French literature courses at the 200-leve and above, or if they anticipate studying in France or a Francophone country during their junior year. Enroll-
ment limit: 20 (expected: 20). If overenrolled, preference will be given to first- and second-year students and those with compelling justification for admission.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MTWRF BROSSILLON
RLFR 104(S) Intermediate French II: Studies in French Language and Francophone Culture
As a continuation of French 103, this course explores the diverse cultural and political identities in the Francophone world through short literary texts and films
from France, Africa, the Caribbean and the Middle East while building on linguistic skills in French. The course will provide an in-depth advanced review of
grammar structures, but will emphasize the application of those structures in activities of composition, reading, oral presentation and discussion. After successful-
ly completing French 104, students may register for French 201. Conducted in French.
Format: class meets three hours a week plus a fourth conference hour with French teaching associates. Requirements: class participation, short papers, oral class
presentations, quizzes and exams.
Prerequisites: French 103. This course is primarily for continuing French 103 students. Students who have placed at the advanced intermediate level on the
placement exam should register for French 105. Enrollment Limit: 20 (expected: 20). If overenrolled, preference will be given to continuing 103 students and
potential French majors.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 TWRF BROSSILLON
RLFR 105(F) Advanced French: Advanced Studies in French Language and Francophone Culture
In this course, we will concentrate on expanding your vocabulary and polishing your written and oral skills while focusing on the analysis and discussion of
French and Francophone cultures and the concepts that define them. We will explore key myths and practices linked to national identity in France and seek to
understand the history of contemporary national identity debates. Topics of discussion will include: What is a nation? What is the Republic? How do wine, bread
and caf culture represent what it means to be French? How is French empire remembered and forgotten? What is French about cinema? We will use a grammar
book as a reference guide to clarify and introduce certain advanced structures, but we will not be working through it chapter by chapter. Conducted in French.
Format: seminar. Requirements: class participation, short papers, presentations, quizzes and final exam.
Prerequisites: RLFR 103, or examination placement. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). Preference given to students continuing their French studies at Williams
and first and second year students.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR Conference: 1:10-2 W PIEPRZAK
RLFR 106 Advanced French: Linguistic, Cultural and Literary Explorations in the Francophone World (II) (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course is designed as a continuation of RLFR 105 for students wishing to develop their ability to converse and write in idiomatic French with ease and
fluency. Students will review linguistic structures in depth as well as expand their range of vocabulary, since special attention will be given to writing and
speaking. At the same time, students will exercise their analytical and critical thinking on the works of a variety of Francophone writers such as Philippe
Delerm, Amlie Nothomb, Marguerite Duras, Gabrielle Roy, Guy de Maupassant, Albert Camus, Mariama B, Annie Ernaux and Nathalie Sarraute while
examining and exploring how relationships are done and undone, how passions such as jealousy, love, greed, hatred enter in a variety of characters and circum-
265
stances. Conducted in French.
Requirements : regular attendance ; active class participation ; quizzes, short papers and oral presentations ; a mid-term and a final test.
Prerequisites: French 103 (with instructor's permission) or 105 or examination placement. Enrollment limit : 20 (expected 20). Preference will be given to
students continuing RLFR 105 or those admitted by placement.
NOTE: See RLFR 105 for more information on the sequencing of French 105/106.
DESROSIERS
RLFR 112 Advanced Conversation in French: French and Francophone Cultures Through the Media (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course in Advanced Conversation in French is designed to develop students' skills in spoken French while learning about French and Francophone cul-
tures. Students will increase vocabulary and fluency through interactive discussions, and will improve their pronunciation and both oral and written comprehen-
sion through different media: the press, television, movies, plays, and songs. We will discuss questions of French and Francophone identities, the Second World
War, immigration, and current events. Conversation will improve students' ability to communicate effectively and to analyze culture through different media.
Class activities will include listening to recordings, reading newspapers, conversation, and debates. Films to include: "Le fabuleux destin d'Amlie Poulain,"
"Tanguy," "L'Auberge espagnole," "Paris je t'aime," "Le vieil homme et l'enfant," "Les Choristes,and "La Rue cases-ngres."
Evaluation based on class participation, quizzes, midterm, and a final oral presentation.
Prerequisites: RLFR 104 or RLFR 105 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20).
BROSSILLON
LITERATURE COURSES
RLFR 201 (formerly RLFR 109) Introduction to French Literature: Les Routes Jalonnes: Culture and Society in the French and
Francophone Literary Heritage (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course introduces students to the richly diverse literary landscape of metropolitan and non-metropolitan France as recorded in major works of prose,
poetry, and theater from the Middle Ages to the present. Particular attention will be given to the ways in which culture, society, and the individual's relationship
to them are mirrored and interpreted in various literary genres, contexts, and registers. Each work to be studied develops a unique language that serves not only
to interpret the culture from which it emerges, but to frame that culture within the larger issues of self and identity. Among the authors and works to be examined
are Chrtien de Troyes's Perceval (excerpts), La Chanson de la Rose (excerpts), selected sonnets by Ronsard, Molire's Le Misanthrope, Rousseau's Rveries
d'un promeneur solitaire (excerpts), France's national anthem La Marseillaise (Rouget de Lisle), Flaubert's Madame Bovary, poems of Hugo and Baudelaire,
short stories of Gustave Flaubert and Albert Camus, Mariama B'sUne si longue lettre, Linda L'sLettres mortes(selections), Honor Beaugrand'sLa Chasse-
galerie, and, last but not least, the comic pachyderm, Babar. Conducted in French.
Format: seminar. Requirements: class participation, three short papers, an oral presentation and a final examination.
Prerequisites: RLFR 105 or 106, or by French placement examination, or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 22 (expected 17). Preference will be given
to French majors and those with compelling justification for admission.
NORTON
RLFR 202(F) (formerly 110) War and Resistance: Two Centuries of War Literature in France, 1804-2004 (Same as Women's, Gender and
Sexuality Studies 201)
In 1883, Maupassant called on his fellow war veterans and writers to join him in speaking out against warfare and violence, crying "Let us dishonor war!" From
the Gallic Wars against Caesar (during the first century BC) to France's controversial role in the "War on Terror" (at the opening of the twenty-first century), the
French literary tradition is rich in texts that bear witness to war and speak out against its monstrous inhumanity. While war literature in France can be traced back
to ancient and medieval texts on Vercingtorix, Charlemagne, William the Conqueror, and Joan of Arc, this course will focus specifically on literary representa-
tions of war during the nineteenth- and twentieth-centuries, from the Napoleonic Wars, to the First and Second World Wars, to the Algerian and Cold Wars, and
the "War on Terror." Discussions will examine the impact of war on soldiers and civilians, patriotism and pacifism, history and memory; the implications of war
as invasion and conquest, occupation and resistance, victory and defeat; the relationship of war to gender, sexuality, and ethnicity; and the role of war in colonial-
ism and genocide. Readings to include novels, short stories, and poems by Balzac, Stendhal, Hugo, Rimbaud, Daudet, Maupassant, Zola, Cocteau, Wiesel, Duras,
Camus, and Fanon. Films to include works by Resnais, Renoir, Carion, Jeunet, Malle, Angelo, Pontecorvo, and Duras. Conducted in French.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active class participation, two short papers, an oral presentation, and a final paper.
Prerequisites: French 105 or 106; 201 or 203; or by placement test, or by permission of instructor.
Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). If overenrolled, preference will be given to French majors and certificate students; Comparative Literature majors; Women's,
Gender and Sexuality Studies majors; and those with compelling justification for admission.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR MARTIN
RLFR 203(S) Introduction to Francophone Studies (Same as Africana Studies 204) (D)
The Francophone world, stretching across Europe, Africa, the Middle East, Asia, the Caribbean and the Americas, has often been described as a family joined by
a shared language and condition born of colonial history. Through fiction and film, this course will examine what it means to be Francophone, and how writers
and filmmakers from the Francophone world have approached the idea of family both literally and metaphorically in order to explore questions of identity,
origins, colonialism, resistance, nationhood and interconnectedness in a global community. This course invites students to enter into critical engagement with
cultural constructions of difference, colonial and post-colonial constructions of subjectivity, culturally contested imaginations and treatment of gender and race,
and the very idea of the Francophone itself. Authors we will read include: Driss Chraibi (Morocco), Dany Laferrire (Haiti), Maryse Cond (Guadeloupe), Aim
Csaire (Martinique), Linda L (Vietnam) and Fatou Diome (Senegal). Films studied include Moolaad (Ousmane Sembne), La vie sur terre (Abderrahman
Sissoko) and Abouna (Mahamet-Saleh Haroun). Conducted in French.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active class participation, informal response papers, two short papers, and final paper.
Prerequisites: RLFR 105 or above, or results of College Placement Examination, or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). Preference
given to French majors or certificate candidates, and Africana Studies concentrators.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR PIEPRZAK
RLFR 208(F) Love and Death in Seventeenth, Eighteenth, and Nineteenth-Century France
Reflecting on loneliness and a life without anyone to love and be loved by, Maupassant declared in 1884: "It is better to love, but terrible." This introductory
course in French literature will focus on this "terrible" aspect of love. The themes of instincts and passions, desires and fears, death and sexuality, death and love
have been exploited in art - literature, painting, music - for centuries. Why do so many authors create an erotic bond between love and death? In this course, we
will examine how passion sometimes leaves no other alternative but the death of its "slaves," how some characters find sexual gratification in killing the objects of
their love, or eroticize and resurrect the dead in a fascinating, macabre, erotic encounter. Suicide, murder, and necrophilia will be studied in their close relationship
with sexuality and love. Readings to include novels, short stories, and poems by Corneille, Racine, Rousseau, Sade, Musset, Hugo, Zola, Baudelaire, and Mau-
passant, as well as paintings and films representing seventeenth, eighteenth, and nineteenth-century France. Conducted in French.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active class participation, two short papers, an oral presentation, and a final paper.
Prerequisites: French 105 or 106; 201, 202, or 203; or by placement test; or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). If overenrolled, prefer-
ence given to French majors and certificate students, and those with compelling justification for admission.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR BROSSILLON
RLFR 210 Fantastic Spaces and Imaginary Places: Literary Text and Image in Late Medieval and Early Modern France (Not offered
2011-2012)
When Aristotle speaks of Homer's powers of language, he describes the Poet's skill as a dimension of energy and eye, the capacity to "represent everything as
moving and living" and thus to be "graphic", to make the audience actually see things through words. Medieval and Renaissance French writers based their
literary projects on these ancient theories of visualization and presentation. The result was a period of intense literary creativity that encompasses a kaleidoscope
of issues converging both on poetics and painting as well as on concepts of architectural and landscape design. This capacity to imagine is at the heart of writing
about travel, exploration, discovery, spatial and natural description, phantasmagoric quests, poetic "madness", and the contemplation of mind. The primary
vehicle through which we will examine these issues is the literary text and its supporting manuscript illuminations and book illustrations: namely, selected texts
from Guillaume de Lorris' and Jean de Meung's Roman de la Rose and the allegory of love, Guillaume Du Bellay's Antiquits de Rome and Regrets, Franois
Rabelais's grotesque epic of Gargantua and Pantagruel, and Pierre de Ronsard's sonnet cycles on love and nature (Les Amours). We will examine how these
overarching literary issues intersect with parallel developments in the visual arts (Burgundy in the 15th century, the Myth of the Golden Age, The School of
Fontainebleau, Clouet), ecclesiastical and domestic architecture, including the development of the chteau, landscape and garden design and its allegorical
configurations. Conducted in French.
266
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: class participation, two 7-page papers, a midterm examination, and an oral presentation.
Prerequisites: French 201, 202, 203, or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected 10). If overenrolled, preference given to French and Compara-
tive Literature majors and those with compelling justification for admission.
NORTON
RLFR 224(S) (formerly 310) Sexuality and Seduction in Nineteenth and Twentieth-Century France (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality
Studies 224) (D)
In 1857, both Flaubert's Madame Bovary and Baudelaire's Les Fleurs du mal were put on trial for sexual indecency and "crimes against public morality." In 1868,
Le Figaro attacked Zola's novel Thrse Raquin as "putrid literature" for its depiction of adultery, murder, and scandalous sexuality in nineteenth-century Paris. A
century later, Gide, Colette, and Duras continued to shock French readers with their extraordinary novels on male and female homosexuality, inter-generational
lovers, and bi-racial relationships. In this course, we will examine a wide range of issues on eroticism and sexuality in nineteenth- and twentieth-century French
literature, including marriage and adultery, seduction and desire, love and betrayal, prostitution and fetishism, gay and lesbian identity, cross-dressing and gender
representation, exoticism and colonial (s)exploitation. Readings to include novels, shorts stories, and poems by Chateaubriand, Constant, Duras, Balzac, Flaubert,
Baudelaire, Zola, Maupassant, Barbey d'Aurevilly, Gide, Proust, Colette, Duras, and Guibert. Conducted in French.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active class participation, two short papers, an oral presentation, and a final paper.
Prerequisites: French 105 or 106; 201 or 203; or by placement test, or by permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). If overenrolled, preference
will be given to French majors and certificate students; Comparative Literature majors; Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies majors; and those with compel-
ling justification for admission.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR MARTIN
RLFR 308(S) The Libertine in Eighteenth and Nineteenth-Century French Novels
This seminar proposes to examine the bachelor in French literature, from the libertines of the eighteenth century to the romantic and naturalist heroes of the
nineteenth century. By studying their modus vivendi and modus operandi, we will try to trace the evolution of the figure of the "libertine" through novels and short
stories by Crbillon-fils, Duclos, Laclos, Sade, Stendhal, Flaubert, Zola, and Maupassant. Discussions will lead us to look for answers to the following questions:
what is the bachelor's approach to life, love, sex, and women? Is the bachelor always in control of his instincts and emotions? What perversions are associated
with the image of the libertine? Is there a link between libertinage and folly? Is there such a thing as a female libertine? In what way does she differ from her male
counterpart? How is the tension between love for oneself and love for the Other represented or reconciled? Conducted in French.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active class participation, two short papers, an oral presentation, and a final paper.
Prerequisites: open to students who have take a literature course in French at Williams, or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). If overen-
rolled, preference given to French majors and certificate students, and those with compelling justification for admission.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR BROSSILLON
RLFR 309 Contemporary Short Stories from North Africa: Fast Cars, Movies, Money, Love and War (Same as Africana Studies 307)
(Not offered 2011-2012)
Today the countries of North Africa are experiencing rapid social change. Rap music can be heard spilling out of windows while television sets broadcast a call
to prayer. In the market place, those selling their goods compete to be heard over the ringing of cell-phones. Old and new exist side by side, albeit sometimes
very uncomfortably. During the past decade, literature has emerged in both French and Arabic examining the effects of globalization: unequal modernization,
unemployment, cultural change and cultural resistance. In this course, we will read short stories that address these issues as well as analyze films, sociological
texts and Moroccan, Algerian and Tunisian newspapers on the web in order to explore contemporary transformations of life in North Africa. Readings by
Maissa Bey, Abdelfattah Kilito, Zeina Tabi, Mohamed Zafzaf, Ahmed Bouzfour, Soumaya Zahy and Abdelhak Serhane among others. Conducted in French.k
Requirements: active class participation, reading journal, two short papers, an oral presentation and a final paper.
Prerequisites: French 201, 202 or 203 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). Preference given to French majors and those with
compelling justification for admission.
PIEPRZAK
RLFR 312(F) Francographic Islands (Same as Africana Studies 312 and Comparative Literature 312) (D)
Utopia, paradise, shipwreck, abandonment, exile, death. Man's fascination and obsession with the island as a place of discovery, beauty and imprisonment
stretches across the centuries. In this class, we will read French literary and imagined islands alongside islands constructed by Francophone Caribbean, Indian
Ocean and non-Western writers in French. What does the island symbolize in individual, community, national, and imperial imaginations? And how does the
island become an agent in discussions of gender, race, modernity and history? Readings will include works by Paul Gauguin, Pierre Loti, Aim Csaire, Michel
Tournier, Ananda Devi, Maryse Cond, Patrick Chamoiseau and Edouard Glissant. Conducted in French.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active class participation, weekly response papers, midterm essay and final essay.
Prerequisites: open to students who have take a literature course in French at Williams, or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 15). Preference
given to French majors and certificate candidates, Comparative Literature majors, and Africana Studies concentrators.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR PIEPRZAK
RLFR 314 Between the Two World Wars (Not offered 2011-2012)
The period from 1913 to 1939 was an adventurous time for the French novel. In this course, we will study novels by Gide, Proust, Colette, Camus, Martin du
Gard, Mauriac, Malraux, and Sartre. Although there is great diversity among these authors, they were all reacting to the aftermath of the First World War and the
breakdown of traditional French culture. Through the popular character of the rebellious adolescent, they experimented with revolt against the stifling social
order of Church and family. The real challenge of the period, however, concerned not a break with the past or discoveries of new levels of consciousness and
freedom, but rather the mature acceptance of responsibility for the future and the articulation of fresh spiritual and political visions. Conducted in French.
Requirements: several short papers and oral class presentations.
Prerequisites: any French literature course or permission of the instructor.
DUNN
RLFR 316 (formerly 214) Paris on Fire: Incendiary Voices from the City of Light (1830-2005) (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality
Studies 315) (Not offered 2011-2012)
During the 1830s, Balzac described Paris as a "surprising assemblage of movements, machines, and ideas, a city of one hundred thousand novels, the head of
the world," but also characterized the French capital as a "land of contrasts," a "monstrous wonder," a "moral sewer." Similarly, writers from Hugo to Zola have
simultaneously celebrated Parisian elegance and condemned the appalling misery of Paris's urban poor. Since 1889, Paris has been fted as the "City of Light"
for its Enlightenment legacy, its Eiffel Tower modernity, and its luminous urban energy, captured in countless paintings, photographs, and film. However, Paris
is also the historical site of revolution, resistance, and riots. From revolutionary revolt (1830, 1848, 1871), to wartime resistance (1870, 1914-18, 1940-44), to
reformist and race riots (1968 and 2005), Paris has repetitively sparked with incendiary passion and political protest. As fires raged during the recent riots in
2005, many heard the echo of Hitler's ominous 1944 question, "Is Paris burning?" and asked: why was Paris burning again at the dawn of the twenty-first
century? To answer this question, we will examine the social, political, and literary landscape of Paris during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, from
urbanization and modernization, to occupation and liberation, to immigration and globalization. Readings to include poetry, short stories, and novels by Hugo,
Balzac, Baudelaire, Maupassant, Verne, Zola, Apollinaire, Colette, Duras, Perec, Rochefort, and Charef. Films to include works by Clair, Truffaut, Godard,
Minnelli, Clment, Lelouch, Luhrmann, Kassovitz, Besson, and Jeunet. Conducted in French.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active class participation, two short papers, an oral presentation, and a final paper.
Prerequisites: French 201, 202, 203 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). If overenrolled, preference will be given to French, Com-
parative Literature, and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies majors, and those with compelling justification for admission.
MARTIN
RLFR 318 Twentieth-Century Novel: From Adversity to Modernity (Same as Comparative Literature 318) (Not offered 2011-2012)
In his futurist novel Paris in the Twentieth Century (1863), Jules Verne envisions an era of technological superiority, complete with hydrogen cars and high-
speed trains, televisions and skyscrapers, computers and the internet. But in Verne's vision of modernity, technological sophistication gives way to intellectual
stagnation and social indifference, in a world where poetry and literature have been abandoned in favor bureaucratic efficiency, mechanized surveillance, and
the merciless pursuit of profit. To contest or confirm this dystopic vision, we will examine a broad range of twentieth-century novels and their focus on adversi-
ty, dignity, and modernity. In a century dominated by the devastation of two World Wars, the atrocities of colonial empire, and massive social and political
transformation, the novel both documented and interrogated France's engagement with race and ethnicity, gender and sexuality, colonialism and immigration.
267
Within this historical context, we will discuss the role of the novel in confronting war and disease, challenging poverty and greed, and exposing urban isolation
and cultural alienation in twentieth-century France. Readings to include novels by Colette, Genet, Camus, Duras, Ernaux, Guibert, and Begag. Lectures to
include discussions of Gide and Proust, Sartre and Beauvoir, Cixous and Foucault, Jelloun and Djbar. Films to include works by Fassbinder, Annaud, Lioret,
Ducastel, Martineau, Tchin, and Charef.
Format: seminar. Conducted in French. Requirements: active class participation, two short papers, an oral presentation, and a final paper.
Prerequisites: French 201, 202, or 203, or by placement test, or by permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). Preference given to French,
Comparative Literature, and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies majors, and those with compelling justification for admission.
MARTIN
RLFR 370(S) Displaying, Collecting and Preserving the Other: Museums and French Imperialism (Same as Africana Studies 370 and
Comparative Literature 370)
This course will explore relationships between culture and imperialism in France by exploring how the colonial "Other" has been conceived, displayed and
collected in French museums, world's fairs and galleries from the 19th century to the present. Through readings in museum history and theory, we will explore the
imperial histories of the Louvre and the Muse de l'Homme, the role of Parisian World's Fairs in ordering the colonial world, French colonial photography and
the creation a body of consumable subjects, and the discourse of collection and preservation in French colonial architecture. Drawing on museum theory, we will
also critically examine contemporary Parisian museums such as the Muse du Quai Branly, the Institut du Monde Arabe and the Cit nationale de l'histoire de
l'immigration. In addition to readings and discussion, the class will engage in a semester-long group project to design a new museum of French history and
identity. The group will present all aspects of their museum including location, design, exhibit concept, narrative, and more. This course will be conducted in
English. For students seeking RLFR credit, research will be conducted primarily in French.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active class participation, response papers, 2 short essays and a final group project.
Prerequisites: for students taking the course as RLFR: French 201 or above, or permission of instructor; for students taking the course as COMP or AFR: no
prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15). Preference given to French and Comparative Literature majors, and concentrators in Africana Studies.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W PIEPRZAK
RLFR 408 Senior Seminar: Mortal Combat and Wounded Hearts: Codes of Honor, Love, and Quest in Medieval and Early Modern
French Literature (Not offered 2011-2012)
French literature and literary language could be said to begin with the 11th-12th-century epic, La Chanson de Roland, a narrative of knightly audacity, betrayal,
and fraternal love centered on Charlemagne's campaign in Saracen Spain and the monumental defeat of his bravest knight, Roland, at Roncevaux. The Chan-
son de Roland inaugurates an exciting and uplifting literary cycle that is both an artistic and a cultural window on the Middle Ages and its narrative traditions.
This cycle encompasses such works as Chrtien de Troyes's narrative romances Yvain ou le Chevalier au Lion, Lancelot ou le Chevalier de la Charrette, and
the unfinished Perceval ou le Conte du Graal. During a period often associated with great spiritual and moral orthodoxy, authors are not reluctant to entwine
epic narrative with the issues of adultery, interracial love, and sexual emancipation as in Chrtien's Lancelot and in the 13th-century romance Aucassin et
Nicolette, a tale of adventure centered on a Christian knight in love with a Saracen slave girl. The motifs of heroism and love culminate later on in the encyclo-
pedic Roman de le Rose, a medieval theme park that embraces a vigorous and licentious summons to live for love and to abandon all restraint. The unabashed
sensual indulgence of this work will be studied in relation to the pro-feminist history of women in Christine de Pisan's Le Livre de la Cit des dames (1405).
This seminar will examine many of the key literary, linguistic, and artistic aspects of this literary heritage, including the concepts of allegory, symbolic expres-
sion, invention, imagination, the evolution of the French language, and the corrosive way in which later Renaissance authors such as Rabelais interrogate the
medieval tradition. All readings will be in modern French. Conducted in French
Format: seminar. Requirements: class participation, three 5-page papers, and an oral presentation.
Prerequisites: French 201 (formerly 109), or French 202 (formerly 110), or French 203 (formerly 111), or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 15 (ex-
pected 10). Preference given to French and Comparative Literature majors.
NORTON
RLFR 410 Senior Seminar: Landscapes of Movement and Migration in French (Not offered 2011-2012)
How do migration and movement construct and disrupt landscapes of identity--home, city and nation--in the French-speaking world? How do migration and
movement contribute to conditions of alienation, nostalgia and violence? This seminar explores such fundamental questions and asks us to think about how in
an increasingly mobile and de-territorialized world, place is imagined, experienced and remembered. Over the course of the semester, we will examine theoreti-
cal texts on memory, space, identity and movement, and analyze literary and film narratives of migration that focus on: the immigration experience in France,
the construction of an Atlantic identity between Africa, the Caribbean, Europe and the Americas, internal migration between the country and the city, clandes-
tine migration between Africa and Europe, population displacement due to war, and the possibility of creating portable places of memory. Works by Nora,
Benjamin, Deleuze, Barthes, Charef, Chamoiseau, Glissant, Diome, Cond, Mernissi, Poulain, Pineau, Sembene, and Binebine among others. Conducted in
French.
Format: seminar. Requirements: weekly 1-page response papers, short mid-term paper and a final research paper.
Prerequisites: any course in French above 203, or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 10). Preference given to seniors who are French
majors or completing the Certificate in French, but open to advanced students of French.
Qualified students in first, second, or third years of their career at Williams can enroll in the Senior Seminar with the permission of the instructor. However, this
will not replace the senior seminar requirement in the senior year of French majors.
PIEPRZAK
RLFR 412(S) Senior Seminar: Nineteenth-Century Novel: From Desperate Housewives to Extreme Makeovers (Same as Women's,
Gender and Sexuality Studies 408)
In 1834, Balzac wrote that "Paris is a veritable ocean. Sound it: you will never know its depth." The same can be said of the French nineteenth-century novel and
its boundless ability to echo the historical past and reverberate in the cultural present. Desperate housewives, sex in the city, queer eyes for straight guys, and
extreme makeovers fill the pages of the nineteenth-century novel. From the Romanticism of Stendhal and Hugo, and the Realism of Balzac and Flaubert, to the
Naturalism of Maupassant and Zola, the novel became an extraordinary forum for examining illicit sexuality, institutional misogyny, social injustice, criminal
passions, revolutionary struggles, and Parisian pleasures in nineteenth-century France. Characters such as the imprisoned housewife Emma Bovary, the reluctant
revolutionary Jean Valjean, the social-climbing lover Julien Sorel, the ambitious undergraduate Rastignac, the domestically-abused Gervaise, and the man-eating
courtesan Nana became synonymous with France's turbulent social and political landscape from the 1830s to the 1880s. And as recent film adaptations make
clear, these characters continue to haunt our twenty-first century present. Reinterpreted by such contemporary actors as Grard Depardieu, Isabelle Huppert, Uma
Thurman, Claire Danes, and Jennifer Aniston, the nineteenth-century novel continues to sound out the scandalous and sensational depths of our own century.
Readings to include novels by Balzac, Stendhal, Hugo, Flaubert, Maupassant, and Zola. Films to include adaptations by Clment, Berri, August, Arteta, Lelouch,
and Chabrol. Conducted in French.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active class participation, two short papers, an oral presentation, and a final paper.
Prerequisites: a 200-level or 300-level French literature course at Williams, or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 10). If overenrolled,
preference will be given to French majors and certificate students; Comparative Literature majors; Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies majors; and those
with compelling justification for admission.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR MARTIN
RLFR W30 Honors Essay
RLFR 493(F)-W31-494(S) Senior Thesis
RLFR 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
RLFR 511(F) Intensive French Grammar and Translation
This course is designed to offer students a thorough and systematic review of sentence structures and grammar. Through this intensive study, students will learn to
decipher the subtleties of the written language, and as they become more confident they will start translating a variety of short excerpts. Students are also expected
to learn and develop a wide lexical range centered on art history and criticism, but not limited to it.
Format: classes meet twice weekly and are conducted in English. Evaluation will be based on class participation, papers, a midterm, and a final examination.
Prerequisites: a strong interest and need to learn French.
Enrollment: although this course is to serve the needs of students enrolled in the Graduate Program in the History of Art, undergraduates may enroll by permission
of the instructor.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR DESROSIERS
268
RLFR 512(S) Readings in French Art History and Criticism
This course is designed to provide Graduate Program students and interested others with knowledge of French acquired through translation and interpretation.
The core of this course is based on the reading and translating of a variety of critical works covering different periods and genres in the field of art history. The
material read (excerpts from museum catalogues; the Gazette des Beaux-Arts and other publications; Salons by Diderot, Baudelaire, and Thor; artists on their
works; and critics such as Francastel, Ch. Sterling, M. Far, Valry, Focillon will be analyzed in form and content, translated or summarized, in order to develop
the skills and understand the techniques necessary for reading French acurately. Grammar will be reviewed in context.
Format: seminar. Evaluation is based on class participation, papers, a midterm, and a final examination.
Prerequisite: French 511 or permission of instructor.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR DESROSIERS
ITALIAN
RLIT 101(F)-W88-102(S) Elementary Italian
This is a year-long course which offers a thorough introduction to basic Italian language skills with primary emphasis on comprehension of the spoken language.
Students interact with taped materials and submit written compositions on a regular basis.
The class meets five hours a week with the instructor and is conducted entirely in Italian.
Evaluation will be based on chapter tests (50%), a final exam (20%), completion of workbook and lab manual exercises (20%), and classroom attendance/partici-
pation (10%).
Students registered for 101-102 are required to attend and pass the sustaining program during the winter study period. Credit granted only if both semesters are
taken.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 22. The course is not open to those who have had one year or more of high school Italian. Instructor will prioritize on the basis
of study abroad plans and year at Williams.
Hour: 9:00-9:50 MTWRF NICASTRO
RLIT 103(F) Intermediate Italian
This course reviews and builds on vocabulary and structures studied in first-year college-level Italian. As a means to this end, students will engage in text-based
grammar-review drills in meaningful context; and will read short stories, excerpts of a contemporary novel, and non-literary texts dealing with current issues in
Italian society.
The class meets three hours a week with the instructor. Evaluation will be based on classroom participation, completion of assigned exercises, and a combination
of chapter tests, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Italian 102 or equivalent. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15).
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF NICASTRO
SPANISH
The Spanish major consists of nine courses above the 103-104 level. These nine courses include 105, 106, any 200 level or above (excluding RLSP 205 and
RLSP 303), and 403. At least one 200-level course must be completed at Williams. In addition, one course must be focused primarily on literature of the period
prior to 1800 C.E. Other courses, taken at overseas programs, may be used to satisfy the requirements of the major, with approval of the department. The Spanish
faculty strongly suggests that students take 201 and 200 at some point in their studies, and especially recommends that they do so before rather than after studying
abroad.
The major seeks to provide training in literary analysis and linguistic expression, as well as an appreciation of Hispanic civilization, through the study of the
major writers of the Spanish-speaking world.
Students majoring in Spanish may replace one of their Spanish electives with a course in Comparative Literature, with one course in Latin-American Studies
that is 200-level or higher, or with a course in Linguistics or Latina/o Studies.
Inasmuch as all courses in Spanish assume the active participation of each student in discussions conducted in the foreign language, regular attendance at class
meetings is expected.
Courses numbered in the 100s are language courses, with 105 and 106 combining grammar and literature. RLSP 200 and RLSP 201 focus on civilization and
culture, while other 200-level classes serve as gateway courses for literary study, in ascending order of difficulty; they are thus suitable for first-years and sopho-
mores. Courses in the 300s require both serious grounding in the study of literature and an advanced command of the language. The 400-level course offered
annually is the senior seminar, serving as "capstone course" to the Spanish major.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN SPANISH
Candidates for a senior thesis must have maintained a 3.5 GPA in the major by the time of proposal submission. Two alternative routes are available to those
who wish to apply for the degree with honors.
The first of these involves the writing of a senior thesis. Honors candidates are required to have maintained a GPA of 3.5 in the major to qualify for submitting a
thesis proposal.
By May 15th of their junior year, candidates will have found a thesis advisor, and given the Department a three- to five-page proposal and a preliminary
bibliography. (In some cases, and upon consultation with the Department, candidates will have the option to choose a second reader in addition to their primary
advisor; for example, when the thesis is interdisciplinary enough in nature that it requires the expertise of an additional reader).
This proposal will be discussed by the Department; by June 1st, the candidate will be informed whether he/she can proceed with the thesis, and if so, what
changes need to be made to the focus and scope of the project. The summer before the senior year will be spent compiling a more detailed bibliography and
reading.
Upon their return to Williams, candidates will devote to their theses two semesters of independent study (beyond the nine courses required for the major) and
the winter study period of their senior year (493-W31-494). The thesis will be written in Spanish and will usually not be shorter than fifty pages. By the end of the
Fall semester, students will normally have a clear outline of the project, have done substantial research, and produced the draft of at least the first half of the
project. During January this draft will be suitably rewritten and edited with a view to a final version, while the candidates will also begin work on remaining
chapters.
Candidates will submit what they have written to the department on the last day of Winter Study.
On the Tuesday of the first week of the spring semester candidates will make a presentation of the project at a departmental colloquium in Spanish. The thesis
will be promptly discussed and evaluated to determine whether or not the student should continue in the honors program. The second semester of independent
thesis work will be spent writing more chapters, as well as revising, rewriting, and polishing the project where necessary. The completed thesis in its final form
will be due on April 25th. At the end of the Spring term, the student will present and defend the final project before members of the Department and others by
invitation. The grade will be awarded once members of the Department have consulted after the defense.
The second route is a group of three clearly related courses (offered by the Department of Romance Languages or by other departments, such as History, Art,
Philosophy, English, etc.), only one of which may be counted in the nine courses comprising the major. One of the courses will be an Independent Study (plus
senior year WSP 030) in the spring of the senior year, at the end of which the student will write an essay that synthesizes the content of the three related courses.
Students may apply for this route by November 2 of the senior year.
In the case of both routes to the degree with honors, the department's recommendation for graduation with honors will be based on the originality and thor-
oughness of the finished project.
THE CERTIFICATE IN SPANISH
The Certificate in Spanish Language and Culture consists of a sequence of seven courses for which the student must earn a cumulative grade average of B or
higher. In addition, the student must take a proficiency test and achieve a score of "Advanced." The test will be administered by the department once a year during
the month of April to all students desirous of obtaining the Certificate. Those so interested should express their intent to the chair of the department by March 1 or
earlier.
For students with no prior Spanish background, the course sequence will consist of Spanish 101-102, Spanish 103 and 104, and three courses in Spanish above
the 104 level, with at least one of these courses at the 200-level or higher taken at Williams. If the student starts out the sequence at Spanish 103, in addition to the
three courses in Spanish beyond the 104 level (including a 200-level course or higher), two electives may be taken in other departments. One elective should be in
Spanish or Latin-American cultural history (art, literature, drama, music) and the other in Spanish or Latin-American intellectual, political, or social history.
Spanish 200, 201, or 208 can be counted for the elective requirement.
Electives may be considered from a variety of departments and programs. However, students should consult with the chair of Romance Languages before
making any enrollment decisions.
269
PLACEMENT
A placement test in Spanish is administered at Williams at the opening of the fall semester. Incoming first-year students who wish to register for any Spanish
courses above the 101 level must take this test.
STUDY ABROAD
Spanish majors, as well as non-majors interested in further exposure to the language and the culture, are strongly encouraged to include study in Spain or Latin
America as part of their program at Williams. Through its special ties with the Hamilton College Academic Year in Spain, the department offers a comprehensive
linguistic and cultural experience in a Spanish-speaking environment, for periods either of a semester or a year. Credit for up to four courses can be granted at the
discretion of the Department for study overseas. Students interested in study abroad should consult with a member of the department at their earliest convenience.
RLSP 101(F)-W88-102(S) Elementary Spanish
This course focuses on grammar, elementary composition, practice in conversation, and reading of easy modern prose. It is taught by the intensive oral method.
Format: the class meets five hours a week. Requirements: students will complete workbook and lab exercises weekly. Evaluation will be based on participation,
regular homework exercises, quizzes, a midterm, and a final exam.
Students registered for 101-102 are required to attend and pass the sustaining program during the winter study period. Credit granted only if both semesters are
taken. Enrollment limit: 20. This course is for students who have studied less than two years of Spanish in secondary school.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MTWRF First Semester: FOX
10:00-10:50 MTWRF Second Semester: ROUHI
RLSP 103(F) Intermediate Spanish
This course is a continuation of Spanish 101-102. It is designed to help students improve their proficiency in each of the major skill-groups (listening, speaking,
reading and writing) while providing an introduction to the cultures of the Spanish-speaking world. Classroom activities and homework are designed to increase
vocabulary and improve your ability to handle daily life in a Spanish-speaking country, to express your views on complex subjects such as art and politics, and to
increase your knowledge of the cultural traditions of Latin America and Spain. Film screenings and readings in Hispanic literature, culture and politics will
provide material for in-class discussion and some writing assignments. This course provides the linguistic and cultural training that is necessary to engage the
diverse Spanish-speaking communities of Latin America,Spain and the US; it will help to prepare students for further literary and cultural studies as well as
provide skills that are increasingly essential in fields such as medicine, law, and education. Conducted in Spanish.
Format: class meets three hours each week with the professor, plus an additional fourth hour with a teaching assistant from Latin America or Spain. Require-
ments: regular attendance and active in-class participation, workbook exercises and weekly compositions, quizzes, midterm and final exams.
Prerequisites: Spanish 101-102 or placement exam results. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20).
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF, 11:00-11:50 MWF Conference: 1:10-2 W, 2:10-3 W BELL-VILLADA, PITCHER
RLSP 104(S) Upper Intermediate Spanish
This course is a continuation of Spanish 103. It focuses on the review of grammar as well as on refining writing and speaking skills. Films and reading selections
will enable students to deepen their understanding of Hispanic cultures.
Format: class meets four hours a week. Requirements: weekly 1- to 2-page compositions, regularity of class participation, oral reports, frequent quizzes, a mid-
term and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Spanish 103 or the results of the Williams College placement exam. Enrollment limit: 22 (expected: 22).
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF, 11:00-11:50 MWF Conferences: 1:10-2 W, 2:10-3 W FOX, PITCHER
RLSP 105(F) Advanced Composition and Conversation
This course involves intensive practice in speaking and writing. Students are also expected to participate actively in daily conversations based on the study of our
grammar book, as well as selected short stories by Latin American and Peninsular writers. In addition, they will write frequent compositions and perform regular ,
written grammar exercises. Conducted in Spanish.
Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on homework, class participation, compositions, a midterm, and a final exam. This course requires students
to have produced 15-20 or more pages of writing by the end of the semester.
Prerequisites: Spanish 103, Spanish 104 or results of the Williams College placement exam. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). Preference is given to first-years,
then sophomores, then juniors, and then seniors, with priority to those considering a major in Spanish.
Hour: 12:00-12:50 MWF, 10:00-10:50 MWF Conferences: 3:10-4 W, 1:10-2 W GOODBODY
RLSP 106(S) Advanced Composition and Conversation
This course may be taken separately or as a continuation of Spanish 105. Written and oral work will be based on selected short stories by Latin-American writers.
Weekly compositions, plus regular exercises in the language laboratory.
Requirements: a weekly essay based on the stories read in class, written laboratory exercises, participation in the grammatical and literary discussions, quizzes, a
midterm, and a final exam.
Prerequisites: Spanish 103, Spanish 104 or results of the Williams College placement exam. Enrollment limit: 20. Preference is given to first-years, then sopho-
mores, then juniors, and then seniors, with priority to those considering a major in Spanish.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF Conferences: 3:10-4 W BELL-VILLADA
RLSP 200(S) (formerly 112) Latin-American Civilizations
An introduction to the multiple elements constituting Latin-American culture. Class assignments include readings from selected Latin-American essayists and
screenings of classic films. Particular focus on the conflict between local and foreign cultural traditions. Areas to be considered: Spanish Catholicism, the influ-
ence of European liberalism and U.S. expansion, the Indian and African contribution, and the cultural impact of social revolution in Mexico and Cuba. Conducted
in Spanish.
Requirements: two essays on assigned topics, one oral presentation, active discussion of the ideas and the facts presented in class, a midterm, and a final.
Prerequisites: Spanish 105 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20).
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF GOODBODY
RLSP 201(F) The Cultures of Spain
Each of the many cultures and civilizations that has settled in Spain has left its mark. Linguistically, culturally, and historically Spain is a composite of the groups
that have inhabited the peninsula in the past, which include Iberians, Celts, Phoenicians, Greeks, Carthaginians, Romans, Visigoths, Arabs, and Jews. The con-
tributions of these different groups, combined with other factors such as geography and climate, will be our starting point in understanding Spain's past. Today,
Spain's cultural diversity also reflects the many distinct autonomous regions of which the country is composed, such as Catalua and the Basque country, and the
recent influx of immigrants from all over the world. In this course we will consider Spain past and present. We will study periods of tolerance and cultural
brilliance, such as the co-existence of Arabs and Jews in Medieval Cordoba, as well as times of violence, censorship and repression such as the Inquisition, the
Civil War and the post-war under Franco. Materials will include representative works from literature, art, architecture, music, and film. Secondary texts will also
be provided for historical and socio-political background and reference. Conducted in Spanish.
Format: seminar. Requirements: active participation in class discussions, an oral presentation, several short writing assignments, a midterm and a final.
Prerequisites: Spanish 105 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). Preference given to French majors and certificate candidates.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF FOX
RLSP 202T(S) 1898: Spain's Fin de Siglo and the Crisis of Ideas (W)
In this tutorial we will read the works of some of modern Spain's influential writers from the late part of the nineteenth century and the first three decades of the
twentieth. Our aim is to understand how fiction and philosophy represented this significant time in Spain's history. The loss of the war with the U.S. in 1898, the
turbulent shifts of power within the country, Spanish regional identities, and the cultural and intellectual movements that shaped Spain on the eve of the Civil War
are among the key issues we will address. Our primary sources--largely fiction and poetry by artists such as Miguel de Unamuno, Azorn, Ramiro de Maezt,
Antonio Machado, Po Baroja--will be complemented with a rigorous study of the cultural landscape of Spain at that time. Our principal engagement with
philosophy will be through Jos Ortega y Gasset, in particular his output from the 1920s.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: Students will be teamed in groups of two, and alternate in writing essays and critiquing these each week. Essays will be 5-8 pages
long. Evaluation is based on the essay and the critique of the essay, as well as punctuality with submission of weekly assignments.
Prerequisites: RLSP 105, or results of the Williams College Placement Exam, or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10).
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. ROUHI
270
RLSP 203(F) From Modernismo to El Boom de la Novela (W)
A survey of some of the leading imaginative writers of Hispanic America. Readings will begin with the modernista poets and go on to include fiction of Mexico
by Rulfo, a wide sampling of verse by Pablo Neruda, and narratives of the "Boom" period by authors such as Borges, Cortzar, Lispector, and Garca Mrquez.
Conducted in Spanish.
Prerequisites: Spanish 105 or higher. Enrollment limit: 22.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR BELL-VILLADA
RLSP 204 Icons and Imaginaries: Culture and Politics in Latin America (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
This course provides an overview of Latin American culture and politics by focusing on some of the most recognizable names and faces from the continent's
turbulent history: Christopher Columbus, Hernn Corts and Malintzn, Simn Bolvar, Jos Mart, Pancho Villa, Eva Pern, Frida Kahlo, Che Guevara, Ri-
goberta Mench and Hugo Chvez. In addition to exploring the controversies surrounding each figure and her or his influence within a specific historical
context, we'll also unpack some of the overarching issues of Latin American culture and politics: How are nations and nationalism constructed through pro-
cesses of representation, and what roles do specific iconic figures play in that process? How can popular culture challenge elite representations of the nation and
its heroes/heroines, and how durable are the images it produces as expressions of collective will? What opportunities are available to women and sexual minori-
ties in a political culture that has been historically dominated by macho military types? This course fulfills the EDI requirement by enabling students to appreci-
ate the figures that have influenced generations of Latin American women and men and their sense of what is politically possible, while challenging the class to
identify the operations of power at work in the construction of the figures themselves.
Format: lecture/discussion. Assignments will include political and cultural essays, literature and films. Three 5-page papers. Conducted in Spanish.
Prerequisites: RLSP 105 or 106 or the equivalent. Enrollment limit: 21 (expected: 20). Preference given to Spanish majors and qualified first-year students.
FRENCH
RLSP 205(S) The Latin-American Novel in Translation (Same as Comparative Literature 205)
A course specifically designed to enable students who have no knowledge of Spanish to read and discover those Latin-American authors who, in the twentieth
century, have attracted world-wide attention. Among the texts to be discussed: Borges, Labyrinths; Cortzar, Blow-up and Hopscotch; Lispector, The Hour of the
Star; lesser works by Fuentes and Puig; and by Nobel Prize-winner Gabriel Garca Mrquez, One Hundred Years of Solitude.
Format: seminar. Requirements: class participation, two brief papers, a midterm, and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 22 (expected: 22).
Does not carry credit for the Spanish major or the certificate.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR BELL-VILLADA
RLSP 208(S) The Spanish Civil War in Literature and Film
The Spanish Civil War (1936-1939) has generated a vast bibliography and filmography that to this day reflect widely antagonistic interpretations of the conflict
itself, its roots, and its impact. From the Spanish perspective, the war is the most important single event in understanding modern Spain. The ideals, passions, and
consequences of the Spanish Civil War still divide Spaniards and have been recreated and relived by writers, artists, and filmmakers, and debated by historians.
The course will begin with a historical introduction to the origins, development, and outcome of the war. Was the Spanish war a national struggle or an interna-
tional struggle played out on Spanish soil? Along with studying internal Spanish political divisions, we will also consider the impact of the foreign policy posi-
tions of other countries-including Germany, Italy, the United States, and Russia--vis-a-vis Spain, as well as the role of the thousands of foreign volunteers who
formed the International Brigades and came from all over the world to fight against Franco. With this historical basis, we will see how the themes and issues of the
war are reflected in Spanish poetry, short fiction, novels, and films from the time of the war up through the present day. Readings will include works by Ayala,
Cernuda, Neruda, Goytisolo, Sender, Fernan-Gomez, and Matute. Films will include documentaries as well as classic and contemporary features. Conducted in
Spanish.
Evaluations will be based on lively class participation, an oral report, short written assignments, and two papers.
Prerequisites: Spanish 111, permission of instructor, or results of the Williams College Placement Exam. Enrollment limit: 20.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MW S. FOX
RLSP 209 Spanish for Heritage Speakers: Introduction to Latina/o Cultural Production (Same as Latina/o Studies 209) (Not offered
2011-2012)
(See under LATS 209 for full description.) CEPEDA
RLSP 211 Survey of Medieval and Golden Age Spanish Literature (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course will introduce the student to some of the major works of Spanish literature from its beginnings through the Golden Age. We will study the historical
context in which the works were written as well as the literary history of the periods in question. Students will learn methods of textual analysis through readings
of relevant literary criticism. Readings will include epic and lyric poems, a picaresque novel, several additional prose selections, and selected plays. Conducted
in Spanish.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, short paper assignments, and a final paper.
Prerequisites: Spanish 105 or permission of instructor.
ROUHI
RLSP 217 Love in the Spanish Golden Age (Not offered 2011-2012)
The principal focus of this course is the Spanish "comedia" of the seventeenth century (with supplemental readings from prose and poetry) to provide us with a
dynamic and critical understanding of the theme of love as constructed by the greatest dramatists and authors of the period. Works by Lope de Vega, Tirso de
Molina, Caldern, Cervantes, San Juan de la Cruz, and others will show us how the theme was treated from diverse perspectives, and how it related to key
concepts such as honor, religion, and artistic creativity. Conducted in Spanish.
Evaluation will be based on meaningful participation and frequent short written assignments with one longer composition.
Prerequisites: Spanish 105 and above or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 20. Preference given to students with a background in literature.
ROUHI
RLSP 219 Humor in Spanish-American Literature (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
From the sixteenth century to the twenty-first, humor has been an essential element of Spanish-American cultural discourse, frequently mixing entertainment
with sharp criticism of repressive political regimes and social institutions. This course will examine the role of humor in Spanish-American literature with
emphasis on the colonial period and the nineteenth century, considering the use of satire, parody and farce to diagnose social ills ranging from the oppression of
indigenous and African Americans to administrative corruption, promiscuity and sexual hypocrisy, and sadism among medical practitioners. Drawing on theo-
rists including Erasmus, Wylie Sypher and Mikhail Bahktin, we will discuss various categories of literary comedy and their functions as subversive or trans-
gression discourses. Spanish-American authors to be read may include Juan Rodrguez Freile, Sir Juana Ins de la Cruz, Catalina de Erauso, Juan del Valle
Caviedes, Alonso Carri de la Vandera, and Ricardo Palma. For students with little or no background in early Spanish-American literature, we will also read
selected works of "serious," canonical literature. We will conclude by considering colonial and nineteenth-century satire as precursors of the anti-authoritarian
discourse in contemporary texts such as Gabriel Garca Mrquez's Los funerales de la Mam Grande.
Format: lecture. Evaluation will be based on contribution to class discussions, three short papers, and mid-term and final exams.
Prerequisites: Spanish 105 or above, or permission of instructor, or results of the Williams College placement exam. Enrollment limit: 22 (expected: 22).
FRENCH
RLSP 220 Women in Twentieth-Century Spain (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 222) (Not offered 2011-2012)
From the early twentieth century to the present day, the radical changes in the lives of Spanish women have clearly reflected the tug of war between progress
and tradition in recent Spanish history.The dramatic upheavals in Spanish politics have marked and transformed the lives of women to such a great extent that
one can often gauge the political and social climate of any given historical moment by considering how the role of women was defined by the law, the Catholic
church, education, and other social and political institutions. Using literary and historical texts as well as films and graphic materials, this course will look at the
transformations in the public and private lives of Spanish women during the following periods: the turn of the century, the Second Republic, the Spanish Civil
War, the Franco years, and the transition to democracy.
Format: seminar.
Prerequisites: Spanish 201, permission of the instructor, or acceptable results of the Williams College Placement Exam. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20).
Preference given to Spanish and Comparative Literature majors.
S. FOX
271
RLSP 230T Violent States, Violent Subjects: Nation-Building and Atrocity in 19th-Century Latin America (Same as Comparative
Literature 230T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
Although the massive, mechanized wars of the 20th century often overshadow earlier conflicts, the 19th century was also a period of widespread bloodshed in
Latin America. Even after the carnage of the Independence Wars came to an end, the new republics continued some of the most violent pursuits of the colonial
period: indigenous people were conquered, their lands settled by whites or used for grazing cattle, and blacks (often despite the official abolition of slavery)
continued to suffer exclusion, oppression, and abuse. It was a century of civil wars (Mexico, Argentina, Uruguay, Peru, Colombia, Venezuela) and of two bitter
international wars, the Paraguayan War(1864-1870), and the Pacific War (1879-1883), each of which would have a lasting impact on the countries involved. In
this tutorial we will explore the literary links between some of the violent conflicts listed above and the foundation of national identities in Latin America,
reading texts that probe the social and ethical implications of state-sponsored violence. Issues to be explored include militarism and the development of nation-
alism; genocide and the national community; torture, truth and testimony; and the nature of"civilization." We will read a variety of 19th century texts by authors
like Rosa Guerra, Lucio V. Mansilla and Ricardo Palma; in addition we will also read a few contemporary texts, written in the aftermath of the most recent
dictatorships in the Southern Cone and elsewhere, that actively reflect on the long history of state-sponsored violence in Latin America. This course fulfills the
EDI requirement by encouraging students to examine the ways that national identities have been constructed in Latin America (and, by extension,elsewhere)
emphasizing the forms of violence that have been part of that process.
Format: tutorial. Students will decide whether they prefer to take the course in Spanish (for Spanish/COMP credit) or in English (for COMP credit). Students
will work in pairs throughout the semester, each group meeting with the instructor once a week. Each week one of the students will present a 5-page paper on
the assigned reading and the other will critique the paper orally.
Prerequisites: Spanish 200 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to Spanish and Comparative Literature majors.
FRENCH
RLSP 272 Literature of the Americas: Transnational Dialogues on Race, Violence and Nation-Building (Same as American Studies 256,
Comparative Literature 272 and Latina/o Studies 272) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D) (W)
(See under COMP 272 for full description.) FRENCH
RLSP 301 Cervantes' Don Quijote (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
This course is an in-depth study of Miguel de Cervantes' masterpiece Don Quijote (1605, 1615). The linguistic, literary, and cultural richness of Cervantes'
novel will allow us to explore the historical complexity of the society in which it was produced, circulated, and read. In order to complement and contextualize
our close reading of Cervantes' text, we will rely on historical documentation, works of art, iconography, other literary works from the period, and contempo-
rary critical studies. Issues to be dealt with include humor, carnival, and popular cultures, the representation of Mediterranean cultural encounters, the material
world and the social fabric of early modern Iberia, and the narrative and rhetorical makeup of the novel. Conducted in Spanish.
Format: seminar. Requirements: actuve participation in classs discussions, oral presentations, short writing assignments, and a final essay.
Prerequisites: any 200-level Spanish course. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19).
MARTNEZ
RLSP 306T(S) Latino Writing: Literature by U.S. Hispanics (Same as Comparative Literature 302T) (W)
Writing by U.S. Hispanics constitutes a new voice in American letters. In this tutorial, we will read and discuss work by U.S. Latinos and examine the social
backgrounds to their texts. The experiences of immigration and assimilation, and the specific complexities of being both Hispanic and North American will be
addressed. Authors to be studied: Jose Antonio Villarreal, Toms Rivera, Richard Rodriguez, Sandra Cisneros, Rudolfo Anaya, Piri Thomas, Oscar Hijuelos,
Cristina Garcia, Junot Diaz, and historical texts by Carey McWilliams and Rodolfo Acua. Given the absence of a critical consensus around these recent titles,
our task is to gain some sense of their common traits as a tradition, and place them within the larger body of literature of the Americas and the world. The tutorial
will examine one work or set of works per week. A student will bring, written out in full, an oral presentation focusing on the artistic features and sociocultural
content of the assigned reading. Questioning of the presenter, on the part of the second tutee and the tutor, will follow. The course is designed to accommodate
both Spanish and English speaking students; for Spanish majors it is to be conducted in Spanish. A student able to read and speak Spanish will be paired with
another student of similar proficiency. Students who neither read nor speak Spanish will be paired together.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: five short oral presentations/papers (about 20-25 minutes) and a final longer one.
Prerequisites: some previous course work in any literature beyond the 100 level is helpful. Students selecting the Spanish option for credit toward the Spanish
major must have taken at least one 200-level Spanish course or seek permission of the tutor. Enrollment limit: 10.
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. BELL-VILLADA
RLSP 308 Latin American Literature of the Colonial Period (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
This course offers a survey of major Latin American writers from the beginning to 1700. We will read some of the most significant chronicles of first contact
and the conquest, as well as work by Sor Juana Ins de la Cruz and other writers from the colonial period. Our methodological focus will be on the problems of
representation, ethics and epistemology presented by the literature of the time, that is, the impossibility of arriving at morally reliable knowledge of historical
events given the scarcity of accounts, particularly by indigenous authors, and the propagandistic inclinations of the European writers. This course fulfills the
EDI requirement because our reading of canonical Latin American literature is explicitly focused on issues of power, violence and exclusion, including the
historical exclusion of women and indigenous peoples from Latin American literature and politics. Conducted in Spanish.
This course offers a survey of major Latin American writers from the beginning to 1800. We will read some of the most significant chronicles of first contact
and the conquest, as well as work by Sor Juana Ins de la Cruz and other writers from the colonial period. Our methodological focus will be on the problems of
representation, ethics and epistemology presented by the literature of the time, that is, the difficulty of arriving at morally reliable knowledge of historical events
given the scarcity of accounts, particularly by indigenous authors, and the propagandistic inclinations of the European writers. This course fulfills the EDI
requirement because our reading of canonical Latin American literature is explicitly focused on issues of power, violence and exclusion, including the historical
exclusion of women and indigenous peoples from Latin American literature and politics. Conducted in Spanish.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: two 5-page papers and one 10-page final essay.
Prerequisites: one 200-level course in Spanish or Latin American literature or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 10). Preference given to
majors in Spanish.
FRENCH
RLSP 319 Latin American Travel Writing (Not offered 2011-2012)
Beyond Columbus' errant journey into the abyss and the ensuing quest for El Dorado, or Darwin's Voyage of the Beagle, Latin America's interior has often
enticed its own learned population. Their travels, in space, time and thought, do not merely present a physical confrontation with alterity, with the continent's
supposed heart of darkness, but an intellectual clearing, an origin, from which a more equitable politics may begin. To name but one example, Alejo Carpenti-
er's Los pasos perdidos, the tale of a New York composer's journey to the beginning of society and music, is often seen as the touchstone of Latin American
identity. Through accounts of real and fictitious travels, from Carpentier to the crassest of guidebooks, we will study such quests for self. These domestic
departures will frame debates on ethics, representation, and epistemology. Readings will include work by Gorriti, Mansilla, Vasconcelos, Borges, Sarmiento,
Che Guevara, Allende, Seplveda, and Bioy Casares. For comparison's sake, there will be occasional primary and secondary texts in English. Conducted in
Spanish.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: two 5-page papers over the first half, and a 12- to 15-page research project over the second half, all of which will be
defended in class..
Prerequisites: one 200-level course in Spanish or Latin American literature. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15).
PITCHER
RLSP 402(S) Senior Seminar: Writing Latin America's Environmental Crisis
Disappearing rain forests, melting glacier ice, sprawling garbage dumps, toxic fields and water: the state of environmental crisis is as real in Latin America as it is else-
where on the planet, and its impact on the region's poor, marginalized and indigenous communities is extremely severe. This seminar explores the sociocultural context
and ramifications of the current crisis by examining Latin America's environmental literature of the 20th and 21st centuries. Readings will range from literary classics by
writers like Jos Eustacio Rivera, Octavio Paz and Giaconda Belli to the blogs of contemporary environmental activists. Keeping in mind the role of neocolonialism and
globalization in accelerating environmental degradation, we'll explore the influence of Latin America's heterogeneous cultural traditions on the relationship between
human groups and the natural world, the significance of race, gender, class and ethnicity for an individual or collective sense of place, the phenomenon of environmental
trauma, and the representational challenges and strategies available to environmentallyengaged writers and artists.
Conducted entirely in Spanish. As the capstone experience for the Spanish major, class meetings will follow a seminar format. In addition to written assignments (one
272
57 page paper and one 1520 page paper) students will also be evaluated on the basis of their regular participation and performance as discussion leaders.
Format: seminar. Requirements: regular, active participation in class discussion, discussion-leading, one 5- to 7-page paper and one 15- to 20-page paper.
Prerequisites: one 300-level Spanish course or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 12). Preference given to Senior Spanish majors.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR FRENCH
RLSP 403 Senior Seminar: Power, Repression, and Dictatorship in the Latin-American Novel (Not offered 2011-2012)
Military dictatorship is among the most crucial factors in Latin-American society and history, and some of the continent's leading novelists have taken it upon
themselves to depict the experience in their work. In this course we will examine both the fact of dictatorship itself and the diverse representation thereof in
Spanish-American fiction. Novels by Garca Mrquez, Vargas Llosa, Poniatowska, and Tomas Eloy Martnez will be closely studied. Students will also read
Absalom! Absalom! by Faulkner, whose influence on Latin-American authors' techniques of representation has been decisive and profound. Conducted in
Spanish.
Requirements: three papers based on the readings, one oral report on the life and personality of a given dictator, and a final exam.
Prerequisite: any 300-level course or two 200-level courses or permission of the instructor.
BELL-VILLADA
RLSP W30 Honors Essay
RLSP 493(F)-W31-494(S) Senior Thesis
RLSP 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
RUSSIAN (Div. I)
Chair, Professor GAIL NEWMAN
Professors: CASSIDAY, GOLDSTEIN. Associate Professor: VAN DE STADT*. Visiting Assistant Professor: SECKLER. Teaching Associate:
KRIVCHENKOVA.
LANGUAGE STUDY
The department provides language instruction to enable the student to acquire all four linguistic skills: understanding, speaking, reading, and writing. Russian
101-W88-102 covers the basics of Russian grammar. Russian 151 through 252 offer additional instruction in grammar and provide extensive practice in reading
and conversation.
STUDY ABROAD
The department strongly encourages students desiring to attain fluency in Russian to spend a semester or year studying in Russia or one of the former Soviet
republics. Students generally apply to one of several approved foreign study programs. Russian 152 or the equivalent and junior standing are normally prerequi-
site for study abroad.
LITERATURE AND CULTURE IN TRANSLATION
The department regularly offers courses on Russian literature and culture in English for those students who have little or no knowledge of Russian, but who
wish to become acquainted with the major achievements in Russian literary and cultural history.
THE CERTIFICATE IN RUSSIAN
To enhance a student's educational and professional profiles, the Certificate in Russian offers a useful tool for using the language in a wide variety of disci-
plines. The sequence of language and culture courses is designed to supplement a student's major at Williams by enabling the student to expand his or her
knowledge in a related field.
Students who enter Williams with previous training in Russian may substitute more advanced courses for all the 100-level courses; they can also be exempted
from up to two of the required courses. Thus, in order to earn a certificate a student must take no fewer than five courses (including three courses in Russian) after
enrolling at Williams. The student must achieve proficiency at the level of a B in RUSS 251 or the equivalent.
Required Courses
101
102
151
152
one additional course conducted in Russian
Electives
--at least one course on Russian cultural history
--at least one course on Russian intellectual, political, or social history, or post-Soviet economics
THE MAJOR
The Russian major offers students an interdisciplinary approach to the intellectual and cultural history of Russia and the former Soviet republics. Students
complete the major by combining courses in Russian language and literature with courses in history, political science, music, economics, and art. The major
requires a minimum of ten courses of which at least six must be conducted in Russian, at least two must be at the 300-level, and one at the 400-level. In addition,
students may take up to four related courses offered by other departments and taught in English.
Examples of appropriate courses in other departments are:
History 140 Fin-de Sicle Russia: Cultural Splendor, Imperial Decay
History 240 Muscovy and the Russian Empire
History 241 The Rise of the Soviet Union
History 440 Reform, Revolution, Terror: Russia, 1900-1939
Sociology 332 Communism and its Aftermath
Students selecting the major must typically complete Russian 152 or the equivalent by the end of the junior year. Majors will normally be expected to take the
400-level seminar offered in their senior year, even if they have previously taken another version of it. Russian majors may receive major credit for summer
language study (in consultation with the department) and for as many as four courses taken during study abroad.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN RUSSIAN
At the beginning of the second semester of the senior year, students may nominate themselves to candidacy for the degree with honors. By the end of the junior
year at the latest, however, they will have established in consultation with the department their qualifications for embarking on the project, the pattern of study to
be followed, and the standards of performance.
Students earn a degree with honors by submitting a senior thesis (493-W31-494) of honors quality.
RUSS 101(F)-W88-102(S) Elementary Russian
An introduction to contemporary standard Russian, this course provides opportunities to acquire basic proficiency in all four language skills: listening compre-
hension, speaking, reading, and writing, through intensive use of authentic written materials and a strong emphasis on the spoken word in all class activities.
Greater emphasis is placed on writing in the second semester. For students who have studied Russian in secondary school, consultation with the instructor is
required before registering for any Russian language course in the sequence 101 through 252.
Format: the class meets five hours a week. Requirements: active class participation, completion of all assignments, quizzes, tests, and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 12). Credit granted only if both semesters are taken. Students electing this course are required to attend and pass
the sustaining program in the winter study period.
Hour: 10:00-10:50 MWF and 9:55-11:10 TR First Semester: CASSIDAY
10:00-10:50 MWF and 9:55-11:10 TR Second Semester: SECKLER
RUSS 151(F), 152(S) Continuing Russian
This course develops all four skills-conversation, listening comprehension, reading, and composition-for students who have completed at least one year of col-
lege-level Russian. Coursework includes a systematic review of Russian grammar, as well as an examination of a variety of materials from Russian and Soviet
culture, current events, and daily life. Intermediate students will concentrate on expanding their vocabulary, while more advanced students will focus on reading
273
and writing about unabridged texts in Russian. Students who complete the yearlong sequence of RUSS 151 and RUSS 152 should be well prepared to undertake
study abroad in Russia and are encouraged to do so. Each year this course is custom designed to meet the needs of those students who enroll, so that both
intermediate-level and advanced students can benefit from taking RUSS 151 and/or RUSS 152 more than once, which may be done with the permission of the
instructor.
Format: the class meets four hours a week, three with the professor and the fourth with the Russian Teaching Associate (time to be arranged). Requirements:
active class participation, completion of all assignments, quizzes, and a final exam.
Prerequisites for 151: completion of at least one year of college-level Russian (RUSS 101-102) or permission of the instructor. Prerequisites for 152: Russian 151
or permission of the instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 6-10).
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF First Semester: SECKLER
11:00-11:50 MWF Second Semester: CASSIDAY
RUSS 203(F) 19th-Century Russian Literature in Translation (Same as Comparative Literature 203)
Whereas 18thcentury Russian literature was largely derivative and imitative, 19thcentury Russian literature--literature of The Golden Age--developed into a
distinct national literature. It acquired its own style, developed along its own trajectory, and engaged with local social and political topics. Organized more or less
chronologically, this course is designed to present a survey of Russian literature by Karamzin, Pushkin, Lermontov, Turgenev, Gogol, Goncharov, Dostoevsky,
Tolstoy, and Chekov that highlights each author's distinctive style as well as the development of dominant themes among the writers. Also, students will be
introduced to the theory of the novel (i.e., Lukcs, Bakhtin, Ortega y Gasset). Short introductory lectures will provide the dual contexts of Russian literary and
political history in order to help students better understand the milieu in which this literature developed. The vast majority of inclass time, however, will be
devoted to the students' analysis of stylistic idiosyncrasies and arguments with regard to style, genre, narration, and literary symbolism. Knowledge of Russian is
not required.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: active daily participation, one group presentation, three short papers, peer review of written work, one term paper, and
a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25 (expected: 20). Preference given to students with a strong interest in 19th-century literature and/or Russian culture.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR SECKLER
RUSS 204 Twentieth-Century Russian Literature: Manuscripts Don't Burn (Same as Comparative Literature 204) (Not offered
2011-2012)
The line, "Manuscripts don't burn," from M. Bulgakov's Master and Margarita obliquely responds to the tragic fates suffered by scores of writers under the
Soviet regime: whereas humans are destructible, literature is not. The clandestine publishing and circulation of censored texts, though extraordinarily danger-
ous, hints at the esteemed status of literature within Soviet culture. This course places authors repressed by the Soviet government (Zamyatin, Babel, Olesha,
Bulgakov, Solzhenitsyn) alongside Soviet poets and socialist-realist novelists (Mayakovsky, Gorky, Polevoi) in order to scrutinize the role of the author and of
literature under a dictatorship. We will also read Russian women and postmodern authors (Tolstaya, Petrushevskaya, Erofeev, and Pelevin). In addition to
gaining familiarity with the styles of individual writers and literary movements, students will consider the following broad questions over the course of the
semester: What is or should be the relationship of the writer to the state? How does literature function in (de)constructing Soviet identity, space, and ideology?
What is meant by revolutionary literature--is it a question of aesthetics or politics? All readings will be in English.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: completion of all reading assignments, four short response papers, one in-class presentation, and a final term paper.
Prerequisites: none. Enrollment limit: none (expected 20). Open to first-year students.
SECKLER
RUSS 206(S) Topics in Russian Culture: Feasting and Fasting in Russian History
This course will use the methodology of food history to explore the broader historical, economic, and artistic conditions that gave rise to Russian culture. We will
examine culinary practice as well as the social context of cooking and eating in Russia. In order to elucidate the important interplay between culture and cuisine,
we will discuss such issues as the domestic roles of women and serfs, the etiquette of the table, the role of drinking and temperance movements, and the impor-
tance of feasts and fasts in the Russian Orthodox Church calendar. Short stories, memoirs, and cookery books will provide insight into class and gender differ-
ences, cooking techniques, and the specific tastes that characterize Russian cuisine. This class will present Russian culture from a predominantly domestic point
of view that originates from the wooden spoon as much as from the scepter.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: active class participation, weekly response papers, one 6page paper, midterm and final exams , and participation in a
communal feast.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 19). Preference give to students who can demonstrate an interest in Russian culture.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR GOLDSTEIN
RUSS 208(S) Twentieth-Century Russian Art and the Birth of Abstraction (Same as ArtH 266)
Such revolutionary artistic movements as Cubo-Futurism, Suprematism, and Constructivism profoundly influenced the development of twentieth-century art
throughout the Western world--just as the 1917 Russian Revolution upset the world's political balance. This course will investigate Russian art within a cultural
framework and explore the relationship between artistic production and politics. We will begin with a brief overview of important developments in Russian art
that prefigured the twentieth-century artistic revolution: the introduction of icons from Byzantium, the founding of St. Petersburg and the rise of Western-style
portraiture, and the fin-de-sicle movements that united painting with music and ballet. However, the focus of the course will be 1910-1930, when radical innova-
tion was the order of the day and revolutionary ideas sparked entirely new conceptions of art. We will then look at the Socialist Realist style of the Stalin era,
Soviet dissident art and Moscow conceptualism, ending the semester with an exploration of current trends in post-Soviet Russian art.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: active class participation, two 5- to 8-page papers, and a final 10-page paper or exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 12-15). Preference given to students who can demonstrate an interest in Russian culture.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 MR GOLDSTEIN
RUSS 210T(S) Tolstoy: The Major Novels (Same as Comparative Literature 207T) (W)
This tutorial will focus on Lev Tolstoy's four novelistic masterpiece--War and Peace, Anna Karenina, Resurrection, and Hadji Murat--placing them in their
appropriate historical, social, and philosophical context. For each week of class, students will read a significant portion of a novel by Tolstoy, as well as a selection
of secondary literature taken from those works that inspired the author, reactions that arose at the time of the novel's publication, and scholarship that seeks to
explain the power and enduring significance of these novels. Students will meet with the professor in pairs, with one student writing a five-page paper for each
class session and the other student providing a critique of the paper. For those students without Russian language skills, all works will be read in English transla-
tion. For those students who have completed at least three years of college-level Russian, all primary readings, a significant portion of secondary readings,
discussion, and writing assignments will be completed in Russian.
Format: tutorial. Evaluation will be based on completion of weekly reading and writing assignments and active discussion during tutorial sessions.
Prerequisites: for students taking the tutorial in English: none; for students taking the tutorial in Russian: either Russian 252 or the permission of instructor.
Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to Russian, Comparative Literature, and Literary Studies majors.
Tutorial meetings to be arranged. CASSIDAY
RUSS 251(F),252(S) Continuing Russian
The same course as RUSS 151/152, but for students at the advanced level. See RUSS 151/152 for full course description.
Prerequisites for 251: Russian 152 or permission of the instructor.
Prerequisites for 252: Russian 251 or permission of the instructor.
Hour: 11:00-11:50 MWF First Semester: SECKLER
11:00-11:50 MWF Second Semester: CASSIDAY
RUSS 275 Russian and Soviet Cinema (Same as Comparative Literature 275) (Not offered 2011-2012)
The Soviet avant-garde directors of the 1920s called for the death of narrative cinema. Just a decade later, the Stalinist-era film industry hoped to built a Soviet
Hollywood to produce adventure films and musical comedies-simple narrative-driven movies for the masses. This course examines how the pendulum of
twentieth-century Soviet politics results in an ongoing alternation between the production of auteur cinema and popular movies and how cinema, therefore, acts
as an aesthetic indicator of political and social change. Screenings will include internationally recognized cinematic masterpieces (Eisenstein's Battleship Po-
tempkin and Ivan the Terrible, Vertov's Man with a Movie Camera, Kalatozov'sThe Cranes are Flying, and Tarkovsky's Ivan's Childhood), as well as many of
the most popular films among Russian audiences (the Vasil'iev Bros' Chapaev, Aleksandrov's Circus, Men'shov's Moscow Doesn't Believe in Tears, and
Balabanov's Brother). All readings will be in English and all films will be viewed with English subtitles.
274
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: completion of all assigned readings, weekly films screenings, active participation in class discussion, three short
papers, two comprehensive quizzes, and a final term paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: none (expected: 15). Open to first-year students.
SECKLER
RUSS 301 Russian and Soviet Film (Not offered 2011-2012)
Called "the most important of all the arts" by Lenin, cinema has played a crucial role in Russian culture throughout the twentieth century. In this course, we will
study the greatest works of Russian cinema, works that not only reflect but also helped to shape Russia's turbulent history during the twentieth century. Our
viewing will include a wide variety of cinematic genres, as well as Russia's most influential film directors, such as Sergei Eisenstein, Dziga Vertov, Andrei
Tarkovskii, and Nikita Mikhalkov. As part of our effort to understand Russian films in their own context, we will read ground-breaking texts on Russian
cinematic theory, critical responses to directors and their films, as well as historical examinations of the development of Russian film. Primary course readings
will be in Russian, with some secondary readings in English. Class sessions will be conducted entirely in Russian.
Format: lecture. Requirements: active class participation, regular short written assignments, regular class presentations, and a final research project.
Prerequisites: Russian 202 or the permission of the instructor. No enrollment limit (expected: 3-5).
CASSIDAY
RUSS 305 Dostoevsky: The Development of his Literature and Ideas (Same as Comparative Literature 305) (Not offered 2011-2012)
Fyodor Dostoevsky's literature is read just as much for its narrative complexity as for its posing of grand philosophical and theological questions. This course
will engage in close readings of Dostoevsky's short fiction and major novels. It will consider how Dostoevsky develops ideas, plots, and the psychology of both
characters and settings while contextualizing the works within the literary, political, and philosophical debates of the time. Primary readings will include "White
Nights," "The Double," Notes from the Underground, Crime and Punishment, and The Brothers Karamazov. Secondary readings may include representative
essays by social critics, formalists, and semioticians. All readings will be in English.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: ability to complete lengthy reading assignments, active participation in class discussion, one in-class presentation,
three response papers, and a final term paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: none (expected: 20). Open to first-year students.
SECKLER
RUSS 306 Tolstoy and His Age (Same as Comparative Literature 306) (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course will examine the life and works of the great Russian writer Lev Tolstoy in the context of Western intellectual history. Readings will include Tols-
toy's two major novels, War and Peace and Anna Karenina, as well as a number of shorter works, such as The Cossacks and The Death of Ivan Ilych. We will
also examine some of Tolstoy's aesthetic and didactic works. All readings will be in English.
Format: lecture/discussion. Requirements: timely completion of all reading assignments, active class participation, three short papers, an oral presentation, and a
final research project. No prerequisites. No enrollment limit (expected: 20).
VAN DE STADT
RUSS 309(F) New Soviet Man and His Discontents (Same as Comparative Literature 311 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 309)
(D)
The Soviet and post-Soviet man--as a cultural construction--provides a rich figure for analysis. He was engineered by Soviet propaganda to be exceedingly
manly in his role as creator and defender of the Soviet Union and held positions of social prominence. However, with elevated public stature comes extreme
danger in oppressive totalitarian regimes, resulting in--as this class will suggest as an hypothesis--infantilized status, traumatic fear, and psychological and
physical victimization. In the jargon of the time, Soviet men are Stalin's sons, and the only father is Stalin himself. Thus, the course will ask: What are the
dominant tropes of masculinity in Soviet culture? How does the notion of a patriarchy need to be rethought in this context? Was there, as some have suggested, a
"masculine crisis" or is such rhetoric a right-wing attempt to reassert essentialist gender stereotypes?
This multi-media course introduces students to masculinity studies via theoretical works and representative films, literature, and to a lesser extent art and music in
a historical and cultural perspective in order to scrutinize the principles governing Soviet gender construction.
Format: seminar. Requirements: Students will complete significant reading and viewing assignments, engage in active discussion, write three short papers, and
one research-based term paper. No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). Preference given to students who have studied Russian culture and/or
gender studies topics.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR SECKLER
RUSS 402(S) Senior Seminar: Cinematic Adaptations
In the RussoSoviet context cinematic adaption has been, at times, a safe haven for directors, offering them readymade, politicallyapproved narratives; at other
times, the wellknown stories functioned as a smokescreen to hide critical "aesopian" language. The goal of this course is twofold. First, it seeks to further
students' Russian speaking, writing, listening, and reading skills. It will achieve this first goal via its second, which is to examine film adaptation as a specific
genre; to consider Russian cinematic theory on screen adaptation; and to have students test these theories by reading and viewing key primary texts that directors
have transferred to screen. Primary texts will include Bulgakov's "Heart of a Dog" and Botko's adaptation; both Pushkin's and Tolstoy's versions of "Prisoner of
the Caucasus" as well as Bodrov and Uchitel's films based on these texts; Shukshin's "Snowball Berry Red" and his film of the same name; and Koznitsev's
cinematic adaptation of Hamlet based on Pasternak's translation. This class is conducted enitrely in Russian.
Format: seminar. Requirements: regular active class participation, regular vocabulary and grammar quizzes, frequent short writing assignments, several formal
presentations, and a term paper.
Prerequisites: Russian 252 or permission of the instructor. No enrollment limit. (expected: 5-7). Preference given to Russian majors.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR SECKLER
RUSS 493(F)-W31-494(S) Senior Thesis
RUSS 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES (Div. II)
Chair, Professor DONALD deB. BEAVER
Advisory Committee: Professors: ALTSCHULER, D. BEAVER, DETHIER, KAPLAN, THOMAN. Associate Professor: MLADENOVIC.
Science and Technology Studies (SCST) is an interdisciplinary program concerned with science and technology and their relationship to society. In addition to
being concerned with the historical development and a philosophical understanding of the ideas and institutions of science and technology; Science and Technol-
ogy Studies also examines their ethical, economic, social, and political implications.
The role that science and technology have played in shaping modern industrial societies is generally acknowledged, but few members of those societies,
including scientists and engineers, possess any understanding of how that process has occurred or much knowledge of the complex technical and social interac-
tions that direct change in either science or society. The Science and Technology Studies Program is intended to help create a coherent course of study for students
interested in these questions by providing a broad range of perspectives. At present, courses are offered which examine the history or philosophy of science and
technology, the sociology and psychology of science, the economics of research and development and technological change, science and public policy, technolo-
gy assessment, technology and the environment, scientometrics, and ethical-value issues.
To complete the requirements of the program, students must complete six courses. The introductory course and senior seminar are required and three elective
courses are chosen from the list of designated electives. Students may choose to concentrate their electives in a single area such as technology, American studies,
philosophy, history of science, economics, environment, current science, or current technology, but are encouraged to take at least one elective in history, history
of science, or philosophy. The sixth course necessary to complete the program is one semester of laboratory or field science in addition to the College's three-
course science requirement. Other science courses of particular interest include Chemistry 110 and Biology 134.
The program is administered by a chair and an advisory committee of faculty who teach in the program. Students who wish to enroll normally register with the
chair by the fall of their junior year.
SCST 101(S) Science, Technology, and Human Values (Same as History of Science 101)
(See under HSCI 101 for full description.) D. BEAVER
275
SCST 309(S) Environmental Policy (Same as Environmental Studies 309, History of Science 309 and Political Science 301)
(See under ENVI 309 for full description.) LYNN
SCST 401(F) Senior Seminar: Critical Perspectives on Science and Technology
A research-oriented course designed to give students direct experience in evaluating and assessing scientific and technological issues. Students initially study
particular techniques and methodologies by employing a case study approach. They then apply these methods to a major research project. Students may choose
topics from fields such as biotechnology, computers, biomedical engineering, energy, and other resource development. Students will apply their background of
historical, philosophical, and technological perspectives in carrying out their study.
Format: seminar. Requirements: research paper or project.
Enrollment limit: 5. Satisfies one semester of the Division II requirement.
Hour: TBA D. BEAVER
Students can check with the department coordinator to see if other courses not listed here might count as
electives.
Elective Courses
ASTR/HSCI/LEAD 338 The Progress of Astronomy
ASTR/HSCI 336 Science, Pseudoscience, and the Two Cultures
BIOL/ENVI 134 The Tropics: Biology and Social Issues
CHEM 113 Chemistry and Crime: From Sherlock Holmes to Modern Forensic Science
ENVI 307/PSCI 317 Environmental Law
ENVI 402 Ethics and the Environment
HIST 374 American Medical History
HSCI 240/HIST 295 Technology and Science in American Culture
PHIL 209 Philosophy of Science
SOC 204 Health, Illness, and Biomedicine
SOC 368 Technology and Modern Society
Courses of Related Interest
ANSO 205 Ways of Knowing
ARTH/ENVI 201 American Landscape History
ARTH 257 Architecture 17001900
ENVI 302 Environmental Planning Workshop
GEOS/ENVI 103 Global Warming and Natural Disasters
HIST 165 Going Nuclear: American Culture in the Atomic Age
HIST 475 Modern Warfare and Military Leadership
HSCI 224/HIST294 Scientific Revolutions: 15431927
HSCI 320/HIST 293 History of Medicine
INTR 150 Dimensions in Public Health
PHYS 107 Newton, Einstein, and Beyond (Q)
SOCIOLOGY (Div. II)--see ANTHROPOLOGY AND SOCIOLOGY
STATISTICS(Div.III)--seeMATHEMATICS ANDSTATISTICS
WILLIAMS PROGRAM IN TEACHING
Director, SUSAN ENGEL
The program in teaching is designed to enable Williams Undergraduates to study the ideas, questions, and practices involved in good teaching at all levels. The
program seeks to promote and facilitate an exchange of ideas about teachers, learners and schools, within and beyond the Williams campus. The program offers a
range of opportunities including courses on education, intensive supervised student teaching, workshops, advising, lecture series, and ongoing peer groups for
those who teach. Students may participate in a variety of ways, ranging from taking one course to a sustained in-depth study of teaching and learning geared to
those who want to become teachers, or educational psychologists. We seek to connect students with one another, to bring in expert teachers to provide mentoring,
and to create links across the curriculum so that students can see the vital connections between what they study (French, Algebra or Biology for instance) and the
process of teaching those topics to elementary and high school students. The program is open to any student interested in education and offers opportunities for all
levels of interest, including those who want to find out about certification and graduate study.
The following provides a sample outline of the sequence of courses and experiences that an interested student might take
z
PSYC 101 Intro to Psych (required for further psychology courses);
z
PSYC 232 Developmental Psychology and/or
z
PSYC 242 Social Psychology;
z
PSYC 272 Psychology of Education;
z
PSYC 327 Optimizing Learning and Memory
z
PSYC 336 Adolescence;
z
PSYC 372 Advanced Seminar in Teaching and Learning
z
At least one Winter Study in an intensive teaching practicum. The major programs are in Berkshire County (under PSYC) or in New York City
(under SPEC), although other opportunities may be listed elsewhere in the Winter Study section of the course catalogue.
No specific major is required to participate in the program--although some lend themselves easily to certification, such as Mathematics, English, Biology,
American history, or French, almost all of our majors can provide the basis of teacher certification. Alternately, students can major in Psychology, take a con-
centration of courses in a different field, and then pursue that content area more intensively in graduate work.
Other courses of interest include:
LATS/AMST 332 Latinos and Education: The Politics of Schooling, Language, and Latino Studies
MATH 285 Teaching Mathematics
PHIL 242 Philosophy of Education: Why Are You Here?
PHIL 331 Contemporary Epistemology
PHIL/AMST 379 American Pragmatism
PSYC 331T Risk and Resilience in Early Development
PSYC 332 Cognitive Development
PSYC 341/WGST 339 Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination
PSYC 351 Childhood Peer Relations
THEATRE (Div. I)
Chair, Professor ROBERT BAKER-WHITE
Professors: BAKER-WHITE, EPPEL. Assistant Professors: SANGARE, HOLZAPFEL**, MORRIS. Lecturers: BROTHERS**, CATALANO.
Visiting Lecturer: ERICKSON. William Dwight Whitney Professor of Arts and Theatre: BUCKY***.
As a reflection of the theatre's historical relationship to literature and the arts, stage production is studied in the context of the literary and artistic movements
which have informed theatrical endeavor. The major in Theatre emphasizes the collaborative nature of the discipline by drawing upon courses offered by faculty
of the Language, Literature, Music, and Art Departments. Although students will be equipped to proceed to graduate and professional schools in theatre, the
major is primarily directed toward those interested in studying the theatre as an artistic phenomenon and as an interpretive tool. Because a deep understanding of
theatre requires training and experience with the synthesis on stage, the major includes curricular study of production and performance, as well as continued
participation in departmental stage production.
Williamstheatre, the production arm of the Department of Theatre, operates under the supervision of the departmental faculty. Major departmental productions
as well as laboratory and experimental productions of all kinds are mounted on the new stages of the '62 Center for Theatre and Dance. Participation in acting or
276
technical work is open to all members of the Williams College community. Students majoring in Theatre will be asked to consult regularly with departmental
advisors in devising the sequence of courses and production participation that will constitute their major.
MAJOR
The Major in Theatre consists of nine courses.
Six required courses are:
Theatre 104(F) Critical Approaches to Theatre and Performance
Theatre 103(S) Acting I
Theatre 201 Theatrical Staging and Design: The Collaborative Process
Theatre 244 Introduction to Theatre Technology (formerly THEA 102)
Theatre 248 The Modern Theatre: Plays and Performance
Theatre 406 Senior Seminar
Three elective courses must be taken from the department's other offerings. One elective must be a course within the department that culminates in departmen-
tal production. Substitutions of other Williams' courses, or of Study Abroad courses, will be made only with the consent of the department Chair. Students
should consult with the department Chair regularly in planning a balance of practice and scholarship in their elective choices.
Production requirement for the major: All majors in Theatre are required to participate in a minimum of four department productions in addition to the labora-
tory requirement for Theatre 244. Participation in at least two of the four must be in technical production and one of those two must be in stage manage-
ment. Assignment to productions is normally made in consultation with the department Chair.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN THEATRE
Candidates for Honors will apply for admission through the submission of a portfolio to the Department Chair by February of their junior year, as well as a
description of their proposed project. The portfolio will be comprised of four parts:
1. The first part will include a list of the courses students have taken relevant to their work towards the major. This list will include courses offered by the
Theatre Department, but may also include classes taken in other Departments. Students should also list and describe relevant independent studies and
production credits.
2. The second part of the portfolio will include a selection of materials developed for these courses and productions listed in Part 1. The selection should
include at least three papers or samples of other written work, and might also include design projects, director's notebooks, studio art projects, actor's
journals or other forms of documentation of the candidate's work. For students who have taken a semester away, it is particularly important that they
provide the Department with a detailed picture of their activities while studying off-campus. Course descriptions and syllabi should be submitted in
addition to a list of courses taken and activities performed.
3. The third part of the portfolio is an annotated bibliography of approximately twelve dramatic or critical texts the student has read, and that he or she feels
have had particular relevance in his or her Theatre education to date. Annotations should be based upon a particular angle of engagement with the text,
that reflects the area or areas that the student has chosen to emphasize in his or her theatrical training. For instance, one might choose to write from the
point of view of an actor, a designer, a director, a playwright, or a dramaturg. Generally annotations should be one or two paragraphs long.
4. The portfolio should conclude with a retrospective essay that reflects on the materials that are being submitted. Students should look for connections
between the various aspects of their work, state any theoretical positions that they have come to embrace, assess their strengths and weaknesses, and
discuss their educational goals for their work with the Department during their Senior year.
The portfolio will be examined alongside the student's record and his or her project description; a determination will then be made as to admission into the
Honors program. Students intending to apply for Honors should meet with the Department Chair or designated Honors Coordinator by the end of the fall semester
of their junior year. Once a student is admitted to the Honors program, the department Chair will assign an Honors Project Advisor, who will work with the
student to specify a timeline and work program for the completion of the Honors Project. At a minimum, this will entail enrollment in Theatre 493 or 494, plus
W32, plus one other course offered either within the department or elsewhere that the candidate and thesis advisor designate as contributing specifically to the
overall goals of the honors work. This honors elective may not fulfill any other portion of the Theatre Major, or any other major the student may be pursuing. All
honors candidates will present their completed projects to the Department Honors Committee for evaluation.
STUDY ABROAD
The Theatre Department attempts to work individually with majors and prospective majors who desire to study abroad. In general, with careful planning it is
usually quite easy for students to complete the major in Theatre if they study abroad for one semester of their junior year. For those wishing to study abroad for
more than one semester of junior year, a more complicated situation may arise, but one that can often be successfully managed through close consultation with the
department chair. Students are encouraged to consult with the chair early in their Williams careers if they anticipate a combination of Theatre major and study
abroad.
THEA 103(F,S) Acting I
This course deals with the development of intellectual and emotional resources required for the actor and will explore an acting technique based on the work of
Russian actor and director Constantin Stanislavsky. Students will examine the power of public presence through theory and practice while expanding their talents,
sensitivity, and imagination.
Format: studio. Evaluation will be based on committed participation in class, preparation and performance of assigned material, and some modest written assign-
ments.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 18 (expected:18). Preference given to first-year students or sophomores considering the Theatre major.
This course is a prerequisite for Theatre 204.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 MR, 1:10-3:50 TF, 1:10-3:50 TF First Semester: SANGARE, BUCKY
1:10-3:50 MR Second Semester: SANGARE
THEA 104(S) Critical Approaches to Theatre and Performance (Same as Comparative Literature 104) (D)
This introductory critical survey course will explore a variety of theatre and performance traditions from around the globe, from antiquity to the present day.
Through close analysis of select texts and performance practices, the course will consider what role theatre plays in the establishment and growth of culture,
politics, and aesthetics. Topics may include: Ancient Greek theatre, Classical Indian performance, Renaissance English theatre, Japanese Noh and Kabuki, popu-
lar American traditions, modern European theatre, and postmodern performance. Films and other media will be utilized when relevant. This course meets the
criteria of the Exploring Diversity Initiative as it engages in a crosscultural investigation of performance and explores how theatre is deeply embedded in power
relations.
Format: lecture/seminar. Requirements: two 5- to 7-page papers, as well as a 10 page revised final paper; short quizzes; inclass participation, writing and discus-
sion; all students enrolled in the course are required to attend the departmental theatre production.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 18 (expected: 14). This course is a requirement for and is suggested as an introduction to the major in Theatre.
Hour: 9:55-11:20 TR HOLZAPFEL
THEA 201(S) Theatrical Staging and Design: Process of Collaboration (Same as ArtS 201)
This course examines the designer's and director's creative process and collaborative roles in the creation of theater. Over a series of practical projects in staging
and mise-en-scene, as well as scenic, costume, and lighting design we will try different techniques for eliciting an initial creative response to a text, developing
that response into a point-of-view, and solving the practical needs of the production. Particular emphases will be placed on how directors and designers work
together to imagine the fictional world(s) of theatrical productions, how design elements synthesize with one another, with the work of the actors and director, and
with the larger intellectual, emotional, and physical context of the work as a whole. The course will be team-taught with the dual perspectives of directing and
design prompting students to adopt various creative roles throughout the series of assigned projects. Basic presentation skills and technique, as well as methodolo-
gies for critical feedback, will be taught as crucial elements of staging and design development.
Format: studio. Requirements: evaluation will be based upon committed class participation and thoughtful, timely completion of all assignments and projects.
Prerequisites: none. Enrollment limit: 14 (expected: 12). Preference given to Theatre majors.
Material and Lab Fees: materials and copying $125 to be added to the students' term bill.
This course is a prerequisite for all upper-level design and directing courses; this course does not count toward the Art major.
Hour: 11:00-12:50 MW Lab: 1:10-3:50 W BAKER-WHITE and MORRIS
THEA 204(S) Acting II
Students will continue to develop technical skills, and the emotional and intellectual resources, required for the actor. The focus will be on the issues of character-
ization, textual understanding and emotional depth. The means of study and experimentation will be intense scene work requiring thorough preparation and
beneficial collaboration. Improvisation and other exercises will be used to complement the textual work. The dramatic texts providing scenes for class will be
from the early realist works onward.
277
Although there will be some modest written assignments, evaluation in the course will principally reflect the degree of committed participation in the preparation
and performance of production exercises.
Format: studio. Prerequisite: Theatre 103 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 14 (expected: 10). Preference to students intending to major in
Theatre.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 TF EPPEL
THEA 205 The Culture of Carnival (Same as Comparative Literature 208) (Not offered 2011-2012)
Carnival is a regenerative festival as well as a transgressive one. It is a time for upheavals and recreating for one day, a new world order. Men dress as women,
women dress as men, the poor become kings; drink and sex and outrageous behavior is sanctioned. We will look at festivals in such places as New Orleans,
Venice, and Rio. Central to this course are the cultural and religious lives of these societies, and how these festivals exist politically in a modern world as theatre
and adult play. A variety of sources will be used, such as newspaper accounts, films, photography, personal memoirs and essays on the subject.
Students will be evaluated on regular active class participation, one oral presentation, one 5-page essay and one 15-page research paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 18). Preference will be given to sophomores and first-year students.
BROTHERS
THEA 214 Playwriting (Same as English 214) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
A studio course designed for those interested in writing and creating works for the theatre. The course will include a study of playwriting in various styles and
genres, a series of set exercises involving structure and the use of dialogue, as well as individual projects. We will read and we will write, beginning with small
exercises and working toward a longer final project. Students will be expected to share in each other's work on a weekly basis, and to collaborate with students
enrolled in Directing. At the end of the term, we will share our collaborative work with the community as part of a One-Act Playwriting Festival.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on attendance, completion of class assignments, and class participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15). Preference given to Theatre and English majors.
HOLZAPFEL
THEA 228(F) Theatrical Self-Production: The Cartographic Imagination
In today's theater world, selfproduction can be a vital, engaging, and necessary method of creating and producing theatrical works. This course examines theatri-
cal selfproduction and the ways in which artists exploit this model in pursuit of their individual and collective ambitions. Through an examination of innovative,
nontraditional models for performance creation, this class will form its own unique structure for developing and producing a new theatrical performance for
public presentation. Operating within carefully chosen constraints, students will share equally the administrative, artistic, and production roles in the public pre-
sentation of their work on stage. Thus, a major emphasis of the course will be on experiential education, which provides an invaluable opportunity to encounter
firsthand the highly complex relationship between artistry and production. To best advise and mentor students in all levels of design, direction and performance,
the course will include additional guest classes with practitioners from the profession, as well as the Department of Theater who can help to provide the full range
of skills necessary for students to realize their goals. Group presentations of the creative development process will provide opportunities for guidance, critique,
and sustained mentorship on the path to a final performance. This year, 228 will investigate the performance possibilities contained in the idea of The Map, and in
the act of mapping space and spatial relationships.
Format: seminar. Evaluation: Students will contribute to the creation of a final performance piece by the group as a whole. Grading will be based on committed
class participation, contribution to the collective work of the class, group and individual presentations, and self-evaluation.
No prerequisites; students from a broad range of curricular disciplines are welcome, but some prior experience in theatre or theatre studies in preferable. Enroll-
ment limited: 16 (expected: 12). Upon overenrollment, the instructors will seek to balance the course by level of prior theatrical experience.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 MR EPPEL and MORRIS
THEA 229(S) Modern Drama (Same as Comparative Literature 202 and English 202)
(See under ENGL 202 for full description.) PETHICA
THEA 233 Physical Theatre Japan (Same as Japanese 223) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under JAPN 223 for full description.)
THEA 236 Political Theatre Making (Not offered 2011-2012)
Placing twentieth-century theatricality in the context of its historical roots in Western theatre, this course will examine a broad range of types of protest move-
ments. From the biting observations of the British class system by playwrights such as Oscar Wilde, Noel Coward, and John Osborne, to mid-century American
political writers such as Clifford Odets and Edward Albee, and Italy's Dario Fo, to the relentless satire of contemporary South African performers such as Pieter
Dirk-Uys, we will investigate dramatic writing and performance style as aspects of social and political resistance. Other groups studied may include the protest
theatre of Johannesburg's Market Theatre, Luiz Valdez's Teatro Campesino, and a younger generation of post-apartheid experimentation in multi-ethnic South
African theatre.
Format: seminar. Requirements: semester-length research project, including a substantial paper, based on the hypothetical creation of a theatre company within
specific historical, social, and political contexts.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15). First-year students must get permission of instructor.
EPPEL
THEA 241(F) Performing Race: From Shakespeare to Spike Lee (Same as Africana Studies 241 and Comparative Literature 241) (D)
Since theatre is both a visual and a verbal medium, the goal is to explore, through detailed close analysis, visual and verbal representations of race--with repre-
sentation being understood to mean cultural construction and with race being defined to include whiteness as a racial category. The comprehensive scope is
deliberately cross-historical to create a longer historical timeline that expands the range for comparative perspectives in the study of race. The Renaissance start-
ing point calls attention to the complex operations of blackface performance in which black roles in Shakespeare and Jonson are played by white actors who are
blacked up. We evaluate how this mode of white actors literally re-presenting black characters affects the range of meaning for images of blackness. Asymmetries
of power, and the potential for disrupting differential power, are considered in relations between blacks and whites not only at the level of characters but also at the
level of authorship. We examine what happens when a black writer gains control of the means of representation, with critical revisions of Othello as a case in
point. Contemporary works include plays by Djanet Sears, Lorraine Hansberry, James Baldwin, Anna Deavere Smith, August Wilson, David Mamet, Lynn
Nottage, and David Henry Hwang, as well as Spike Lee's film Bamboozled. This is an Exploring Diversity Initiative (EDI) course because, in the context of racial
difference, we will confront forthrightly the negative realities and critically assess the possibilities for productive change and hope in cross-racial interactions.
Format: discussion. Evaluation based on active participation in class discussion, short papers, final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 12). Preference given to Theatre majors.
Hour: 8:30-9:45 TR P. ERICKSON
THEA 243T Strategies of Political Theatre (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
"Change the world; it needs it," is the German playwright Bertolt Brecht's famous clarion cry. In this tutorial, we will take a critical look at the strategies
employed in the twentieth century by several dramatists who have attempted to heed Brecht's exhortation. After a brief glance at Aristophanes and Shakespeare
to correct any possible mistaken impression that political theatre is a twentieth-century invention, the class will proceed, of course, to the plays and essays of
Brecht himself (and his predecessor Erwin Piscator). Students will read Brecht's Mother Courage on war; The Measures Taken on political morality; Peter
Weiss' Marat/ Sade on revolution and The Investigation on the Holocaust; Marc Blitzstein's The Cradle Will Rock on corruption and corporate greed; Arthur
Miller's The Crucible on modern "witchhunts;" Harold Pinter's The Birthday Party, Mountain Language, The New World Order, and One for the Road on
torture; Athol Fugard's Statements After an Arrest Under the Immorality Act on Apartheid; Barbara Garson's MacBird on Vietnam; Caryl Churchill's Cloud
Nine on gender and sexuality; and Anna Deavere Smith's Twilight: Los Angeles, 1992 on race in America. With these plays and associated essays, the tutorial
will focus on a critical appraisal of the works in their dramatic design, as artful political commentary, and as calls to political action.
Format: tutorial. Requirements: In the first two weeks of the tutorial the class will meet together as a group to establish its bearings. Thereafter students will meet
in pairs once a week. Each student will write a 4- to 6-page paper every other week, and be prepared to mount a detailed comment/response in the alternate
weeks. The focus will be both on interpretative skills in reading dramatic texts, and on the ability to construct critical arguments and respond to them. A final
project that can take the form of a performance piece, a playtext, or a paper on a major American performance ensemble devoted to political drama is required.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected 10). Open to sophomores and upperclassmen.
BUCKY
278
THEA 244(F) Introduction to Theatre Technology
As an overview of performance spaces, production technologies and methods, the course will examine how and where plays are performed, produced, and
designed. Students will attend lectures, participate in labs in drafting and technical production, and will be required to participate on the production crew of one or
more departmental productions.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 10).
Hour: 9:55-11:10 TR Lab: 1:10-3:50 W CATALANO
THEA 245 (Re)presenting Sex: Shakespeare on Page and Stage (Same as EXPR 245 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 245)
(Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under EXPR 245 for full description.) BAKER-WHITE, ERICKSON
THEA 248(S) The Modern Theatre: Plays and Performance (Same as English 234 and Comparative Literature 248)
A survey of major trends in playwriting and performance practice from the late nineteenth century to the end of the twentieth. We will read major playwrights
from a variety of national traditions, always considering their works in the context of evolutionary and revolutionary transformations of theatre practice. Artists
and movements may include Realism and Naturalism (Stanislavsky, Antoine, Ibsen, Strindberg, Chekhov, Shaw), the Epic Theatre (Brecht, Piscator), The
Theatre of Cruelty (Artaud), the "Absurd," (Beckett, Genet, Pinter) the collectivist avant-garde (Grotowski, Living Theatre, Open Theatre), and more recent
playwriting.
Lecture/discussion format will focus on dialectical interplay between dramatic writing and trends in acting, directing, design, theatre architecture and the actor/au-
dience relationship. Requirements: active participation in class discussion, midterm exam, one major paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 18 (expected:14). If overenrolled, preference given to Theatre majors.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR EPPEL
THEA 250(S) Gender, Sexuality and the Modern Stage (Same as English 253 and Women and Gender Studies 250) (W) (D)
This seminar explores aspects of gender identity, sexuality, performativity, and representations of the body in modern and contemporary theatre. While our focus
will be on the still understudied role of women in theatre, we will seek to define gender and sexual identity as unstable categories that transcend binary divisions.
Close analysis of texts by dramatists such as Sophie Treadwell, Caryl Churchill, Ntozake Shange, Tim Miller, Naomi Iizuka, SuzanLori Parks, Sarah Kane,
Sarah Ruhl, and others, will occur alongside discussion of performative bodies in modern and contemporary media, from Karen Finley to Lady Gaga. Our
approach to the material will be enriched by readings of select work by contemporary theorists such as Judith Butler, bell hooks, Cherrie Moraga, Donna Har-
away, and others. This course meets the criteria of the Exploring Diversity Initiative as it draws focus towards the diversity of race, class and ethnicity represented
by the subjects of our study as well as towards the political power of theatre and performance.
Format: seminar. Requirements: three 8- to 10-page papers and a final performance project; inclass participation. Emphasis will be placed on developing skills in
writing, reading, interpretation, critical argumentation, and oral response.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15). Preference if over-enrolled: Majors in Theatre, English or Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies.
Hour: 11:20-12:35 TR HOLZAPFEL
THEA 262 Performing Greece and Rome (Same as Classics 262 and Comparative Literature 270) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under CLAS 262 for full description.) HOPPIN and BUCKY
THEA 284(F) Writing for Film, Video, and Performance (Same as ArtS 284) (W)
(See under ARTS 284 for full description.) L. JOHNSON
THEA 302 Scenic Design (Same as ArtS 221) (Not offered 2011-2012)
This course focuses on the artistic, intellectual, and practical roles of a set designer in the development of works of theatre. Grounded in textual analysis and
research, a range of techniques will be explored and utilized to create theoretical stage designs for several plays, musicals and/or operas over the course of the
semester. Emphasis will be on 3-dimensional modeling as the primary means of process and presentation, but sketching, drafting, and digital tools will also be
important factors in course work. Unique, diverse, and strong points of view will be encouraged. Lab fee: $125.
Format: studio. Evaluation will be based upon committed class participation and thoughtful, timely completion of all assignments and projects.
Prerequisites: Theatre 201 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 8). If overenrolled, preference to Theatre majors.
This course does not count toward the Art major.
MORRIS
THEA 303 Stage Lighting (Not offered 2011-2012)
A study of the art and techniques of stage lighting. This class will provide instruction in the basic physics of light and color; the use of angle, intensity, color,
texture and movement of light as compositional tools; various kinds of stage lighting instruments and their uses; conceptual development of a lighting design;
translation of concept into light plot and channel hookup; focusing the plot in the theater; and writing cues.
Texts for the course will be the texts and scores of the plays, operas and other dramatic works that we will examine from the lighting designer's perspective,
supplemented with readings that address the technical aspects of stage lighting. The class format will be a combination of lecture/discussion sessions and
practical labs.
Every effort will be made to provide students with lighting design opportunities on departmental productions as a part of their coursework, in accordance with
students' abilities and interests and in consultation with directors and other faculty. Students are encouraged to seek out lighting design opportunities outside the
department as well, and may incorporate these projects into their coursework.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, successful completion of weekly projects, thorough technical understanding ofa basic stage lighting system, and
performance on a final exam.
Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 8).
THEA 305(S) Costume Design (Same as ArtS 200)
This course is both an introductory and an intensive study of the art of costume design. The course focuses on the designer's process: script analysis, collaboration,
research, color theory, basic design principles, rendering techniques, fabric research, organizational skills and presentation of designs. Evaluation will be based on
multiple design assignments including a detailed final design project, costume labs, image and research files, costume sketchbook, short papers, committed
participation, and attendance. Students are required to attend at least one rehearsal and one department theatre performance during the semester. Students will also
be expected to partake in intelligent critiques of fellow classmates' design work.
Prerequisite: successful completion of any 200-level course in any of the fine or performing arts or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 8).
Hour: 1:10-3:50 TF BROTHERS
THEA 306(S) Acting III: Variable Topics Acting Studio: Physical Theatre
This course for advanced students of acting will focus on particular aspects of performance as determined by the instructor in each semester in which the course is
taught. Topics may include acting in verse drama, movement for the actor, voice, performing Shakespeare, aspects of physical theatre, non-realist acting, etc. The
course will be taught by members of the Theatre faculty and/or Guest Artists, and may be repeated by students as instructors and topics change. Texts and reading
assignments will vary depending on each semester's focus.
This semester Theatre 306 will focus on processes of Physical Theatre. The class is open to students interested in developing their ability in communication
through the art of body language. Assigned research, analysis, discussions, and improvised exercises on stage will give us the opportunity to expand our under-
standing of physical vocabulary and will help us to express our intentions by evocative behavior. Based on various theatre techniques, including Grotoski's and
Suzuki's, this course will hone artistic skills for performance and improve students' confidence in their interactions with other people.
Format: studio. Evaluation will be based on committed participation in class, and preparation and performance of assigned material.
Prerequisite: permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 14 (expected: 10).
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF SANGARE
THEA 307(F) Stage Direction
An introduction to the resources available to the Stage Director for translating interpretive concepts into stageworthy physical realization. Kinetic and visual
directorial controls, as well as textual implications and elements of dramatic structure, and strategies of working with actors and other collaborators will be studied
in detail. Most assignments will involve handson directing projects presented in class for collective critique.
279
Format: studio. Although there will be some written assignments, including the assembly of directing production books and critiques of several productions,
evaluation in the course will be based principally on committed participation in the preparation and performance of production exercises.
Prerequisites: Theatre 103 and Theatre 201 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 8). Preference given to those who have also taken Theatre
204.
Hour: 11:00-12:15 MWF BAKER-WHITE
THEA 308 Directing Workshop (Not offered 2011-2012)
This is a studio workshop dealing with the preparation, performance, and evaluation of brief dramatic exercises and one-act plays. The emphasis will be on the
director's confrontation with the text, the actors, and the directorial controls chosen in support of interpretative concept.
Prerequisites: Theatre 201, 204, 307 or permission of the instructor.
THEA 317(S) Black Migrations: African American Performance at Home and Abroad (Same as Africana Studies 317, Comparative
Literature 319, Dance 317 and English 317)
(See under AFR 317 for full description.) BRAGGS
THEA 338 Facing the Music (Not offered 2011-2012)
Music has accompanied theatrical performance since the birth of drama. Over time music on stage has served many dramatic functions: sometimes it merely
serves to embellish the emotive temperature but, more consequentially, music can also constitute the major source of dramatic articulation. In this course we
will study the specific dramatic function of music in such works as Mozart's Cosi Fan Tutte, Wagner's Die Meistersinger, Verdi's Otello, Brecht's Mahagonny
and The Measures Taken, (music by Weill and Eisler), Sondheim's Company and Sweeney Todd, and Glass and Wilson's postmodern opera Einstein on the
Beach. The course will also study the variety of working relationships that musicians have enjoyed with their collaborators in theatrical production.
Format: discussion/seminar. Requirements: Energetic and committed participation is required. Written exercises will include a midterm report on the role of
music in a live performance, and a final paper on a dramatic work to be chosen in consultation with the instructor.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 10).
BUCKY
THEA 339 Introduction to Dramaturgy: The Art of Classical Adaptation (Not offered 2011-2012)
The dramaturg is an important collaborator in the theatrical production process, playing the multi-faceted role of historian, cultural critic, audience educator, and
overall supporter of the production team. Working closely with the director, the dramaturg helps to shape a production and facilitate the demanding process of
creating a world on stage. This course will introduce students to the fundamentals of production dramaturgy, applying our study of the practice to the topic of
classical adaptation and translation. Sophocles' Antigone and Euripides' Hippolytus will serve as two of our foundational texts, from which we'll consider
adaptations by Racine, Anouilh, Brecht, Gambaro, and LeCompte. We'll also view how modern directors have interpreted the classics through unique produc-
tions, such as Breuer's The Gospel at Colonus, Brook's Mahabharata, Mnouchkine's Les Atrides, and Ninagawa's Medea.
Format: seminar. Requirements/Method of evaluation: Assignments will be project-based and will range from making image boards to writing program notes.
As a final assignment, students will research and write their own mini-adaptations of classical works and present their material to one another through informal,
staged readings.
Prerequisites: This course will serve as the Junior Seminar for majors in the Department of Theatre. Enrollment for non-majors is possible with permission of
instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference if over-enrolled: Required for majors and preference of instructor for non-majors
HOLZAPFEL
THEA 342 Solo Performance (Not offered 2011-2012)
This is an acting course in which students will study the art and skill of monologue. We will look at the concepts of soliloquy and monologue and "one-person
performance", both from the points of view of content, and context--that is the relationship between the performer and the work, and between the performer
and the audience. The course will culminate in a performance during the Theatre Department's annual Dialogue One Festival. Students will identify an histori-
cal figure on which to base their final monologues, and the work will entail intensive study of that person.
Prerequisite: Theatre 103 or permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected: 10). Preference given to Theatre majors
EPPEL
THEA 345 Contemporary Drama and Performance (Same as English 349 and Comparative Literature 355) (Not offered 2011-2012)
As Gertrude Stein once remarked, "The hardest thing is to know one's present moment." What is going on it today's theatre? What are the hot topics? Who are
the writers and directors of our recent past and present moment? This survey course will consider both experimental and mainstream drama and performance
from the past twenty years, focusing on topics such as: auteur-directors, new realism, identity theatre, environmental theatre, performance art, cyber-plays, and
the "virtuosic theatre" of the new century. Artists to be considered may include: The Wooster Group, Richard Foreman, Robert Wilson, Edward Albee, Sam
Shepard, David Mamet, Rachel Rosenthal, Caryl Churchill, Mac Wellman, Tony Kushner, David Henry-Hwang, Suzan-Lori Parks, Sarah Kane, Richard
Maxwell, Christoph Marthaler, Naomi Iizuka, Rinne Groff, Zakiyyeh Alexander, and others.
Format: seminar. Evaluation will be based on written and dramaturgical-based assignments as well as in-class discussions
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15 (expected: 15). If overenrolled, preference given to Theatre majors.
HOLZAPFEL
THEA 346 To Be Or Not To Be: Theatrical Decision-making (Not offered 2011-2012)
In this advanced acting course, students will examine a wide range of motivations, decisions, mistakes, and consequences that dramatic characters encounter.
Through discussions and analysis of selected play, students will find key moments that define tragedy, and will explore the ways in which characters change
their behavior to resolve conflict. How do characters respond to problems? Could they make better choices? What can we change about our own decision-mak-
ing? How do we protect ourselves from mistakes? Fundamental dilemmas will be examined through theory and improvisation. The results of our exploration
will be presented in a final performance. This theatrical experience will prepare students for future challenges on the stage of life.
Format: studio. Requirements: evaluation will be based on committed participation in class, and preparation and performance of assigned material.
Prerequisites: Theatre 204 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 10 (expected:10). Preference given to Theatre majors.
SANGARE
THEA 397(F), 398(S) Independent Study
THEA 406(F) Senior Seminar: Twentieth Century Struggle Theatre (Same as Comparative Studies 406)
This seminar course is required of all senior Theatre majors. The course is a revolving topics seminar. The subject matter and reading list for each iteration of the
course will be determined by the instructor, but will in each instance focus on a current or historical question of theatre theory and practice. It is understood that the
subjects addressed in the course will be broad enough to engage the varied interests of each senior class. The specific requirements for the class may vary, but in
all cases students will be required to present original research and analysis in a public seminar presentation at the end of the semester.
The seminar will explore the nature of the impact that theatre exerts on communities in general, and on societies existing under specific circumscribed sociopoliti-
cal systems. The seminar will investigate the power of theatre to influence, enlighten and transform its audiences within a commonly lived political system. In
many societies in the 20th and 21st centuries, the theatre has been a space where, within that famed "two hour traffic of our stage", struggle has been a major
theme, and opposition can, somehow, be voiced. The theatre is a place of parable and of storytelling, a place where comedy and satire as well as tragedy find
within their audiences a recognition and an identification. Put this way, theatre can be and has been a powerful, sometimes even dangerous tool.
The Seminar will look at "Struggle Theatre" in the 20th Century. Anti-apartheid South African protest theatre of the 1950's though the 1980's will be highlighted
next to theatre movements in Eastern Europe during the Cold War; the United States during the Depression, and the Viet Nam war years; Brazil, Chile, Argentina
and other South American countries during their periods of military dictatorships. Readings will include theorists from literary studies, anthropology, cultural
studies, and related fields, as well as primary texts from drama and other arts.
Format: seminar. Requirements: project work, and presentation of original research and analysis in a public setting at the end of the semester.
No prerequisites; limited to senior Theatre majors. Enrollment limit: 11 (expected: 11).
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF EPPEL
THEA 493(F), 494(S) Senior Honors Thesis
280
THEA W31 Senior Project
THEA W32 Senior Honors Thesis
(See description of Degree with Honors.)
Of interest to advanced students:
THE NATIONAL THEATRE INSTITUTE
The Department of Theatre is affiliated with the National Theatre Institute, which offers additional theatre study through its resident semester program. The
Institute is fully accredited by Connecticut College and is a member of the Twelve-College Exchange. Limited numbers of Williams students can therefore be
selected to take a full semester of intensive theatre study at the NTI, located at the Eugene O'Neill Memorial Theatre Centre in Waterford, Connecticut. During
the semester, students from participating colleges live and work as members of a theatre company gaining experience with professional theatre artists in a work-
shop environment. Early application is essential.
WOMEN'S, GENDER and SEXUALITY STUDIES (Div. II)
Chair, Professor KATHRYN KENT
Advisory Committee: Professors: BUELL, DRUXES, C. JOHNSON. Associate Professors: LONG, MARTIN, SCHMIDT** . Visiting Associate
Professors: HONDERICH. Assistant Professors: DUBOW, HOLZAPFEL**. Librarian: SHRIVER. Queer Life Coordinator: ADKINS. Health
Educator: DONNA DENELLI-HESS.
Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies can be defined as the study of how gender is constructed, how it is inflected by differences of race, ethnicity, sexuality,
class, and so on, how gender affects the experiences and situations of men and women, and how assumptions about gender influence the construction of knowl-
edge and experience. Scholarship in Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies has brought neglected material into established fields and raised important method-
ological questions that cross disciplinary boundaries and challenge established intellectual frameworks. The program in Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies
thus includes courses from a wide variety of disciplines that focus in a coherent way on gender issues, and/or sexuality issues, as well as core courses that acquaint
students with the interdisciplinarity of the field.
THE MAJOR
The Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies major encourages exposure to the interdisciplinary character of feminist and sexuality-focused scholarship. In
addition, majors are required to gain some knowledge of methods within a field or discipline (3 courses in one of the categories listed below), to appreciate the
importance of diversity (racial, sexual, class, ethnic, national, etc.) in scholarship on gender and sexuality, to gain exposure to feminist and/or queer theory, and to
pursue work at an advanced level (3 courses at the 300-level).
In order to ensure that students reflect about the paths that they choose through the major, each major will be assigned to an advisor in the spring of the
sophomore year. With the advisor, the student will establish a revisable course of study for the following two years. Students interested in declaring a major should
contact the chair of the Program (Kent, x2549).
Required Courses
The major consists of at least 9 courses. The following are required:
WGSS 101 Introduction to Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies
WGSS 402 Junior/Senior Seminar in Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies (The seminar explores topics in Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies, and
varies from year to year. Majors may take more than one seminar, space permitting.)
Students can check with the department coordinator to see if other courses not listed here might count as
electives.
Distribution Requirements
1. One of the following feminist theory courses:
ANTH/REL/WGSS 272 Sex in Society: The Cultural Construction of Reproduction
ENGL/WGSS 341 American Genders, American Sexualities
ENGL/WGSS 371 Feminist Theory and the Representation of Women in Film
HIST/WGSS 356 Race, Gender, and Sexuality in U.S. History
HIST/WGSS 457 Gender, Law, and Politics in U.S. History
PHIL/WGSS 271T Woman as "Other"
PHIL/WGSS 327T Foucault
PSCI/WGSS 336 Sex, Gender, and Political Theory
REL 306/WGSS 307 Feminist Approaches to Religion
WGSS/PHIL 225 Classics in Western Feminist Thought
WGST 310 Womanist/Black Feminist Thought
WGSS 355 Feeling Queer: Theories of Emotion and Affect in Literary and Cultural Studies
Or students may petition to have a course not on the list considered.
2. Racial, Sexual, and Cultural Diversity
Majors must take at least one of the following:
ECON/WGSS 211 Gender in the Global Economy
ENGL/WGSS 341 American Genders, American Sexualities
ENGL/WGSS 342 Representing Sexualities: U.S. Traditions
ENGL/COMP/AMST/WGSS 355 Feeling Queer: Theories of Emotion and Affect in Literary and Cultural Studies
HIST/ WGSS 147 Women and Men in Twentieth-Century Latin America
HIST/AFR/WGSS 308 Gender and Society in Modern Africa
HIST/ASST/WGSS 319 Gender and the Family in Chinese History
HIST/WGSS 356 Race, Gender, and Sexuality in U.S. History
HIST/WGSS 378 The History of Sexuality in America
HIST/AFR/WGSS 379 Black Women in the United States
HIST/LATS 382 Latina/o Politics
HIST/WGSS 383 History of Whiteness in the United States
INTR/AFR/WGSS 309T Black Gender Theory: Intimacy, Memory and Violence
INTR 326/AFR 326/PSCI 306/WGSS 326 Black Women in National Politics, 1964-Present
LATS/HIST/WGSS 386 Latinas in the Global Economy: Work, Migration, and Households
REL/ANTH/WGSS 256 Engendering Buddhism: How Women and Men Shape and Are Shaped by Buddhism
WGSS/COMP 200 Nordic Lights: Literacy and Cultural Diversity in Modern Scandanavia
WGSS 202 Introduction to Sexuality Studies
WGSS/AFR/INTR 221T(S) Racial-Sexual Violence
WGSS 246 India's Identities: Religion, Caste and Gender
WGSS 239 Body, Politics, Gender and Religioun in South Asia
WGST 310 Womanist/Black Feminist Thought
WGSS 313 Gender, Racem Beauty, and Power in the Age of Transnational Media
WGSS 469 Race, Class, and Gender in American Immigration History
Or students may petition to have a course not on the list considered.
3. Thematic Cluster
At least three of the seven electives, with at least one at the 300-level, should be identified by majors as comprising a thematic group. This requirement
aims to have majors create some focus and depth within their interdisciplinary study by forming a cluster sharing common approaches, themes, or
issues.
a. Literary or artistic expression
281
b. Historical perspectives
c. Forms of political and social organization
d. Theorizing gender across cultural differences and/or disciplines
e. Queer Studies
f. Ethnicity and Race
4. Interdisciplinary electives must be taken in at least three departments/programs and at least two divisions.
5. Three of the seven electives must be at the 300 level.
THE DEGREE WITH HONORS IN Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies
Honors in Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies may be granted to majors after an approved candidate completes an honors project, delivers a public
presentation of the work, and is awarded honors by the Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies Committee.
The honors project may be fall semester (plus winter study) or a year-long project. It may consist of a conventional research thesis of 40-70 pages or of other
modes of presentation (e.g., art, music, poetry, theater, fiction). Proposals for non-thesis projects should include evidence of experience and competence in the
chosen mode.
A student may become a candidate for honors in Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies after the following criteria are met:
1). in April of the junior year, submission and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies Committee approval of a 4- to 6-page project proposal, in which the
ideas, aim, general methodology, and preliminary bibliography for the project are outlined and a faculty advisor is named; prior to submission of this
proposal, students must consult with a reference librarian.
2). at the end of the junior year, cumulative grade point average of 3.5 from courses taken in the major;
3). in the first week of classes of the senior year, submission and approval by the faculty advisor and second reader of a 5- to 10-page "Plan of Action" (an
overview of what has already been completed and a schedule of what needs to be accomplished to finish the project). Where appropriate, students pursuing
honors will continue to consult with the second reader over the course of the semester(s).
All honors work, including the public presentation, will be evaluated by the Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies Committee. It will decide on the awarding
of honors; the advisor will award the grade(s)
STUDY ABROAD
The Williams College Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies Program encourages potential majors to study abroad in order to enhance their education and
gain international perspectives on gender and women's issues and feminism. There are many excellent study abroad opportunities offering students a variety of
possible experiences: among them cultural immersion, field work, intensive language learning, independent study, participation in another educational system.
There are several semester-long programs with a specific focus on women and/or gender administered by other U.S. Colleges that would especially enrich the
educational experience of our majors:
Antioch College: Comparative Women's Studies in Europe fall semester
Augsburg College, Center for Global Education: Crossing Borders: Gender and Social Change in Mesoamerica fall semester; and Social and Environmental
Justice in Latin America spring semester
School for International Training:
The Balkans: Women and Democratization, fall or spring semester
Jamaica: Gender and Development, fall or spring semester
Mali: Gender and Development, fall or spring semester
The Netherlands: Identity, Gender and Sexuality, fall or spring semester
CROSS-LISTED COURSES (INCLUDING SEQUENCE COURSES)
WGSS 101(F,S) Introduction to Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies (W) (D)
This discussion course introduces a range of feminist issues, theories, and controversies. It has several aims: to provide critical and analytical tools for thinking
about gender; to explore key issues facing women in U.S. (and other) societies, and to discuss strategies for confronting them. The course will examine issues
such as: body politics, sexuality, reproductive rights, sexual violence, gender and work, motherhood and family. Above all, the course is intended as an explora-
tion of the tremendous diversity of thought contained under the general rubrics of feminist and gender studies and as a vehicle for developing skills in writing and
research, as well as analytical tools for further work in the field. This course meets the requirements of the Exploring Diversity Initiative in that its main emphases
are on challenging the notion of one universalizing category of "woman," and to recognize the diverse ways in which national, sexual, ethnic, racial, classed and
other kinds of differences produce multiple and often divergent relations of gendered power. It also whenever possible contextualizes within a global frame the
central issues that have made up and continue to define the U.S. feminist tradition, in order to encourage students to recognize the role cultural difference plays in a
variety of feminist issues and to decenter the U.S as a reference point for all feminist theory and politics.
Format: seminar. Requirements: regular short essays, class presentations, and a longer paper, with revisions; evaluation will be based on these assignments and
class participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19 per section (expected: 19 per section).
Required course for the Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies major.
Hour: 2:35-3:50 TF, 9:55-11:10 TR First Semester: CASE, HONDERICH
9:55-11:10 TR, 1:10-2:25 TF Second Semester: DUBOW, KENT
WGSS 152(F) The Fourteenth Amendment and the Meanings of Equality (Same as History 152) (W)
(See under HIST 152 for full description.)
WGSS 178T(S) Marriage and the American Nation (Same as History 178T) (W)
(See under HIST 178T for full desription.) DUBOW
WGSS 200 Nordic Lights: Literary and Cultural Diversity in Modern Scandinavia (Same as Comparative Literature 212) (Not offered
2011-2012) (D)
(See under COMP 212 for full description.) MARTIN
WGSS 201(F) War and Resistance: Two Centuries of War Literature in France, 1804-2004 (Same as French 202)
(See under RLFR 202 for full description.) MARTIN
WGSS 202(F) Introduction to Sexuality Studies (D)
This course will offer an introduction to the burgeoning interdisciplinary field of gay/lesbian/bisexual/transgender/queer studies, in part through examining histor-
ical, legal, literary, filmic, cultural studies, sociological, and popular texts, as well as work done under the umbrella of queer theory. Subjects covered may include
the following: histories of sexualities in the U.S., feminism and its relation to queer studies; how sexuality is racialized; transgender and intersex theory and
activism; globalization and sexuality; and strategies of resistance and visibility such as those evidenced by AIDS activism/theory and debates over gay marriage.
An essential part of the course will be exploring how race, class, religion, and nationality contribute to the construction and lived experience of modern gender and
sexual identities. Readings may include works by Foucault, Sedgwick, Warner, Berlant, Stryker, Manalaslan, Hammonds, Crimp, Lorde, Bechdel, McBride, and
Massad. This class meets the requirements of the Exploring Diversity Initiative in that it emphasizes empathetic understanding of gender and sexual diversity;
studying relations of power and privilege as they apply to sexual, gender, racial, class and national identities and practices; and foregrounds critical theorization of
gender and sexuality.
Format: discussion. Requirements: active participation in discussion, critical responses, 2 short papers (35 pages), annotated bibliography, final paper (9 pages).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20 (expected: 20). Preference given to Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies majors.
Hour: 1:10-2:25 MR KENT
WGSS 203(F) Chicana/o Film and Video (Same as ArtH 203 and Latina/o Studies 203)
(See under LATS 203 for full description.) CHAVOYA
WGSS 210(F) Culture and Incarceration (Same as Africana Studies 210, American Studies 210, INTR 210 and Political Science 210)
(See under PSCI 210 for full description.) JAMES
WGSS 211(F) Gender in the Global Economy (Same as Economics 211)
This course will present a feminist economic analysis of the global economy, and some of the urgent issues facing women in poor countries. The course will
start by developing theoretical resources: these will include feminist critiques of economics theory, work on care labor and the shifting boundaries between
markets, governments and households, theories of household bargaining, and discussions of intersectionality and difference. Then we will discuss a series of
282
interlinked issues which may include the contradictory effects of structural adjustment and its successors; the informal sector and the 'invisible assembly line';
the economics of sex work and global sex trafficking; microcredit; the economics of the HIV/AIDS pandemic. We will finish by looking at communitybased
activism, nongovernmental organizations, and the possibilities for firstworld/thirdworld alliances.
Requirements: reaction papers, midterm exam, research paper;participation in class discussion will count for part of the grade; two oral responses to seminar
papers; two 2page seminar response papers; one response to a peer's final paper.
Prerequisites: Economics 110. Enrollment limit: 30 (expected: 20).
Hour: 1:10-2:25 TF HONDERICH
WGSS 212 Ethics and Reproductive Technologies (Same as Philosophy 212) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
In her groundbreaking book, The Tentative Pregnancy, Barbara Katz Rothman writes that "[t]he technological revolution in reproduction is forcing us to con-
front the very meaning of motherhood, to examine the nature and origins of the mother-child bond, and to replace--or to let us think we can replace--chance
with choice." Taking this as our starting point, in this course we will examine a number of conceptual and ethical issues in the use and development of technolo-
gies related to human reproduction, drawing out their implications for such core concepts as "motherhood" and "parenthood," family and genetic relatedness,
exploitation and commodification, and reproductive rights and society's interests in reproductive activities. Topics will range from consideration of "mundane"
technologies such as in vitro fertilization (IVF), prenatal genetic screening and testing, and surrogacy, to the more extraordinary, including pre-implantation
diagnosis (PID), post-menopausal reproduction, post-mortem gamete procurement, reproductive cloning and embryo splitting, and in utero medical interven-
tions. Background readings include sources rooted in traditional modes of bioethical analysis as well as those incorporating feminist approaches.
Format: discussion. Requirements: active participation in class discussions, four to five short reflection papers, and two longer papers ( 5-10 pages).
No prerequisites; but introductory-level course in Philosophy and/or Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies highly recommended. Enrollment limit: 19 (ex-
pected: 19). Preference given to Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies majors.
J. PEDRONI
WGSS 219T(F) Women in National Politics (Same as INTR 219 and Politcal Science 219) (W)
(See under INTR 219T for full description.) JAMES
WGSS 221T Racial-Sexual Violence (Same as Africana Studies 221 and INTR 221) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under INTR 221 for full description.) JAMES
WGSS 222 Women in Twentieth-Century Spain (Same as Spanish 220) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under RLSP 220 for full description.) S. FOX
WGSS 224(S) Sexuality and Seduction in Nineteenth and Twentieth-Century France (Same as French 224) (D)
(See under RLFR 224 for full description.) MARTIN
WGSS 225 Classics in Western Feminist Thought (Same as Philosophy 225) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
This course provides an introduction to feminist thought through readings of seminal feminist texts from the Enlightenment to the present. Special attention will
be given to feminist revisions (including those by woman of color) of traditional and contemporary emancipatory theories such as liberalism, Marxism, psycho-
analysis, poststructuralism, and queer theory as well as transnational feminism. Authors read may include the following: Mary Wollstonecraft, John Stuart Mill,
Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Alexandra Kollantai, Sojourner Truth, Harriet Jacobs, Emma Goldman, Charlotte Perkins Gilman, Adrienne Rich, Marilyn Frye,
Gloria Anzaldua, Audre Lorde, Catherine MacKinnon, Judith Butler, Iris Young, Nancy Fraser, Gayatri Spivak, and Chandra Mohanty. We conclude the
course with an exploration of the wide range of feminist analyses of issues concerning prostitution and pornography.
Format: discussion. Requirements: several 2-page essays, one 4-page essay, one 6-page essay (including a draft) and participation in in-class exercises including
short oral presentations.
Prerequisites: Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 101, or Philosophy 101, or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 19 (expected: 10).
Satisfies the Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies theory requirement for the major.
SAWICKI
WGSS 228 Feminist Bioethics (Same as Philosophy 228) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
(See under PHIL 228 for full description.) J. PEDRONI
WGSS 234(S) Masculinities (Same as Anthropology 234)
(See under ANTH 234 for full description.) JUST
WGSS 236(S) Sex, Gender, and Political Theory (Same as Political Science 236)
(See under PSCI 236 for full description.) NJOYA
WGSS 237(F) Gender and Desire 1200-1600 (Same as Comparative Literature 237 and English 237) (W) (D)
(See under ENGL 237 for full description.) KNOPP
WGSS 239 The Construction of Gender in Ancient Greece and Rome (Same as Classics 239 and History 322) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under CLAS 239 for full description.) CHRISTENSEN
WGSS 245 (Re)presenting Sex: Shakespeare on Page and Stage (Same as EXPR 245 and Theatre 245) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under EXPR 245 for full description.) BAKER-WHITE, ERICKSON
WGSS 246 India's Identities: Religion, Caste, and Gender (Same as Anthropology 246 and Religion 246) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under REL 246 for full description.) GUTSCHOW
WGSS 248T The Tale of Carmen, 1845-Now (Same as Music 246) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under MUS 246 for full description.) BLOXAM
WGSS 249(F) Body Politics, Gender and Religion in South Asia (Same as Anthropology 248, Asian Studies 248 and Religion 248) (D)
(See under REL 248 for full description.) GUTSCHOW
WGSS 250(S) Gender, Sexuality and the Modern Stage (Same as English 253 and Theatre 250) (W) (D)
(See under THEA 250 for full description.) HOLZAPFEL
WGSS 252(S) Modern Women Writers and the City (Same as Comparative Literature 243)
(See under COMP 243 for full description.) DRUXES
WGSS 253 Art in the Age of the Revolution, 1760-1860 (Same as ArtH 253) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under ARTH 253 for full description.) OCKMAN
WGSS 254(F) Manet to Matisse (Same as ArtH 254) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under ARTH 254 for full description.) OCKMAN
WGSS 256 Engendering Buddhism: How Women and Men Shape and Are Shaped by Buddhism (Same as Anthropology 256, Asian
Studies 256 and Religion 256) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
(See under REL 256 for full description.) GUTSCHOW
283
WGSS 257 Gender Remade: Muslim Women and Narratives of Subjection (Same as Anthropology 257 and Religion 238) (Not offered
2011-2012)
(See under ANTH 257 for full description.) LOAN
WGSS 259T Adultery in the Nineteenth-Century Novel (Same as Comparative Literature 259T and English 261T) (Not offered
2011-2012) (W)
(See under COMP 259 for full description.) CASSIDAY
WGSS 262(S) (formerly 356) Confession and Catharsis in the Poetry of Sylvia Plath and Ted Hughes (Same as English 262) (Gateway) (W)
(See under ENGL 262 for full description.)
WGSS 271T(S) Woman as "Other" (Same as Philosophy 271T) (D) (W)
(See under PHIL 271 for full description.) SAWICKI
Satisfies the Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies theory requirement for the major.
WGSS 272(F) Sex in Society: Cultural Constructions of Reproduction (Same as Anthropology 272)
(See under ANTH 272 for full description.) GUTSCHOW
Satisfies the Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies theory requirement for the major.
WGSS 307 Feminist Approaches to Religion (Same as Religion 306) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W) (D)
(See under REL 306 for full description.) BUELL
Satisfies the Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies theory requirement for the major.
WGSS 308 Gender and Society in Modern Africa (Same as Africana Studies 308 and History 308) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under HIST 308 for full description.) MUTONGI
WGSS 309(F) New Soviet Man and His Discontents (Same as Comparative Literature 311 and Russian 309) (D)
(See under RUSS 309 for full description.) SECKLER
WGSS 310(F) Womanist/Black Feminist Thought (Same as Africana Studies 310 and Religion 310) (D)
(See under AFR 310 for full description.) R. MANIGAULT-BRYANT
WGSS 313 Gender, Race, Beauty, and Power in the Age of Transnational Media (Same as American Studies 313, Comparative Literature
313 and Latina/o Studies 313) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under LATS 313 for full description.) CEPEDA
WGSS 315 Paris on Fire: Incendiary Voices from the City of Light (1830-2005) (Same as French 316) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under RLFR 316 for full description.) MARTIN
WGSS 319 Gender and the Family in Chinese History (Same as Asian Studies 319 and History 319) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under HIST 319 for full description.) A. REINHARDT
WGSS 327T Foucault (Same as Philosophy 327T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D) (W)
(See under PHIL 327 for full description.) SAWICKI
Satisfies the Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies theory requirement for the major.
WGSS 328(F) Jane Austen and George Eliot (Same as English 328)
(See under ENGL 328 for full description.) SOKOLSKY
WGSS 332(F) Gender and Intellectual Life in Seventeenth Century Europe (Same as History 332)
(See under HIST 332 for full description.) ROSENGREN
WGSS 333(S) The NineteenthCentury British Novel (Same as English 333)
(See under ENGL 333 for full description.) CASE
WGSS 334(S) Sex and Psyche: A Cultural History of Fin-de-Sicle Europe (Same as History 334)
(See under HIST 334 for full description.) FISHZON
WGSS 339 Stereotypes, Prejudice, and Discrimination (Same as Psychology 341) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D) (W)
(See under PSYC 341 for full description.) FEIN
WGSS 341(F) American Genders, American Sexualities (Same as English 341) (D)
(See under ENGL 341 for full description.) KENT
WGSS 355T(S) Feeling Queer: Theories of Emotion and Affect in Literary and Cultural Studies (Same as American Studies 356,
Comparative Literature 356 and English 356) (W) (D)
(See under ENGL 356 for full description.) KENT
WGSS 356 Race, Gender, and Sexuality in U.S. History (Same as History 356) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under HIST 356 for full description.) DUBOW
Satisfies the Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies theory requirement for the major.
WGSS 370 Women Activists and Social Movements (Same as Africana Studies 371, INTR 371, and Political Science 371) (Not
offered 2011-2012)
(See under INTR 371 for full description.) JAMES
WGSS 378 The History of Sexuality in America (Same as History 378) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under HIST 378 for full description.) DUBOW
WGSS 379(S) Black Women in the United States (Same as Africana Studies 379 and History 379) (D)
(See under HIST 379 for full description.) LONG
WGSS 382 Latina/o Politics (Same as History 382 and Latina/o Studies 382) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under LATS 382 for full description.) WHALEN
WGSS 383 History of Whiteness in the United States (Same as History 383) (Not offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under HIST 383 for full description.) L. BROWN
284
WGSS 386 Latinas in the Global Economy: Work, Migration, and Households (Same as History 386 and Latina/o Studies 386) (Not
offered 2011-2012) (D)
(See under HIST 386 for full description.) WHALEN
WGSS 389(F) The Fiction of Virginia Woolf (Same as English 389)
(See under ENGL 389 for full description.) CASE
WGSS 395 Fashioning Bodies: Dress, Consumption, and Gender from the Renaissance to the Present (Same as History 395) (Not offered
2011-2012)
(See under HIST 395 for full description.) FISHZON
WGSS 402(S) Transformations and Entanglements: Identity and Agency
How are we human? What does it mean to speak "for yourself," for others, or about the "self"? How ought we to live? Throughout the course, we shall ask how
identity, agency, and ethics are enacted and revealed in and through practices and ideas about change and difference (or lack of difference). In this seminar we
shall explore and evaluate contributions by feminists as well as gender and sexuality scholars, activists, and artists to questions about agency, identity, difference,
power, relationality and responsibility.
Format: seminar. Requirements: weekly reading preparations, active participation, final paper or project.
Prerequisites: Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 101, junior/senior major in WGSS, or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 12 (expected: 10). Pref-
erence given to Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies majors.
Required course for the Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies major.
Not available for the Gaudino option.
Hour: 1:10-3:50 W BUELL
WGSS 406T Coming of Age in the Polis (Same as Greek 406T) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under CLGR 406 for full description.)
WGSS 408(S) Nineteenth-Century Novel: From Desperate Housewives to Extreme Makeovers (Same as and French 412)
(See under RLFR 408 for full description.) MARTIN
WGSS 426 Pictures That Rocked the Nation: Courbet and Manet in Second Empire France (Same as ArtH 426) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(D)
(See under ARTH 426 for full description.) OCKMAN
WGSS 432 Domestic Visual Culture in Renaissance Florence (Same as ArtH 432) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under ARTH 432 for full description.) SOLUM
WGSS 451 Ideal Bodies: The Modern Nude and Its Dilemmas (Same as ArtH 451) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under ARTH 451 for full description.) OCKMAN
WGSS 452 Women in America, 1620-1865 (Same as History 452) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under HIST 452 for full description.) LONG
WGSS 457 Gender, Law, and Politics in U.S. History (Same as History 457) (Not offered 2011-2012)
(See under HIST 457 for full description.) DUBOW
Satisfies the Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies theory requirement for the major.
WGSS 461T Writing about Bodies (Same as ArtH 461 and INTR 461) (Not offered 2011-2012) (W)
(See under ARTH 461 for full description.) OCKMAN
WGSS 469(F) Race, Class, and Gender in American Immigration History (Same as History 469) (D)
(See under HIST 469 for full description.) WONG
WGSS 491(F)-W30, W30-492(S) Honors Project
WGSS 493(F)-W31, W31-494(S) Senior Thesis
WGSS 497(F), 498(S) Independent Study
CRITICAL REASONING AND
ANALYTICAL SKILLS (CRAAS) COURSES
To one degree or another, every class at Williams goes beyond its subject--be it mathematics, Machiavelli, or modernism--to teach intellectual skills that
have wide application in other fields as well as outside of the academy: scientific reckoning, expository writing, rhetorical analysis, oral presentation, and so on.
Courses offered under the CRAAS initiative foreground such analytical skills. While each CRAAS class covers a different topic, all are aimed particularly at
developing the processes necessary for excellence in a range of fields: techniques for analyzing ideas, data, texts or artworks; approaches to interpreting, synthe-
sizing, and developing arguments; strategies for presenting ideas and results.
CRAAS classes typically emphasize the practices of meta-analysis--self-criticism, editing, and revision--with the goal of constant improvement. Many
classes feature peer tutoring, small group work, and intensive one-on-one engagement with the professor. Students should leave a CRAAS course with a substan-
tially heightened ability to approach problems, analyze texts, and craft arguments in whatever discipline they may go on to explore.
A few CRAAS courses are restricted to advanced students, but the majority are open to all, and some are specifically targeted for first year students. Most have
strictly limited enrollment. Because these classes cultivate the general strategies of effective scholarship, students are encouraged to consider taking a CRAAS
course early in their academic careers.
ARTH 105 Picturing God in the Middle Ages: An Introduction
ARTH 110 Reading the Renaissance: Interpreting Italian Renaissance Art and History (W)
ENGL 133(F) New Poetry (W)
[ENGL 218 Forms of Violence (W)--last offered Spring 2009]
MUS 402(S) Senior Seminar in Music: Bach's Legacy (W)
PHIL 201(F) Continental Philosophy: Reading the Critics of Reason
PHIL/CLAS 330 Plato (W)
SOC 316 Consumer Society and Its Critics in the Modern World
EXPERIENTIAL EDUCATION COURSES
A description of experiential education at Williams may be found on page NOTAG of this catalog. A complete description of each course may be found in the
relevant department's section. Students may obtain detailed information about experiential elements in a specific course from its instructor.
Students interested in incorporating fieldwork into courses not listed here should contact the Coordinator for help. Inclusion of experiential components de-
pends on permission of the instructor.
SEMESTER COURSES:
AFR 245/MUS 242(F) Monk and the Bebop Revolution
AMST 201(F,S) Introduction to American Studies
285
ARTH/ENVI 201(F) American Landscape History
[ARTH 308/ENVI 308(S) The NorthAmerican Park Idea--last offered spring 2009]
ARTH 508(S) Art and Conservation: An Inquiry into History, Methods and Materials
BIOL 220/ENVI 220(S) Field Botany and Plant Natural History
BIOL 302/ENVI 312(F) Communities and Ecosystems
CHIN 352/LATS 383 (S) Bridging Theory and Practice: Learning and Teaching Chinese as a Second Language
[ENGL 376(F) Documentary Technologies--last offered fall 2008]
ENVI 102(S) Introduction to Environmental Science
ENVI 302(F) Environmental Planning Workshop
ENVI 397/398(F,S) Independent Study of Environmental Problems
EXPR/MATH/PHIL/ENGL/ARTS 309(F) Exploring Creativity
GEOS 105(F) Geology Outdoors
GEOS 206/ENVI 206(S) Renewable Energy and the Sustainable Campus
GEOS/ENVI 214(S) Remote Sensing and Geographic Information Systems
LATS 220/AMST 221 (F) Introduction to Urban Studies: Shaping and Living the City
LATS/THEA 230/ WGST 231 (F) Approaching Performance Studies
[LATS 331(F) Sound and Movement in the AfroLatin Diaspora--last offered fall 2008]
LING 400(F) Linguistics Research Seminar
MAST/GEOS/ENVI 104(S) Oceanography
MAST 211/GEOS 210 (F,S) Oceanographic Processes (Williams/Mystic Program)
MAST 311/BIOL 231 (F,S) Marine Ecology (Williams/Mystic Program)
MAST /ENVI 351(F,S) Marine Policy (Williams/Mystic Program)
MAST/HIST 352(F,S) America and the Sea, 1600Present (Williams/Mystic Program)
MUS/AFR 235(F) African Rhythm, African Sensibility
POEC 402(S) Political Economy of Public Policy Issues
PSYC 352(S) Clinical and Community Psychology
PSYC 372(F) Advanced Seminar in Teaching and Learning
REL 286(F) Shopping, Desire, Compulsion and Consumption
RUSS 206(S) Topics in Russian Culture: Feasting and Fasting in Russian History
[WNY 307T(F,S) Work/Ethics: Frameworks for Observing People at Work (Williams in New York Program) last offered spring2009]
[WNY 308(F) Explorations in the Urban Outback (Williams in New York Program)  last offered fall 2008]
[WNY 309(F) Covering the Other: A Course in CrossCultural and Communitybased Film (Williams in New York Program)--last offered fall 2008]
[WNY 310(S) Art, Space and the City (Williams in New York Program)--last offered spring 2009]
[WNY 311(S) Imagining New York City (Williams in New York Program)--last offered spring 2009]
WINTER STUDY:
AFR 025/WGST 24 Youth, Gender and Social Activism in Tanzania
AMST 011 Singing School: Sacred Choral Traditions in the Berkshires and Beyond
AMST 015 Contemporary American Songwriting
ANSO 010 Meditation-Based Stress Reduction: Adopting a Mindfulness Practice
ANSO 011 Berkshire Farm Center Internship
ANSO 012 Children and the Courts: Internship in the Crisis in Child Abuse
ARTS 019 Introduction to the Craft and Art of Blacksmithing
CHIN 013 Theory and Practice of Chinese Cooking
CHIN 025 Study Tour to Taiwan
BIOL 014 Gestures of Time: A Visual Exploration
BIOL 015 From Populations to Species: Understanding the Evolution of Diversity
BIOL 021 Science Beyond Williams
CHEM 010 Zymurgy
CHEM 011/SPEC 011 Science for Kids
CHEM 016 Glass and Glassblowing
CSCI 010 Designing and Building a Desktop Computer
ECON 012 Negotiation: Theory and Practice
ECON 025 The Political Economy of Social Cohesion: Lessons from South Africa's Miracle
ENVI 010 The Winter Naturalist's Journal
ENVI 012 The Changing Forest
ENVI 014 Green Design Workshop and LEED Certification Course
ENVI 015 Get Focused and Step It Up-Climate Change Activism
ENVI 016 Problems with Plastics
ENVI 025 Sustainable Eleuthera: Energy, Environment and Economic Development
GEOS 012 Landscape Photography
HIST 012 Reading Childhood
HIST 015 The Great Depression: A Storied History
HIST 025/THEA 026 Fashionable London: Clothing and Fetishism from Victorian Street to Westwood Catwalk
LEAD 018 Wilderness Leadership
LGST 021 Creating a Non-Profit Organization
JAPN 012 Kamishibai Workshop
JAPN 025 Exploring Japanese Culture and Language
LING 012 Preliminary Introduction to American Sign Language
MATH 012 Mural
MATH 016/SPEC 016 Knitting: The Social History and Craft Form
MATH 023 Gaudino Winter Study Fellows Program
MUS 013 Math and Music
MUS 025 Musical Performance: Cultural Exchange in Argentina
PHIL 011 Aikido and the Creation of Ethical Policy
PHIL 013 Boxing
PHYS 15 Livres des Artists-The Artist Book
PSCI 021 Fieldwork in Public and Private Non-Profits/Volunteer Income Tax Assistance
PSCI 025 Williams in NOLA
PSYC 016 Rhythm Based Communication
PSYC 019 Psychology in Action
REL 025 Jerusalem: One City, Three Faiths, Many Narratives
RLSP 016/MUS 016 Music Circus: John Cage and His World
RUSS/SPEC 025 Williams in Georgia
STAT 013 Roulette
SPEC 010 Quest for College: Early Awareness in Berkshire County Schools
SPEC 015 Ski Patrol Rescue Techniques: Outdoor Emergency Care CPR
SPEC 019 Medical Apprenticeship
SPEC 021 The Psychology of the Workplace; a Field Study with Williams Alumni/Parents
SPEC 024 Eye Care and Culture In the Rural Atlantic Coast of Nicaragua
SPEC 026/MATH 026 Resettling Refugees in Maine
SPEC 028 Teaching Practica in New York City Schools
SPEC 035 Making Pottery on the Potter's Wheel
EXPLORING DIVERSITY INITIATIVE
THE EXPLORING DIVERSITY INITIATIVE REQUIREMENT--Williams College is committed to creating and maintaining a curriculum, faculty, and
student body that reflects and explores a diverse, globalized world and the multi-cultural character of the United States. Courses designated "(D)" in the
286
College Bulletin are a part of the College's Exploring Diversity Initiative (EDI); they represent our dedication to study groups, cultures, and societies as
they interact with, and challenge, each other. Through such courses, students and faculty also consider the multiple approaches that engage these issues.
Rather than simply focus on the study of specific peoples, cultures, or regions of the world, in the past or present, however, courses fulfilling the require-
ment actively promote a self-conscious and critical engagement with diversity. They urge students to consider the operations of difference in the world and
provide them with the tools to do so. The ultimate aim of the requirement is to lay the groundwork for a life-long engagement with the diverse cultures,
societies, and histories of the United States and the rest of the world.
Courses that comprise the Exploring Diversity Initiative may fall under a variety of categories, including (but not limited to) the following:
1. Comparative Study of Cultures and Societies. These courses focus on the differences and similarities between cultures and societies, and/or on the ways in
which cultures, peoples, and societies have interacted and responded to one another in the past.
2. Empathetic Understanding. These courses explore diverse human feelings, thoughts, and actions by recreating the social, political, cultural, and historical
context of a group in order to imagine why within that context, those beliefs, experiences, and actions of the group emerged.
3. Power and Privilege: These courses link issues of diversity to economic and political power relations, investigating how cultural interaction is influenced by
various structures, institutions, or practices that enable, maintain, or mitigate inequality among different groups.
4. Critical Theorization: These courses focus on ways scholars theorize the possibilities of cross-cultural understanding and interaction; they investigate the
ways that disciplines and paradigms of knowledge both constitute "difference" and are reconfigured by the study of diversity-related questions.
5. Cultural Immersion: In various ways these courses immerse students in another culture and give them the tools with which to understand that culture from
the inside. They include those foreign language courses that explicitly engage in the self-conscious awareness of cultural and societal differences, traditions,
and customs as an integral aspect of language study.
All students are required to complete ONE course that is part of the Exploring Diversity Initiative. Although this course, which may be counted toward the
divisional distribution requirement, may be completed any semester before graduation, students are urged to complete the course by the end of the sopho-
more year.
By immersing students in foreign cultures, and often by furthering language acquisition, study abroad programs can offer a robust way to study cultural
diversity. Students wishing to fulfill the EDI requirement via the completion of a study abroad program must submit a petition before departure proposing
EDI credit for a particular course on their program, for particular experiences (such as independent research or a homestay), or for a specific language
training program they will undertake while abroad. The petition will require students to describe how they believe their proposed study abroad experience
will meet one or more of the goals of the Exploring Diversity Initiative; it will be considered by the Director of the Exploring Diversity Initiative working in
concert with the Committee on Academic Standing.
The one-course EDI requirement must be met by all members of the classes of 2012 and 2013; members of the class of 2011 who have already completed a
course designated "People's and Cultures" do not need to complete an EDI course.
AFR 122(S) African-American Music (Same as Music 122) (D)
AFR 193(F) Black Power Abroad: Decolonization in Africa, the Caribbean and Europe (Same as History 193) (D) (W)
AFR 204(S) Introduction to Francophone Studies (Same as French 203) (D)
AFR 207(S) Picturing Race: From Early Modern Europe to Now (Same as ArtH 205) (D)
AFR 211(F) Race and the Environment (Same as Environmental Studies 211 and Sociology 211) (D)
AFR 217(F) Race(ing) Sports: Issues, Themes and Representations of Black Athletes (Same as English 255) (D)
AFR 229(S) European Imperialism and Decolonization (Same as History 229) (D)
AFR 231(S) Nothin' But the Blues (Same as Music 231) (D)
AFR 241(F) Performing Race: From Shakespeare to Spike Lee (Same as Comparative Literature 241 and Theatre 241) (D)
AFR 267(S) Race in the Americas (Same as Sociology 267) (D)
AFR 280(S) African American History: An Introduction (Same as History 280) (D)
AFR 304(F) South Africa and Apartheid (Same as History 304) (D)
AFR 310(F) Womanist/Black Feminist Thought (Same as Religion 310 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 310) (D)
AFR 312(F) Francographic Islands (Same as Comparative Literature 312 and French 312) (D)
AFR 346(F) History of Modern Brazil (Same as History 346) (D)
AFR 379(S) Black Women in the United States (Same as History 379 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 379) (D)
AFR 444(S) The Black Republic: Haiti in History and Imagination (Same as History 444) (D)
AFR 450(S) Melville, Mark Twain, and Ellison (Same as English 450) (D)
AMST 201(F,S) Introduction to American Studies (D)
AMST 203(S) Introduction to Native American Studies (Same as Antropology 203) (D)
AMST 224(S) U.S. Latina/o Religions (Same as Latina/o Studies 224 and Religion 224) (D)
AMST 238(S) Racial Formations and Transformations in America: 1945-Present (Same as English 238) (D)
AMST 240(F) Latina/o Language and Literature: Hybrid Voices (Same as Comparative Literature 210 and Latina/o Studies 240) (D)
AMST 284(F) Topics in Asian American History (Same as Asian Studies 284 and History 284) (D)
AMST 305(S) Cities of the Anglophone Chinese Imagination (Same as Asian Studies 305, Comparative Literature 303 and English 374) (D)
AMST 313(S) Gender, Race, Beauty, and Power in the Age of Transnational Media (Same as Comparative Literature 313, Latina/o Studies 313 and
Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 313) (D)
AMST 346(S) Latinas/os and the Media: From Production to Consumption (Same as Comparative Literature 359 and Latina/o Studies 346) (W) (D)
AMST 356T(S) Feeling Queer: Theories of Emotion and Affect in Literary and Cultural Studies (Same as Comparative Literature 356, English 356 and
Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 355) (W) (D)
AMST 409(F) Transnational Lives in Global Context (Senior Seminar) (Same as Latina/o Studies 409) (W) (D)
ANTH 101(F,S) The Scope of Anthropology (D)
ANTH 203(S) Introduction to Native American Studies (Same as American Studies 203) (D)
ANTH 223(S) Ethnic Minorities in China: Past and Present (Same as Chinese 223) (D)
ANTH 248(F) Body Politics, Gender and Religion in South Asia (Same as Asian Studies 248, Religion 248 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies
249) (D)
SOC 211(F) Race and the Environment (Same as Africana Studies 211 and Environmental Studies 211) (D)
SOC 267(S) Race in the America's (Same as Africana Studies 267) (D)
ARAB 222(F) Photography in/of the Middle East (Same as ArtH 222) (D)
ARAB 303(F) Medieval East and West: Travel, Holy War, Storytelling (Same as Comparative Literature 315 and English 303) (D)
ARAB 410(F) Kings, Heroes, Gods, and Monsters: Historical Texts and Modern Identities in the Middle East (Same as History 410, Jewish Studies 410 and
Religion 405) (D) (W)
ARTH 205(S) Picturing Race: From Early Modern Europe to Now (Same as Africana Studies 207) (D)
ARTH 222(F) Photography in/of the Middle East (Same as Arabic Studies 222) (D)
ARTH 470(S) Image-making, Orientalism and Visual Culture (D)
ASST 128(S) Chinese Music and Intercultural Influence: From the Silk Road to Korea and Japan (Same as Music 128) (D)
ASST 212(S) Transforming the "Middle Kingdom": China, 2000 BCE-1600 (Same as History 212) (D)
ASST 247(S) Tibetan Civilization (Same as Religion 245) (D)
ASST 248(F) Body Politics, Gender and Religion in South Asia (Same as Anthropology 248, Religion 248 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 249)
(D)
ASST 250(S) Scholars, Saints and Immortals: The Religious Life in East Asia (Same as Religion 250) (D)
ASST 284(F) Topics in Asian American History (Same as American Studies 284 and History 284) (D)
ASST 305(S) Cities of the Anglophone Chinese Imagination (Same as American Studies 305, Comparative Literature 303 and English 374) (D)
CHIN 101(F)-W88-102(S) Basic Chinese (D)
CHIN 201(F), 202(S) Intermediate Chinese (D)
CHIN 210(F) Cultures of China: Conflicts and Continuities (Same as History 220) (D)
CHIN 223(S) Ethnic Minorities in China: Past and Present (Same as Anthropology 223) (D)
CHIN 301(F), 302(S) Upper-Intermediate Chinese (D)
CHIN 401(F), 402(S) Advanced Chinese (D)
JAPN 101(F)-W88-102(S) Elementary Japanese (D)
JAPN 110(F) Bridging Japanese for Non-beginners I (D)
JAPN 200(S) Bridging Japanese for Non-beginners II (D)
JAPN 201(F), 202(S) Intermediate Japanese (D)
JAPN 255(S) Love and Death in Modern Japanese Literature (Same as Comparative Literature 255) (D)
JAPN 301(F), 302(S) Upper-Intermediate Japanese (D)
JAPN 403(F) Advanced Seminar in Japanese I (D)
JAPN 404(S) Advanced Seminar in Japanese II (D)
JAPN 406(F) Thematic Reading and Writing in Japanese II (D)
COMP 104(S) Critical Approaches to Theatre and Performance (Same as Theatre 104) (D)
COMP 210(F) Latina/o Language and Literature: Hybrid Voices (Same as American Studies 240 and Latina/o Studies 240) (D)
287
COMP 237(F) Gender and Desire 1200-1600 (Same as English 237 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 237) (W) (D)
COMP 241(F) Performing Race: From Shakespeare to Spike Lee (Same as Africana Studies 241 and Theatre 241) (D)
COMP 255(S) Love and Death in Modern Japanese Literature (Same as Japanese 255) (D)
COMP 303(S) Cities of the Anglophone Chinese Imagination (Same as American Studies 305, Asian Studies 305 and English 374) (D)
COMP 311(F) New Soviet Man and His Discontents (Same as Russian 309 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 309) (D)
COMP 312(F) Francographic Islands (Same as Africana Studies 312 and French 312) (D)
COMP 313(S) Gender, Race, Beauty, and Power in the Age of Transnational Media (Same as American Studies 313, Latina/o Studies 313 and Women's,
Gender and Sexuality Studies 313) (D)
COMP 315(F) Medieval East and West: Travel, Holy War, Storytelling (Same as Arabic 303 and English 303) (D)
COMP 356T(S) Feeling Queer: Theories of Emotion and Affect in Literary and Cultural Studies (Same as American Studies 356 and English 356, and
Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 355) (W) (D)
COMP 359(S) Latinos/as and the Media: From Production to Consumption (Same as American Studies 346 and Latina/o Studies 346) (D) (W)
ECON 470(S) The Indian Economy: Development and Social Justice (D)
ENGL 238(S) Racial Formations and Transformations in America: 1945-Present (Same as American Studies 238) (D)
ENGL 253(S) Gender, Sexuality and the Modern Stage (Same as Theatre 250 and Women and Gender Studies 250) (W) (D)
ENGL 255(F) Race(ing) Sports: Issues, Themes and Representations of Black Athletes (Same as Africana Studies 217) (D)
ENGL 215(F) Imagining Immigrants (Gateway) (D) (W)
ENGL 237(F) Gender and Desire 1200-1600 (Same as Comparative Literature 237 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 237) (Gateway) (W) (D)
ENGL 303(F) Medieval East and West: Travel, Holy War, Storytelling (Same as Arabic 303 and Comparative Literature 315) (D)
ENGL 341(F) American Genders, American Sexualities (Same as Women's and Gender Studies 341) (D)
ENGL 356T(S) Feeling Queer: Theories of Emotion and Affect in Literary and Cultural Studies (Same as American Studies 356, Comparative Literature 356
and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 355) (W) (D)
ENGL 374(S) Cities of the Anglophone Chinese Imagination (Same as American Studies 305, Asian Studies 305 and Comparative Literature 303) (D)
ENGL 450(S) Melville, Mark Twain, and Ellison (Same as Africana Studies 450) (D)
ENVI 208(F) Science and Politics in Environmental Decision Making (D)
ENVI 211(F) Race and the Environment (Same as Africana Studies 211 and Sociology 211) (D)
HIST 143(S) Soccer and History in Latin America: Making the Beautiful Game (W) (D)
HIST 193(F) Black Power Abroad: Decolonization in Africa, the Caribbean and Europe (Same as Africana Studies 193) (D) (W)
HIST 207(F) The Modern Middle East (Same as Jewish Studies 217 and Religion 239) (D)
HIST 212(S) Transforming the "Middle Kingdom": China, 2000 BCE-1600 (Same as Asian Studies 212) (D)
HIST 220(F) Cultures of China: Conflicts and Continuities (Same as Chinese 210) (D)
HIST 229(S) European Imperialism and Decolonization (Same as Africana Studies 229) (D)
HIST 280(S) African American History: An Introduction (Same as Africana Studies 280) (D)
HIST 284(F) Topics in Asian American History (Same as American Studies 284 and Asian Studies 284) (D)
HIST 304(F) South Africa and Apartheid (Same as Africana Studies 304) (D)
HIST 310(S) Iraq and Iran in the Twentieth Century (D)
HIST 336(S) NationalSocialist Germany (D)
HIST 346(F) History of Modern Brazil (Same as Africana Studies 346) (D)
HIST 379(S) Black Women in the United States (Same as Africana Studies 379 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 379) (D)
HIST 410(F) Kings, Heroes, Gods, and Monsters: Historical Texts and Modern Identities in the Middle East (Same as Arabic 410, Jewish Studies 410 and
Religion 405) (D) (W)
HIST 444(S) The Black Republic: Haiti in History and Imagination (Same as Africana Studies 444) (D)
HIST 469(F) Race, Class, and Gender in American Immigration History (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 469) (D)
HIST 471(S) Comparative Latina/o Migrations (Same as Latina/o Studies 471) (D) (W)
JWST 217(F) The Modern Middle East (Same as History 207 and Religion 239) (D)
JWST 410(F) Kings, Heroes, Gods, and Monsters: Historical Texts and Modern Identities in the Middle East (Same as Arabic 410, History 410 and Religion
405) (D) (W)
LATS 224(S) U.S. Latina/o Religions (Same as American Studies 224 and Religion 224) (D)
LATS 240(F) Latina/o Language and Literature: Hybrid Voices (Same as American Studies 240 and Comparative Literature 210) (D)
LATS 313(S) Gender, Race, Beauty, and Power in the Age of Transnational Media (Same as American Studies 313, Comparative Literature 313 and
Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 313) (D)
LATS 346(S) Latinas/os and the Media: From Production to Consumption (Same as American Studies 346 and Comparative Literature 359) (D) (W)
LATS 409(F) Transnational Lives in Global Context (Same as American Studies 409) (W) (D)
LATS 471(S) Comparative Latina/o Migrations (Same as History 471) (D) (W)
MUS 122(S) African-American Music (Same as Africana Studies 122) (D)
MUS 125(F) Music Cultures of the World (D)
MUS 127(S) Cuban Popular Music and Culture (D)
MUS 128(S) Chinese Music and Intercultural Influence: From the Silk Road to Korea and Japan (Same as Asian Studies 128) (D)
MUS 231(S) Nothin' But the Blues (Same as Africana Studies 231) (D)
PHIL 271T(S) Woman as "Other" (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 271T) (D) (W)
REL 224(S) U.S. Latina/o Religions (Same as American Studies 224 and Latina/o Studies 224) (D)
REL 239(F) The Modern Middle East (Same as History 207 and Jewish Studies 217) (D)
REL 245(S) Tibetan Civilization (Same as Asian Studies 247) (D)
REL 248(F) Body Politics, Gender and Religion in South Asia (Same as Anthropology 248, Asian Studies 248 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies
249) (D)
REL 250(S) Scholars, Saints and Immortals: The Religious Life in East Asia (Same as Asian Studies 250) (D)
REL 310(F) Womanist/Black Feminist Thought (Same as Africana Studies 310 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 310) (D)
REL 405(F) Kings, Heroes, Gods, and Monsters: Historical Texts and Modern Identities in the Middle East (Same as Arabic 410, History 410 and Jewish
Studies 410) (D) (W)
RLFR 203(S) Introduction to Francophone Studies (Same as Africana Studies 204) (D)
RLFR 224(S) (formerly 310) Sexuality and Seduction in Nineteenth and Twentieth-Century France (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 224)
(D)
RLFR 312(F) Francographic Islands (Same as Africana Studies 312 and Comparative Literature 312) (D)
RUSS 309(F) New Soviet Man and His Discontents (Same as Comparative Literature 311 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 309) (D)
THEA 104(S) Critical Approaches to Theatre and Performance (Same as Comparative Literature 104) (D)
THEA 241(F) Performing Race: From Shakespeare to Spike Lee (Same as Africana Studies 241 and Comparative Literature 241) (D)
THEA 250(S) Gender, Sexuality and the Modern Stage (Same as English 253 and Women and Gender Studies 250) (W) (D)
WGSS 101(F,S) Introduction to Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies (W) (D)
WGSS 202(F) Introduction to Sexuality Studies (D)
WGSS 224(S) Sexuality and Seduction in Nineteenth and Twentieth-Century France (Same as French 224) (D)
WGSS 237(F) Gender and Desire 1200-1600 (Same as Comparative Literature 237 and English 237) (W) (D)
WGSS 249(F) Body Politics, Gender and Religion in South Asia (Same as Anthropology 248, Asian Studies 248 and Religion 248) (D)
WGSS 250(S) Gender, Sexuality and the Modern Stage (Same as English 253 and Theatre 250) (W) (D)
WGSS 271T(S) Woman as "Other" (Same as Philosophy 271T) (D) (W)
WGSS 309(F) New Soviet Man and His Discontents (Same as Comparative Literature 311 and Russian 309) (D)
WGSS 310(F) Womanist/Black Feminist Thought (Same as Africana Studies 310 and Religion 310) (D)
WGSS 313(S) Gender, Race, Beauty, and Power in the Age of Transnational Media (Same as American Studies 313, Comparative Literature 313 and
Latina/o Studies 313) (D)
WGSS 341(F) American Genders, American Sexualities (Same as English 341) (D)
WGSS 355T(S) Feeling Queer: Theories of Emotion and Affect in Literary and Cultural Studies (Same as American Studies 356, Comparative Literature 356
and English 356) (W) (D)
WGSS 379(S) Black Women in the United States (Same as Africana Studies 379 and History 379) (D)
WGSS 469(F) Race, Class, and Gender in American Immigration History (Same as History 469) (D)
QUANTITATIVE/FORMAL REASONING COURSES
Williams students should be adept at reasoning mathematically and abstractly. The ability to apply a formal method to reach conclusions, to use numbers
comfortably, and to employ the research tools necessary to analyze data lessen barriers to carrying out professional and economic roles. Prior to their senior year,
all students must satisfactorily complete a Quantitative/Formal Reasoning (QFR) course--those marked with a "(Q)." Students requiring extra assistance (as
assessed during First Days) are normally placed into Mathematics 100/101/102, which is to be taken before fulfilling the QFR requirement.
The hallmarks of a QFR course are the representation of facts in a language of mathematical symbols and the use of formal rules to obtain a determinate
answer. Primary evaluation in these courses is based on multistep mathematical, statistical, or logical inference (as opposed to descriptive answers).
Courses that may be used to meet the requirement in 2011-2012:
288
ASTR 111(F) Introduction to Astrophysics (Q)
ASTR 211(F) Observation and Data Reduction Techniques in Astronomy (Q)
BIMO 321(F) Biochemistry I--Structure and Function of Biological Molecules (Same as Biology 321 and Chemistry 321) (Q)
BIMO 322(S) Biochemistry II--Metabolism (Same as Biology 322 and Chemistry 322) (Q)
BIOL 202(F) Genetics (Q)
BIOL 203(F) Ecology (Same as Environmental Studies 203) (Q)
BIOL 305(S) Evolution (Q)
BIOL 319(F) Integrative Bioinformatics, Genomics, and Proteomics Lab (Same as Chemistry 319, Computer Science 319, Mathematics 319 and Physics 319)
(Q)
BIOL 321(F) Biochemistry I--Structure and Function of Biological Molecules (Same as Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 321 and Chemistry 321) (Q)
BIOL 322(S) Biochemistry II--Metabolism (Same as Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 322 and Chemistry 322) (Q)
CHEM 151(F) Introductory Concepts of Chemistry (Q)
CHEM 153(F) Introductory Concepts of Chemistry: Advanced Section (Q)
CHEM 155(F) Principles of Modern Chemistry (Q)
CHEM 156(S) Organic Chemistry: Introductory Level (Q)
CHEM 319(F) Integrative Bioinformatics, Genomics, and Proteomics Lab (Same as Biology 319, Computer Science 319, Mathematics 319 and Physics 319)
(Q)
CHEM 321(F) Biochemistry I--Structure and Function of Biological Molecules (Same as Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 321 and Biology 321) (Q)
CHEM 322(S) Biochemistry II--Metabolism (Same as Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 322 and Biology 322) (Q)
CSCI 109(F) The Art and Science of Computer Graphics (Q)
CSCI 134(F,S) Introduction to Computer Science (Q)
CSCI 136(F,S) Data Structures and Advanced Programming (Q)
CSCI 237(F) Computer Organization (Q)
CSCI 256(S) Algorithm Design and Analysis (Q)
CSCI 319(F) Integrative Bioinformatics, Genomics, and Proteomics Lab (Same as Biology 319, Chemistry 319, Mathematics 319 and Physics 319) (Q)
CSCI 334(S) Principles of Programming Languages (Q)
CSCI 337T(S) Digital Design and Modern Architecture (Q)
CSCI 339(S) Distributed Systems (Q)
CSCI 356T(F) Advanced Algorithms (Q)
CSCI 361(F) Theory of Computation (Same as Mathematics 361) (Q)
CSCI 373(F) Artificial Intelligence (Q)
CSCI 434T(F) Compiler Design (Q)
ECON 110(F,S) Principles of Microeconomics (Q)
ECON 120(F,S) Principles of Macroeconomics (Q)
ECON 213(S) Introduction to Environmental and Natural Resources Economics (Same as Environmental Studies 213) (Q)
ECON 229(S) Law and Economics (Q)
ECON 251(F,S) Price and Allocation Theory (Q)
ECON 252(F,S) Macroeconomics (Q)
ECON 253(F) Empirical Methods in Political Economy (Same as Political Economy 253) (Q)
ECON 255(F,S) Econometrics (Q)
ECON 378(F) Long-Run Perspectives on Economic Growth (Q)
ECON 386(S) Environmental Policy and Natural Resource Management (Same as Economics 515 and Environmental Studies 386) (Q)
ECON 389(S) Tax Policy in Emerging Markets (Same as Economics 517) (Q)
ECON 392(S) Finance and Capital Markets (Q)
ECON 464(S) Empirical Methods in Macroeconomics (Same as Economics 514) (Q)
ECON 514(S) Empirical Methods in Macroeconomics (Same as Economics 464) (Q)
ECON 515(S) Environmental Policy and Natural Resource Management (Same as Economics 386 and Environmental Studies 386) (Q)
ECON 517(S) Tax Policy in Emerging Markets (Same as Economics 389) (Q)
ENVI 203(F) Ecology (Same as Biology 203) (Q)
ENVI 213(S) Introduction to Environmental and Natural Resources Economics (Same as Economics 213) (Q)
ENVI 215(S) Climate Changes (Same as Geosciences 215) (Q)
ENVI 386(S) Environmental Policy and Natural Resource Management (Same as Economics 386 and Economics 515) (Q)
GEOS 215(S) Climate Changes (Same as Environmental Studies 215) (Q)
GEOS 301(F) Structural Geology (Q)
MATH 103(F,S) Calculus I (Q)
MATH 104(F,S) Calculus II (Q)
MATH 105(F,S) Multivariable Calculus (Q)
MATH 106(F) Multivariable Calculus (Q)
MATH 209(S) Differential Equations (Q)
MATH 210(S) Mathematical Methods for Scientists (Same as Physics 210) (Q)
MATH 211(F,S) Linear Algebra (Q)
MATH 251(F,S) Discrete Mathematics (Q)
MATH 301(F) Real Analysis (Q)
MATH 305(S) Applied Real Analysis (Q)
MATH 309(F) Introduction to Complex Analysis (Q)
MATH 312(S) Abstract Algebra (Q)
MATH 314T(S) (formerly 414) Galois Theory (Q)
MATH 315(F) Groups and Characters (Q)
MATH 319(F) Integrative Bioinformatics, Genomics, and Proteomics Lab (Same as Biology 319, Chemistry 319, Computer Science 319 and Physics 319)
(Q)
MATH 321(S) Knot Theory (Q)
MATH 322(F) Differential Geometry (Q)
MATH 357T(S) Phylogenetics (Q)
MATH 361(F) Theory of Computation (Same as Computer Science 361) (Q)
MATH 375(S) Game Theory (Q)
MATH 404(S) Ergodic Theory (Q)
MATH 419(S) Algebraic Number Theory (Q)
MATH 433(F) Mathematical Modeling and Control Theory (Q)
MATH 437(F) Electricity and Magnetism for Mathematicians (Q)
STAT 101(F,S) Elementary Statistics and Data Analysis (Q)
STAT 201(F,S) Statistics and Data Analysis (Q)
STAT 231(F) Statistical Design of Experiments (Q)
STAT 346(F) Regression and Forecasting (Q)
STAT 442(S) Computational Statistics and Data Mining (Q)
PHYS 107(F) Newton, Einstein, and Beyond (Q)
PHYS 109(S) Sound, Light, and Perception (Q)
PHYS 131(F) Introduction to Mechanics (Q)
PHYS 132(S) Electromagnetism and the Physics of Matter (Q)
PHYS 141(F) Mechanics and Waves (Q)
PHYS 142(S) Foundations of Modern Physics (Q)
PHYS 151(F) Seminar in Modern Physics (Q)
PHYS 201(F) Electricity and Magnetism (Q)
PHYS 202(S) Vibrations, Waves and Optics (Q)
PHYS 210(S) Mathematical Methods for Scientists (Same as Mathematics 210) (Q)
PHYS 301(F) Quantum Physics (Q)
PHYS 302(S) Statistical Mechanics and Thermodynamics (Q)
PHYS 319(F) Integrative Bioinformatics, Genomics, and Proteomics Lab (Same as Biology 319, Chemistry 319, Computer Science 319 and Mathematics
319) (Q)
PHYS 405T(F) Electromagnetic Theory (Q)
PHYS 418(S) Gravity (Q)
POEC 253(F) Empirical Methods in Political Economy (Same as Economics 253) (Q)
PSYC 201(F,S) Experimentation and Statistics (Q)
289
THE WILLIAMS TUTORIAL PROGRAM
The Tutorial Program offers Williams students a distinctive opportunity to take a heightened form of responsibility for their own intellec-
tual development. No student is required to take a tutorial course, but any student with the appropriate qualifications and interests is invited to
do so.
Tutorials at the 100/200 level are designed primarily for first-year students and sophomores; they are usually given enrollment preference
for such courses, though interested juniors and seniors are often welcome. Tutorials at the 300/400 level are designed primarily for juniors
and seniors (and, often, for majors in the discipline); first-year students and sophomores are welcome to apply, but are urged to consult the
instructor before registering.
Tutorials place much greater weight than do regular courses--or even small seminars--on student participation. They aim to teach stu-
dents how to develop and present arguments; listen carefully, and then refine their positions in the context of a challenging discussion; and
respond quickly and cogently to critiques of their work. Tutorials place particular emphasis on developing analytical skills, writing abilities,
and the talents of engaging in rigorous conversation and oral debate.
The ways in which particular tutorials are conducted vary across the disciplines, but here is a description of how most tutorials at Williams
are organized. Tutorials are usually limited to ten students. At the start of term, the instructor divides the students into pairs. Each pair meets
weekly with the instructor for roughly one hour. Many tutorial courses begin and end the term with a group seminar, and in a few depart-
ments, instructors hold weekly group meetings of all tutorial members to provide background information designed to facilitate the students'
independent work. But the heart of every tutorial course is the weekly meeting of the two students with the instructor.
At these weekly meetings, one student delivers a prepared essay or presentation (e.g., an analysis of a text or work of art, a discussion of a
problem set, a report on laboratory exercises, etc.) pertaining to the assignment for that week, while the other student--and then the instruc-
tor--offer a critique. In the following week, students switch roles. Typically, students write five or six essays (usually in the range of 4-7
pages) during the term, and offer five or six critiques of their partners' work.
Since the program's inception in 1988, students have ranked tutorials among the most demanding--and rewarding--courses they have
taken at Williams. While not designed to be more difficult than other courses, tutorials are nonetheless challenging, with frequent writing
assignments and the expectation that students will be well prepared to participate actively and effectively in weekly discussions. At the same
time, students have consistently placed tutorials among the most enriching and consequential courses they have taken. They have appre-
ciated the close attention to their writing and argumentation skills; the opportunity to be held accountable, in a detailed way, for the extended
implications of their ideas; the chance to develop their oral abilities as they engage in debate; and the close intellectual bonds tutorials build
between teachers and students, and students with each other. Many students have formed important advising and mentoring relationships
with their tutorial teachers.
Registration information: Students preregister for tutorials as they would for any other course (but should first check the description for
prerequisites and to see if permission of the instructor is required). Because of limited enrollments and the special logistical arrangements
involved in organizing tutorials, students may not drop a tutorial after 4:00 PM on the day before the first scheduled day of organizational
meetings each semester. It is therefore important that students determine, before the start of the term, their interest in and commitment to the
course. If they are uncertain whether they wish to take the tutorial, they should consult with the instructor. Tutorials may not be taken on a
pass/fail basis.
TUTORIALS OFFERED 2011-2012
AFR 481T(S) Race & Revol in Latin America (Instructor: Benson)
ARTH 330T(F) Michelangelo:Biogrphy, Myth&Art (Instructor: Solum)
ARTS 322T(F) The Empowered Object (Instructor: Podmore)
ARTS 333T(F) Narrative Strategies (Instructor: Ali)
ASTR 412T(S) Solar Physics (Instructor: Pasachoff)
BIOL 218T(F) DNA, Life, & Everything (Instructor: Altschuler)
BIOL 424T(F) Conservation Biology (Instructor: Edwards)
CSCI 337T(S) Digital Design&Modern Architec (Instructor: Bailey)
CSCI 356T(F) Advanced Algorithms (Instructor: Heeringa)
CSCI 434T(F) Compiler Design (Instructor: Freund)
ECON 219T(S) Global Economic History (Instructor: Nafziger)
ECON 228T(S) Water as a Scarce Resource (Instructor: Bradburd)
ECON 391T(F) Econ Analysis of Housing Mkt (Instructor: Sheppard)
ECON 467T(S) Development Successes (Instructor: Montiel)
ECON 516T(S) Intern'l Financial Institution (Instructor: Truman)
ECON 520T(S) Inclusive Grwth:Soc Sfty Nets (Instructor: Samson)
ENGL 222T(F) Lyric Poetry (Instructor: Bell)
ENGL 301T(F) Four American Poets (Instructor: Cleghorn)
ENGL 356T(S) Feeling Queer (Instructor: Kent)
ENGL 372T(S) American Modernist Fiction (Instructor: Limon)
ENGL 430T(F) Hitchcock&Psychoanalytc Theory (Instructor: Tifft)
GEOS 218T(F) The Carbon Cycle & Climate (Instructor: Cook)
GEOS 220T(S) Evolution Volcanic Islands (Instructor: Karabinos)
GERM 310T(S) Storm and Stress and More (Instructor: Kieffer)
HIST 135T(F) The Great War, 19141918 (Instructor: Wood)
HIST 178T(S) Marriage & the American Nation (Instructor: Dubow)
HIST 482T(F) Fictions of AfrAmer History (Instructor: Long)
HIST 484T(F) Victorian Psychology (Instructor: Kohut)
HIST 487T(S) The Second World War (Instructor: Wood)
INTR 219T(F) Women in National Politics (Instructor: James)
MATH 102T(F) FoundationsQuantitative Skills (Instructor: Johnson)
MATH 314T(S) Galois Theory (Instructor: Pacelli)
MATH 357T(S) Phylogenetics (Instructor: Devadoss)
MUS 203T(S) Composition I (Instructor: TBA)
MUS 204T(F) Composition II (Instructor: Perez Velazquez)
PHIL 124(S) Skepticism and Relativism (W) (Instructor: Cruz)
PHIL 238T(F) Just War Theory (Instructor: White)
PHIL 271T(S) Woman as "Other" (Instructor: Sawicki)
PHIL 294T(S) Philosophy & Narrative Fiction (Instructor: Mladenovic)
PHIL 337T(F) Justice in Health Care (Instructor: Pedroni)
PHIL 391T(S) The Ethics of Hume and Kant (Instructor: Barry)
PHYS 405T(F) Electromagnetic Theory (Instructor: Seifert)
PSCI 208T(S) Wealth in America (Instructor: Johnson)
PSCI 331T(F) NonProfit Org&Communty Change (Instructor: Willingham)
PSCI 345T(F) Ancient Chinese Polit Thought (Instructor: Crane)
PSCI 352T(S) Comparative Political Economy (Instructor: Munemo)
290
PSYC 340T(S) Interdisciplinary Social Psych (Instructor: Fein)
REL 270T(F) Father Abraham (Instructor: Darrow)
RLSP 202T(S) 1898: Spain's Fin de Siglo (Instructor: Rouhi)
RLSP 306T(S) Latino Writing: Literature by U.S. Hispanics (Instructor: BellVillada)
RUSS 210T(S) Tolstoy:The Major Novels (Instructor: Cassiday)
Students may obtain detailed information about particular tutorials from the course descriptions and the instructors.
The Center for Development Economics is offering two graduate-level courses (ECON 516T and 520T) in the tutorial format. Interested undergraduates should consult
the course description and the instructor for eligibility.
The College acknowledges with deepest gratitude those classes and individuals who have created generous endowments to support tutorials at Wil-
liams:
The Class of 1953
The Class of 1954
The Class of 1964
The Class of 1979
Hugh Germanetti 1954
David A. Gray 1954
Robert L. Guyett 1958
The Hunter Family
John D. Mabie 1954
John H. Simpson 1979
The Testa Family
Tutorial Honoring Williams Health Center Nurses
WRITING-INTENSIVE COURSES
Courses designated as "writing intensive"--those marked with a "(W)"--stress the process of learning to write effectively. Such courses include a substantial
amount of writing (a minimum of 20 pages), usually divided into several discrete assignments. Instructors pay close attention to matters of style and argumenta-
tion. Enrollments are limited to 19.
All Williams College students are required to take two writing-intensive courses: one by the end of the sophomore year and one by the end of the junior year.
Students will benefit most from writing-intensive courses by taking them early in their college careers and are therefore strongly encouraged to complete the
requirement by the end of the sophomore year.
Courses that may be used to meet the requirement in 2011-2012:
AFR 129(F) Twentieth-Century Black Poets (Same as English 129) (W)
AFR 149(F) The 1959 Cuban Revolution: Precedents, Processes, and Legacies, 1898-2009 (Same as History 149) (W)
AFR 193(F) Black Power Abroad: Decolonization in Africa, the Caribbean and Europe (Same as History 193) (D) (W)
AFR 240(S) Introduction to the Music of Duke Ellington (Same as Music 240) (W)
AFR 330T(F) Non-Profit Organization and Community Change (Same as Political Science 331T) (W)
AFR 481T(S) Race and Revolution in Latin America (Same as History 481) (W)
AFR 482T(F) Fictions of African-American History (Same as History 482) (W)
AMST 144(S) American Ethnic Detective Fictions and Variations (Same as English 144) (W)
AMST 303T(F) Four American Poets (Same as English 301) (W)
AMST 346(S) Latinas/os and the Media: From Production to Consumption (Same as Comparative Literature 359 and Latina/o Studies 346) (W) (D)
AMST 356T(S) Feeling Queer: Theories of Emotion and Affect in Literary and Cultural Studies (Same as Comparative Literature 356, English 356 and
Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 355) (W) (D)
AMST 372T(S) American Modernist Fiction (Same as English 372T) (W)
AMST 409(F) Transnational Lives in Global Context (Senior Seminar) (Same as Latina/o Studies 409) (W) (D)
ANTH 222(S) Charisma and Celebrity (Same as Religion 273) (W)
ANTH 299(F) Ritual, Power and Transgression (Same as Religion 274) (W)
ANTH 324(S) Empires of Antiquity (W)
SOC 303(S) Cultures of Climate Change (Same as Environmental Studies 303) (W)
ARAB 402(S) Topics in Translation (W)
ARAB 410(F) Kings, Heroes, Gods, and Monsters: Historical Texts and Modern Identities in the Middle East (Same as History 410, Jewish Studies 410 and
Religion 405) (D) (W)
ARTH 201(F) American Landscape History (Same as Environmental Studies 201) (W)
ARTH 210(F) The Works of Modernist and Contemporary Landscape Architects (W)
ARTH 265(S) Pop Art (W)
ARTH 311(S) Infrastructure (Same as Environmental Studies 311) (W)
ARTH 330T(F) Michelangelo: Biography, Mythology, and the History of Art (W)
ARTH 376(S) The Path to Enlightenment: Zen and Zen Art In China and Japan (Same as Asian Studies 376 and Religion 252) (W)
ARTH 405(S) Seminar in Architectural Criticism (W)
ARTS 284(F) Writing for Film, Video, and Performance (Same as Theatre 284) (W)
ASST 376(S) The Path to Enlightenment: Zen and Zen Art In China and Japan (Same as ArtH 376 and Religion 252) (W)
ASTR 412T(S) Solar Physics (W)
BIMO 401(S) Topics in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (W)
BIOL 218T(F) DNA, Life and Everything (W)
BIOL 424T(F) Conservation Biology (Same as Environmental Studies 424T) (W)
CLAS 218(S) Gnosis, Gnostics, Gnosticism (Same as Comparative Studies 218, History 331 and Religion 218) (W)
CLAS 226(S) (formerly 105) The Ancient Novel (Same as Comparative Literature 226) (W)
CLAS 323(S) Leadership, Government, and the Governed in Ancient Greece (Same as History 323 and Leadership Studies 323) (W)
COMP 106(S) Happiness (Same as English 104) (W)
COMP 111(F) The Nature of Narrative (Same as English 120) (W)
COMP 117(F) Introduction to Cultural Theory (Same as English 117) (W)
COMP 139(S) Metafiction (Same as English 139) (W)
COMP 207T(S) Tolstoy: The Major Novels (Same as Russian 210T) (W)
COMP 211(S) Terrorism and Literature (W)
COMP 218(S) Gnosis, Gnostics, Gnosticism (Same as Classics 218, History 331 and Religion 218) (W)
COMP 226(S) The Ancient Novel (Same as Classics 226) (W)
COMP 237(F) Gender and Desire 1200-1600 (Same as English 237 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 237) (W) (D)
COMP 238(S) Comedy/Tragedy (Same as English 235) (W)
COMP 239(S) The Novel in Theory (Same as English 240) (W)
COMP 240(S) Introduction to Literary Theory (Same as English 230) (W)
COMP 283(S) Great Big Books (Same as English 233) (Gateway) (W)
COMP 294T(S) Philosophy and Narrative Fiction (Same as Philosophy 294) (W)
COMP 302T(S) Latino Writing: Literature by U.S. Hispanics (Same as Spanish 306T) (W)
COMP 310T(S) Storm and Stress and More (Same as German 310) (W)
COMP 316(S) Inscrutable Evil, or the Transformative Horror Film (Same as English 318) (W)
COMP 340(F) Literature and Psychoanalysis (Same as English 363) (W)
COMP 356T(S) Feeling Queer: Theories of Emotion and Affect in Literary and Cultural Studies (Same as American Studies 356 and English 356, and
Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 355) (W) (D)
COMP 359(S) Latinos/as and the Media: From Production to Consumption (Same as American Studies 346 and Latina/o Studies 346) (D) (W)
ECON 219T(S) Global Economic History (W)
ECON 228T(S) Water as a Scarce Resource (Same as Environmental Studies 228) (W)
ECON 391T(F) Economic Analysis of Housing Markets (W)
ECON 467T(S) Development Successes (Same as Economics 518T) (W)
ECON 518T(S) Development Successes (Same as Economics 467T) (W)
ENGL 103(F,S) Imagining Hell (W)
ENGL 104(S) Happiness (Same as Comparative Literature 106) (W)
ENGL 105(S) Poetry and Magic (W)
ENGL 111(S) Poetry and Politics (W)
291
ENGL 113(F) Modernist British Fiction (W)
ENGL 114(F) Literary Speakers (W)
ENGL 116(F) The Ethics of Fiction (W)
ENGL 117(F) Introduction to Cultural Theory (Same as Comparative Literature 117) (W)
ENGL 120(F) The Nature of Narrative (Same as Comparative Literature 111) (W)
ENGL 121(S) Precocity (W)
ENGL 123(F) Borrowing and Stealing: Originality in Literature and Culture (W)
ENGL 129(F) Twentieth-Century Black Poets (Same as Africana Studies 129) (W)
ENGL 132(F) "Feminaissance": Contemporary Poetry by Women (W)
ENGL 136(F) Shakespeare--Again (W)
ENGL 139(S) Metafiction (Same as Comparative Literature 139) (W)
ENGL 144(S) American Ethnic Detective Fictions and Variations (Same as American Studies 144) (W)
ENGL 150(S) Expository Writing (W)
ENGL 152(F) Other People's Lives: Contemporary American Memoir (W)
ENGL 231(F,S) Literature of the Sea (Same as Maritime Studies 231) (W) (Offered only at Mystic Seaport.)
ENGL 253(S) Gender, Sexuality and the Modern Stage (Same as Theatre 250 and Women and Gender Studies 250) (W) (D)
ENGL 286(S) After Nature (Same as Environmental Studies 285) (W)
ENGL 215(F) Imagining Immigrants (Gateway) (D) (W)
ENGL 222T(F) Lyric Poetry (Gateway) (W)
ENGL 226(F) Irish Revivals (W) (Gateway)
ENGL 230(S) Introduction to Literary Theory (Same as Comparative Literature 240) (Gateway) (W)
ENGL 233(S) Great Big Books (Same as Comparative Literature 283) (Gateway) (W)
ENGL 235(S) Comedy/Tragedy (Same as Comparative Literature 238) (Gateway) (W)
ENGL 237(F) Gender and Desire 1200-1600 (Same as Comparative Literature 237 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 237) (Gateway) (W) (D)
ENGL 240(S) The Novel in Theory (Same as Comparative Literature 239) (W) (Gateway)
ENGL 258(F) Poetry and the City (Gateway) (W)
ENGL 262(S) (formerly 356) Confession and Catharsis in the Poetry of Sylvia Plath and Ted Hughes (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 262)
(Gateway) (W)
ENGL 265(S) Topics in American Literature: Reason and Feeling in the American Eighteenth Century (Gateway) (W)
ENGL 267(S) The Art of Satire (W) (Gateway)
ENGL 301T(F) Four American Poets (Same as American Studies 303) (W)
ENGL 318(S) Inscrutable Evil, or the Transformative Horror Film (Same as Comparative Literature 316) (W)
ENGL 356T(S) Feeling Queer: Theories of Emotion and Affect in Literary and Cultural Studies (Same as American Studies 356, Comparative Literature 356
and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 355) (W) (D)
ENGL 363(F) Literature and Psychoanalysis (Same as Comparative Literature 340) (W)
ENGL 372T(S) American Modernist Fiction (Same as American Studies 372T) (W)
ENGL 414(F) Poetry and Prose of John Donne (W)
ENGL 424(F) Documentary Fictions (W)
ENGL 430T(F) Hitchcock and Psychoanalytic Theory (W)
ENGL 257(S) The Personal Essay: Writing Workshop (W)
ENGL 232(F) The Art of the Long Story (W)
ENGL 326(F) Fiction Workshop: Revision and Radical Revision (W)
ENVI 201(F) American Landscape History (Same as ArtH 201) (W)
ENVI 218T(F) The Carbon Cycle and Climate (Same as Geosciences 218T) (W)
ENVI 219T(S) Evolution Of and On Volcanic Islands (Same as Geosciences 220) (W)
ENVI 228T(S) Water as a Scarce Resource (Same as Economics 228) (W)
ENVI 285(S) After Nature (Same as English 286) (W)
ENVI 303(S) Cultures of Climate Change (Same as Sociology 303) (W)
ENVI 424T(F) Conservation Biology (Same as Biology 424T) (W)
FRS 101(F) Interpreting Human Experience (W)
GEOS 105(F) Geology Outdoors (W)
GEOS 218T(F) The Carbon Cycle and Climate (Same as Environmental Studies 218T) (W)
GEOS 220T(S) Evolution Of and On Volcanic Islands (Same as Environmental Studies 219) (W)
GEOS 302(S) Sedimentology (W)
GERM 310T(S) Storm and Stress and More (Same as Comparative Literature 310) (W)
GERM 311T(F) O Immortality! The Legacy of Heinrich von Kleist (W)
HIST 135T(F) The Great War, 1914-1918 (Same as Leadership Studies 135T) (W)
HIST 141(S) Adventures and Pleasures in the Russian Metropolis, 1880-1917 (W)
HIST 143(S) Soccer and History in Latin America: Making the Beautiful Game (W) (D)
HIST 149(F) The 1959 Cuban Revolution: Precedents, Processes, and Legacies, 1898-2009 (Same as Africana Studies 149) (W)
HIST 152(F) The Fourteenth Amendment and the Meanings of Equality (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 152) (W)
HIST 157(F) From Powhatan to Lincoln: Discovering Leadership in a New World (Same as Leadership Studies 157) (W)
HIST 158(S) Thicker than Water: American Political Dynasties (W)
HIST 168(S) 1968-1969: Two Years in America (W)
HIST 178T(S) Marriage and the American Nation (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 178T) (W)
HIST 193(F) Black Power Abroad: Decolonization in Africa, the Caribbean and Europe (Same as Africana Studies 193) (D) (W)
HIST 323(S) Leadership, Government, and the Governed in Ancient Greece (Same as Classics 323 and Leadership Studies 323) (W)
HIST 324(F) The Development of Christianity: 30-600 C.E. (Same as Religion 212) (W)
HIST 331(S) Gnosis, Gnostics, Gnosticism (Same as Classics 218, Comparative Literature 218 and Religion 218) (W)
HIST 352(F,S) America and the Sea, 1600-Present (Same as Maritime Studies 352) (Offered only at Mystic Seaport.) (W)
HIST 410(F) Kings, Heroes, Gods, and Monsters: Historical Texts and Modern Identities in the Middle East (Same as Arabic 410, Jewish Studies 410 and
Religion 405) (D) (W)
HIST 471(S) Comparative Latina/o Migrations (Same as Latina/o Studies 471) (D) (W)
HIST 481T(S) Race and Revolution in Latin America (Same as Africana Studies 481) (W)
HIST 482T(F) Fictions of African-American History (Same as Africana Studies 482) (W)
HIST 484T(F) Victorian Psychology (W)
HIST 487T(S) The Second World War: Origins, Course, Outcomes, and Meaning (W)
INTR 219T(F) Women in National Politics (Same as Politcal Science 219 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 219) (W)
JWST 270T(F) Father Abraham: The First Patriarch (Same as Religion 270) (W)
JWST 410(F) Kings, Heroes, Gods, and Monsters: Historical Texts and Modern Identities in the Middle East (Same as Arabic 410, History 410 and Religion
405) (D) (W)
LATS 346(S) Latinas/os and the Media: From Production to Consumption (Same as American Studies 346 and Comparative Literature 359) (D) (W)
LATS 409(F) Transnational Lives in Global Context (Same as American Studies 409) (W) (D)
LATS 471(S) Comparative Latina/o Migrations (Same as History 471) (D) (W)
LEAD 135T(F) The Great War, 1914-1918 (Same as History 135T) (W)
LEAD 157(F) From Powhatan to Lincoln: Discovering Leadership in a New World (Same as History 157) (W)
LEAD 242(F) America and the Vietnam War (Same as Political Science 242) (W)
LEAD 323(S) Leadership, Government, and the Governed in Ancient Greece (Same as History 323 and Classics 323) (W)
LEAD 365(S) U.S. Grand Strategy (Same as Political Science 365) (W)
LGST 401(S) Senior Seminar: Trials and Transitions (W)
MAST 231(F,S) Literature of the Sea (Same as English 231) (Offered only at Mystic Seaport.) (W)
MAST 352(F,S) America and the Sea, 1600-Present (Same as History 352) (Offered only at Mystic Seaport.) (W)
MUS 240(S) Introduction to the Music of Duke Ellington (Same as Africana Studies 240) (W)
MUS 402(S) Senior Seminar in Music: Schubert and Brahms (W)
PHIL 112(F,S) Who Are We? Philosophy and Human Nature (W)
PHIL 115(S) Personal Identity (W)
PHIL 117(S) Arguing about God (W)
PHIL 121(F) Trust, Goodness and Beauty (W)
PHIL 122(F) Philosophical Approaches to Contemporary Moral Issues (W)
PHIL 123(S) Objectivity in Ethics (W)
PHIL 124(S) (formerly 109T) Skepticism and Relativism (W)
PHIL 206(S) (formerly 202) Philosophy of Language and Philosophy of Mind (W)
PHIL 227(S) Death and Dying (W)
292
PHIL 238T(F) Just War Theory, Terrorism, and Weapons of Mass Destruction (Sames as Political Science 237) (W)
PHIL 271T(S) Woman as "Other" (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 271T) (D) (W)
PHIL 294T(S) Philosophy and Narrative Fiction (Same as Comparative Literature 294) (W)
PHIL 305(F) Existentialism and Phenomenology (W)
PHIL 340(S) Contemporary Metaphysics (W)
PHIL 391T(S) The Ethics of Hume and Kant (W)
PSCI 110(S) Seminar: The Politics of Place in America (W)
PSCI 120(S) Seminar: America and the World After September 11 (W)
PSCI 140(F) (formerly 102) Seminar: Religion and Capitalism (Same as Religion 283) (W)
PSCI 208T(S) Wealth in America (W)
PSCI 219T(F) Women in National Politics (Same as INTR 219 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 219) (W)
PSCI 242(F) America and the Vietnam War (Same as Leadership Studies 242) (W)
PSCI 315(S) Parties in American Politics (W)
PSCI 316(S) Policy Making Process (W)
PSCI 331T(F) Non-Profit Organization and Community Change (Same as Africana Studies 330T) (W)
PSCI 345T(F) Cosmology and Rulership in Ancient Chinese Political Thought (W)
PSCI 351(S) The New Left and Neoliberalism in Latin America (W)
PSCI 365(S) U.S. Grand Strategy (Same as Leadership Studies 365) (W)
PSYC 340T(S) Interdisciplinary Approaches to Social Psychology (W)
REL 212(F) The Development of Christianity: 30-600 C.E. (Same as History 324) (W)
REL 218(S) Gnosis, Gnostics, Gnosticism (Same as Classics 218, Comparative Studies 218 and History 331) (W)
REL 252(S) The Path to Enlightenment: Zen and Zen Art In China and Japan (Same as ArtH 376 and Asian Studies 376) (W)
REL 270T(F) Father Abraham: The First Patriarch (Same as Jewish Studies 270) (W)
REL 273(S) Charisma and Celebrity (Same as Anthropology 222) (W)
REL 274(F) Ritual, Power and Transgression (Same as Anthropology 299) (W)
REL 283(F) Religion and Capitalism (Same as Political Science 140) (W)
REL 284(F) What's At Work? (W)
REL 305(S) (formerly 284) Foucault (W)
REL 405(F) Kings, Heroes, Gods, and Monsters: Historical Texts and Modern Identities in the Middle East (Same as Arabic 410, History 410 and Jewish
Studies 410) (D) (W)
RLSP 202T(S) 1898: Spain's Fin de Siglo and the Crisis of Ideas (W)
RLSP 203(F) From Modernismo to El Boom de la Novela (W)
RLSP 306T(S) Latino Writing: Literature by U.S. Hispanics (Same as Comparative Literature 302T) (W)
RUSS 210T(S) Tolstoy: The Major Novels (Same as Comparative Literature 207T) (W)
THEA 250(S) Gender, Sexuality and the Modern Stage (Same as English 253 and Women and Gender Studies 250) (W) (D)
THEA 284(F) Writing for Film, Video, and Performance (Same as ArtS 284) (W)
WGSS 101(F,S) Introduction to Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies (W) (D)
WGSS 152(F) The Fourteenth Amendment and the Meanings of Equality (Same as History 152) (W)
WGSS 178T(S) Marriage and the American Nation (Same as History 178T) (W)
WGSS 219T(F) Women in National Politics (Same as INTR 219 and Politcal Science 219) (W)
WGSS 237(F) Gender and Desire 1200-1600 (Same as Comparative Literature 237 and English 237) (W) (D)
WGSS 250(S) Gender, Sexuality and the Modern Stage (Same as English 253 and Theatre 250) (W) (D)
WGSS 262(S) (formerly 356) Confession and Catharsis in the Poetry of Sylvia Plath and Ted Hughes (Same as English 262) (Gateway) (W)
WGSS 271T(S) Woman as "Other" (Same as Philosophy 271T) (D) (W)
WGSS 355T(S) Feeling Queer: Theories of Emotion and Affect in Literary and Cultural Studies (Same as American Studies 356, Comparative Literature 356
and English 356) (W) (D)
MAST 231(F,S) Literature of the Sea (Same as English 231) (W)
MAST 352(F,S) America and the Sea, 1600-Present (Same as History 352) (W)
WILLIAMS-EXETER PROGRAMME AT OXFORD UNIVERSITY
Director, Professor NANCY ROSEMAN
THE PROGRAMME
Williams College offers a year-long program of studies at Oxford University in co-operation with Exeter College (founded in 1314), one of the constituent
colleges of the University. Williams students will be enrolled as Visiting Students at Exeter and as such will be undergraduate members of the University, eligible
for access to virtually all of its facilities, libraries, and resources. As Visiting Students in Oxford, students admitted to the Programme will be fully integrated into
the intellectual and social life of one of the world's great universities.
Although students on the Programme will be members of Exeter College, entitled to make full use of Exeter facilities (including the College Library), dine
regularly in Hall, and join all College clubs and organizations on the same terms as other undergraduates at Exeter, students will reside in Ephraim Williams
House, a compound of four buildings owned by Williams College, roughly 1.4 miles north of the city centre. Six students from Exeter College will normally
reside in Ephraim Williams House each year, responsible for helping to integrate Williams students into the life of the College and the University. A resident
director (and member of the Williams faculty) administers Ephraim Williams House, oversees the academic program, and serves as both the primary academic
and personal advisor to Williams students in Oxford.
Students on the Williams-Exeter Programme are required to be in residence in Oxford from Thursday, 2\7 September 2012, until 22 June2013 with two breaks
for vacations between the three terms. Students enroll for the full academic year, which consists of three eight-week terms of instruction: MICHAELMAS TERM
(7 October to 1 December 2012), HILARY TERM (13 January to 9 March 2013), and TRINITY TERM (21 April to 15 June 2013). Students are expected to be
in residence to write their first tutorial papers in the week (0th Week) before the eight weeks of instruction begin and to remain in residence during the week (9th
Week) after the term ends in order to sit final examinations. Between the three terms there are two intervening five week vacations, during which students may be
expected to continue reading as preparation for their upcoming tutorials. Students are required to arrive in Oxford by 27 September 2012 for the ten-day orienta-
tion.
THE TUTORIAL SYSTEM
Undergraduate instruction at Oxford University is largely carried out through individual or small-group tutorials, in which students meet weekly with their
tutor to present and discuss an essay they have written, based on an extensive amount of reading undertaken from an assigned reading list they will receive at the
beginning of each term. In addition to the weekly tutorial, students are usually expected to attend a course of lectures offered by the University that corresponds to
the material being addressed in their tutorials.
Each student will plan a course of study for the three terms of the academic year in consultation with the director of the Programme. In his or her capacity as the
Tutor for Visiting Students at Exeter College, the director, working closely with Exeter's subject tutors, will arrange the teaching for the students, monitor student
progress, be in regular contact with the student's tutors, supervise the examinations that students sit at the end of each academic term, and report on each student's
academic progress to the Senior Tutor at Exeter College. There are no "add/drop" periods at Oxford; once a student has made a commitment to a particular tutorial
course, and the director has then secured a tutor to teach that course, students cannot back out or change the terms of the tutorial. All tutorials at Oxford are graded,
although in exceptional circumstances a tutorial may be converted to pass/fail before the end of the fourth week of term with the permission of the Programme
director.
Over the course of the three terms, students are required to enroll in a minimum of FIVE tutorial courses (each consisting of eight individual tutorial meetings
and generally requiring the preparation of eight essays). It is possible for students, in consultation with their tutor, to spread an eight-session tutorial out over two
terms, however. Although most students take the minimum five tutorial courses, many have enrolled in two tutorials per term for a total of six tutorials over their
time at Oxford.
GRADES AND CREDIT
Grades for each tutorial course reflect the grade assigned to all eight tutorial sessions, including their related essays, considered together, as well as the grade for
the final examination. Final examinations last three hours and are always sat in the ninth week of term, following the eight weeks of instruction. For some tutorial
courses, tutors may elect to offer the student the option of a final paper or project in lieu of an examination.
Upon satisfactory completion of the requirements for the Williams-Exeter Programme at Oxford University, students receive academic credit for a regular
Williams academic year, with each eight-session tutorial plus final examination counting as the equivalent of 1.6 regular semester courses taken at Williams.
Grades eventually become a part of their Williams transcript and will be included in the computation of their Grade Point Average.
Tutorial courses in Oxford may be used toward fulfilling the divisional distribution requirement; a student may earn a maximum of three distribution require-
ments, with no more than one from each division, for the year. All tutorial courses at Oxford meet the Williams College "Writing Intensive" designation, except
for those in the studio arts, mathematics, and the sciences.
293
Tutorial courses in Oxford may also be used to meet major requirements. Students are encouraged to check with their department chair(s) to confirm official
department policy.
THE COURSE OF STUDY
In addition to the opportunity to pursue British and Commonwealth Studies, Williams students in Oxford will be able to pursue tutorials in fields in which
Oxford is particularly noted (Economics, English Literature, Modern History, Philosophy, Politics, Classics, Theology, the Natural Sciences, etc.). Exeter College
also has fellows in English Language and Literature (with interests ranging from the Renaissance-including Shakespeare-to the early nineteenth century), in
Politics (with interests in international relations and comparative politics), and in History (with an interest in the medieval period) committed to teaching Williams
students, and students are thus encouraged to consider undertaking at least one tutorial course in these fields as part of their course of study.
What follows is a PARTIAL list of tutorial courses normally available to students studying on the Williams-Exeter Programme at Oxford. The tutorials listed
below represent a selection of some of the standard "papers" (courses) that comprise the Oxford degrees in various subjects and that are taught in tutorial format,
although most are not offered every Oxford term. It needs to be emphasized that this is only a partial list, that the tutorial offerings at Oxford University are
incredibly rich, and that one of the attractions of the Programme is that it enables students to define, develop, and pursue their academic interests. Students are
therefore encouraged to explore all the courses offered at Oxford even if they are not listed in this Catalog.
Tutorial courses are not offered every term and are often accompanied by scheduled lectures. Although the term in which the lectures are delivered is some-
times listed below, as is the term in which students should take the tutorials (MT-Michaelmas Term; HT-Hilary Term; TT-Trinity Term), these change from year to
year. It is therefore imperative that students consult the relevant "faculty" webpages to make sure when the lectures and/or tutorials they wish to take are actually
offered. Sometimes, where appropriate, prerequisites are also listed.
A full summary of the list of courses offered by subject can be found at: http://www.ox.ac.uk/admissions/undergraduate_courses/courses/index.html.
Although some courses descriptions are provided below, detailed descriptions of all the courses listed in this catalog can be found on the websites of respective
departments or faculties the links of which can be found at: http://www.ox.ac.uk/divisions/department_az.html.
THE COURSE OF STUDY
A full summary of the list of courses offered by subject can be found at: http://www.ox.ac.uk/admissions/undergraduate_courses/courses/index.html.
Although some courses descriptions are provided below, detailed descriptions of all the courses listed in this catalog can be found on the websites of
respective departments or faculties the links of which can be found at: http://www.ox.ac.uk/divisions/department_az.html. For a full list of lecture in
all divisions at the university, visit: http://www.admin.ox.ac.uk/pubs/lectures/
Archaeology and Anthropology
http://www.anthropology.ox.ac.uk/
http://www.arch.ox.ac.uk/
WIOX Social Analysis and Interpretation
WIOX Cultural Representations, Beliefs, and Practices
WIOX Landscape, Ecology, and Human Evolution
WIOX Urbanization and Change in Complex Societies: Comparative Approaches
WIOX Anthropology
Topics include but are not limited to:
Culture and Society of West Africa
South Asia (Caste and Humanism)
Lowland South America
Maritime South East Asia
Gender in Cross-Cultural Perspective
Human Genetical Variation
Primates in Anthropology
Material Cultural Studies
Visual Anthropology and the Anthropology of Art
Japanese Society
China and the Overseas Chinese
Tibet and the Himalayas
Anthropology of Europe
WIOX Archaeolgy
Topics include but are not limited to:
The Origins of Modern Humans
Archaeology of southern African Hunter-Gatherers
Farming and Early States in Sub-Saharan Africa
Mesopotamia and Egypt from the Emergence of Complex Society to c. 2000 BC
Mesopotamia and Egypt, 1000-500 BC
Greek Archaeology and Art, c. 500-323 BC
Europe in Transition: The Emergence and Development of Early Farming Societies
Science-Based Methods in Archaeology
Archaeology of Modern Human Origins
The Archaeology of Anglo-Saxon England in the Early Christian Period, c. 600-750
Archaeology and Geographical Information Systems
Landscape Archaeology
The Late Glacial in Europe: Pathways to Complexity?
Biological Techniques in Environmental Archaeology
Themes in European Mesolithic Studies
WIOX Biochemistry, Molecular and Cellular
http://www.bioch.ox.ac.uk/
WIOX Molecular Cell Biology
WIOX Biological Chemistry
WIOX Biophysical Chemistry
WIOX Organic Chemistry
WIOX Mathematics and Statistics for Biochemists
WIOX Structure and Function of Metabolics
WIOX Energetics and Metabolic Processes
WIOX Genetics and Molecular Biology
WIOX Cell Biology and the Integration of Function
294
WIOX Biological Sciences
http://www.biology.ox.ac.uk/
WIOX Evolution (these all have course descriptions)
WIOX Quantitative Methods
WIOX Adaptation to the Environment
WIOX Animal Behavior
WIOX Plants and People
WIOX Ecology
WIOX Cell and Developmental Biology
WIOX Disease
WIOX Chemistry
http://www.chem.ox.ac.uk/
A full list of courses and lectures offered in Chemistry can be found at : http://www.chem.ox.ac.uk/teaching/UndergradHandbook2008.pdf
WIOX Inorganic Chemistry
WIOX Organic Chemistry
WIOX Physical Chemistry
WIOX Mathematics for Chemistry
WIOX Solid State Chemistry
WIOX Classical Archeology and Ancient History
WIOX Aristocracy and Democracy in the Greek World, 550-450 BC
WIOX Republic to Empire, Rome 50 BC to 50 AD
WIOX Early Greece and the Mediterranean, c.800-500 BC
WIOX Greek Art and Archaeology, c.500-300 BC
WIOX Rome, Italy, and the Hellenistic East, c.300-100 BC
WIOX Roman Archaeology: Cities and Settlements under the Empire
WIOX Egyptian Art and Architecture
WIOX The Late Bronze Age and Early Iron Age Aegean
WIOX Greek and Roman Coins
WIOX Art under the Roman Empire, AD 14-337
WIOX The Transformation of the Celtic World, 500-BC-AD 100
WIOX The Archaeology of the Late Roman Empire, AD 284-641
WIOX Byzantium: The Transition from Antiquity to the Middle Ages, AD 500-1100
WIOX The Emergence of Medieval Europe, AD 400-900
WIOX The Formation of the Islamic World, AD 550-950
WIOX Epigraphy of the Greek and Roman World, c.700 BC-AD 300
WIOX From Julian the Apostate to St Augustine, AD 350-95
WIOX Francia in the Age of Clovis and Gregory of Tours
WIOX Roman History, 146-46 BC
WIOX The Archaeology of Minoan Crete, 3200-1000 BC
WIOX Mediterranean Maritime Archaeology
WIOX Classics
http://www.classics.ox.ac.uk/
A full lecture list of classics courses can be found at: http://www.classics.ox.ac.uk/lectures/leclist.asp?ListType=CL
WIOX Cicero and Cataline
WIOX Greek Literature of the 5th Century B.C.
WIOX Homer, Odyssey, in Greek or in Translation
WIOX Latin Literature of the First Century BC
WIOX New Testament Greek
Ancient History
WIOX Greek History, 479-403 BC
WIOX Greek History, 403-336 BC
WIOX Roman History, 146-46 BC
WIOX Roman History, 46 BC-AD 54
WIOX The Early Greek World and Herodotus' Histories: 650 to 479 BC
WIOX Thucydides and the Greek World: 479 to 403 BC
WIOX The End of the Peloponnesian War to the Death of Philip II of Macedon: 403 to 336 BC
WIOX Polybius, Rome and the Mediterranean: 241-146 BC
WIOX Republic in Crisis, 146-46 BC
WIOX Rome, Italy and Empire from Caesar to Claudius, 46 BC to AD 54
WIOX Athenian Democracy in the Classical Age
WIOX Alexander the Great and His Early Successors, 336-302 BC
WIOX The Hellenistic World: societies and Cultures c.300-100 BC
WIOX Cicero: Politics and Thought in the Late Republic
WIOX Politics, Society, and Culture from Nero to Hadrian
WIOX Religions in the Greek and Roman World, c.31 BC-AD 312
WIOX Sexuality and Gender in Greece and Rome
WIOX The Greeks and the Mediterranean World, 950-500 BC
WIOX Classics and English
WIOX Epic (Homer, Virgil, Lucan, Milton, Dryden, Pope)
WIOX Tragedy (Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides, Seneca, Kyd, Marlowe, Shakespeare, Jonson, Webster, Middleton, Ford, Milton)
WIOX Comedy (Aristophanes, Menander, Plautus, Terence, Gascoigne, Lyly, Shakespeare, Jonson, Wycherley, Vanbrugh, Congreve, Sheri-
dan)
295
WIOX Satire (Horace, Wyatt, Donne, Marston, Dryden, Johnson, Pope)
WIOX Pastoral (Theocritus, Bion, Virgil, Mantuan, Tasso, Guarini, Spenser, Fletcher, Milton, Pope, Shelley, Arnold)
WIOX Medieval and Renaissance Latin Hexameter Poetry
WIOX The Reception of Classical Literature in Poetry in English since 1900
WIOX Classics and Modern Languages
WIOX Classics and Oriental Studies
WIOX Computer Science
WIOX Earth Sciences (Geology)
WIOX Physics and Chemistry of the Earth
WIOX Earth Materials
WIOX Earth Surface Processes
WIOX Economics and Management
http://www.economics.ox.ac.uk/
All of the Economics teaching is arranged by Oxford's Economics Department and not by the Director of the Williams-Exeter Programme. Students
will be expected to attend the lectures in all terms designated and undertake their tutorial work in the appropriate term. For a full list of courses, visit
http://www.economics.ox.ac.uk/index.php/undergraduate/matrix.
WIOX Quantitative Economics core course
This is a compulsory course for all PPE (and EM and HE) finalists. The lectures and classes will be given in Trinity Term. The QE course is designed
to give students a good understanding of the rationale for and intuition about the application of statistical methods to the analysis of a range of applied
economics issues, such as the economics effects of education or the behaviour of aggregate consumption. Topics covered will include descriptive statis-
tics, basic statistical distributions and applications to economic data, sampling and hypothesis testing, regression analysis and the testing and interpreta-
tion of regression results, time series modelling and empirical applications of these methods in micro and macroeconomics.
WIOX Macroeconomics
Alternative macroeconomic theories and policy implications; aggregate investment and consumption; demand for money; unemployment and infla-
tion; balance of payments adjustment; exchange rates; supply-side policies; monetary and fiscal policy; international aspects of macroeconomic
policy-all with special reference to the UK and its membership of the EU. (Similar to Economics 252.)
Prerequisites: Economics 110 and 120. Lectures: HT. Tutorials: HT only.
WIOX Microeconomics
Risk, uncertainty and information; the firm and market structures; welfare economics; externalities, public goods, and the sources of market failure;
the distribution of income; trade and protection; the applications of microeconomics to public policy issues. (Similar to Economics 251.)
Prerequisites: Economics 110 and 120. Lectures: MT. Tutorials: MT only.
WIOX Microeconomic Theory
Rigorous study of core elements of microeconomic theory. Topics may (but not necessarily) include: decisions making under risk and uncertainty;
theory of search under uncertainty; models of contracting under asymmetric information; theory of general economic equilibrium; theory of social
choice. A descriptive list of the topics will be published on the Economics Web site before the beginning of the year in which the course is taught and
examined. Questions will be set requiring candidates to solve problems and demonstrate conceptual understanding of core elements of microeconomic
theory.
WIOX Money and Banking
The nature and definition of money; the role, behavior, and regulation of banks and other financial intermediaries; the supplies of money and credit;
the interest rate structure and equity prices; the aims, instruments, and practice of monetary policy; foreign exchange markets and monetary policy;
the relations between monetary and fiscal policy.
Prerequisites: Economics 110, 120, and 252. Lectures and Tutorials: MT
WIOX Economics of Industry
Market structures, costs and scale economies; oligopoly and the theory of games; empirical studies of pricing and profitability; advertising and product
differentiation; mergers and vertical integration; public enterprises and public policy towards market structure; managerial theories of the firm.
Prerequisites: Economics 110, 120, and 251. Lectures and Tutorials: HT.
WIOX Labour Economics and Industrial Relations
Organization and policies of trade unions and employers' associations; employer-employee relations; the theory and practice of collective bargaining;
the role of the government in industrial relations; the application of economic analysis to labor markets; economic aspects of trade unions; the econom-
ics of labor policy.
Prerequisites: Economics 110 and 120; Economics 251 or 252. Lectures and Tutorials: MT, HT
WIOX International Economics
Theories of international trade and their application to economic policy and current problems; theory and practice of economic integration; current
problems of the international trading system; methods of balance of payments adjustment and financing; behavior of floating exchange rates; Exchange
Rate Regimes and the International Monetary System. Prerequisites: Economics 110 and 120; Economics 251 or 252. Lectures and Tutorials: MT,
HT
WIOX Command and Transitional Economies
Traditional command economies, attempts to reform them in the direction of market socialism, and the transition to market economies. Focus is largely
on Russia and the nations of Eastern Europe, with some attention to China.
Prerequisites: Economics 110 and 120; Economics 251 or 252. Lectures and Tutorials: MT, HT
WIOX Public Economics
Welfare-economic foundations; the measurement of well-being; taxation and incentives; taxation, debt, and behavior over time; health, education, and
social security; public goods, externalities and market failure; policy towards natural resources and the environment.
Prerequisites: Economics 110, 120, and 251. Lectures and Tutorials: HT
WIOX Economics of Developing Countries
Theories of growth and development; poverty and income distribution; human resources; labor markets and employment; industrialization and
technology; agriculture and rural development; monetary and fiscal issues; foreign aid; the role of government in development.
296
Prerequisites: Economics 110 and 120; Economics 251 or 252. Lectures and Tutorials: MT, HT
WIOX British Economic History Since 1870
Trends and cycles in national income; changes in the structure of output, employment, and capital; the location of industries, industrial concentration,
and the growth of large firms; prices, interest rates, and public finance; trade unions and the labor market; poverty and living standards; foreign trade;
government policy.
Prerequisites: Economics 110 and 120; Economics 251 or 252 . Lectures and Tutorials: MT, HT.
WIOX Statistical Methods in Economics
This contains a compulsory section on methods of statistical analysis, followed by applications to economics. In methods of statistical analysis you
are introduced to elements of probability theory, the standard statistical distributions, estimation and hypothesis testing. The applications in Economics
are concerned with the application of techniques of statistical inference to economic problems. Additional techniques which are examined include
the seasonal adjustment of time series and the construction of index numbers. The syllabus for this paper is currently under revision.
WIOX Econometrics
The objective of the course is to introduce students to econometrics and regression models. This includes an overview of regression techniques and
applications to cross-sectional data and time series data as used in microeconomics and macroeconomics, respectively. The course aims to reach a level
of econometrics such that applied economic journals can be read with a good understanding and a critical perspective.
Tutorials and Lectures: split between MT and HT.
WIOX Comparative Demographic Systems
The course deals with the major subject areas and controversies in contemporary demography. These include: the status of demographic transition
models, theories of low fertility and of divergent mortality in the industrial world; the prospects for welfare systems in ageing societies, new forms
of family and household and their future; the realities and prospects of mass migration. Population growth, economic development, environmental
pressures and new threats to health in the post-war third world will receive attention, and the future of world population as growth rates slacken and
poor societies begin population ageing. Intended and unintended consequences of government actions on demographic phenomena, and the historical
origins of Europe's distinctive demography will be emphasised.
Tutorials and Lectures: MT and HT.
WIOX Economics of OECD Countries
This course analyses developments since 1945 in the major OECD economies. A comparative framework is used to examine overall developments,
centring on the USA, Japan and Europe. Students may then specialise in one of the major areas. Broad topics covered in comparative perspective in-
clude economic growth in the 'golden age'; the growth and productivity slow-down starting in the 1970s; the rise of unemployment; the inflation of
the 1970s and the disinflation of the 1980s and the international monetary system. Within Europe the course focuses on the process of European integra-
tion, its results and challenges. It also looks at features of individual economies such as the 'German model' and the 'Swedish model'. The US section
covers issues such as the
73 PPE HANDBOOK 2009-10 'new economy' of the 1990s, macro-economic policy and the causes of inequality. The Japanese section includes the
transition from rapid growth to stagnation, the Japanese labour market and financial systems.
WIOX Economic Decisions within the Firm
The aim of the course is to introduce the student to operational research models and methods, which are useful for understanding problems as faced
by firms and other agents, and for making decisions concerning these problems.
Lectures and Tutorials: HT
WIOX Finance
The Finance elective is a comprehensive introduction to topics in finance including both an asset pricing component and a corporate finance compo-
nent. In asset pricing, topics will cover foundational lectures on expected utility theory and models of financial market equilibrium. We will then
discuss the pricing of derivative securities and aspects of financial market efficiency. The corporate finance component will cover aspects of capital
budgeting, discounted cash flow and capital project appraisal methods and issues relating to the cost of capital. Methods of company finance, capital
structure, dividend policy will also be covered along with an introduction to mergers and acquisitions.
Lectures and Tutorials: HT
WIOX Game Theory
Game theory is the study of strategic interaction. Some elements of game theory appear in the 2nd-year microeconomics core course. This course will
develop the basic concepts studied then, and introduce more advanced material, including recent state-of-the-art research. The focus will be on the
application of these concepts to the social sciences. Although the applications for the most part will be drawn from economics, examples from political
science and further afield may also be studied.
WIOX Quantitative Economics
To introduce the students to quantitative economics and in particular the notions of empirical distributions, inference and the assumptions for inference,
regression analysis, multivariate problems such as the demand and supply model and cointegration in macroeconomic time series. Throughout the
ideas will be motivated by data and applied questions. Software for quantitative analysis will be introduced. It is assumed that the students have only
little prior experience with quantitative economics, whether it is in the form of probability, statistics or data analysis.
Lectures and Tutorials: TT
WIOX Mathematical Methods
The paper will cover mathematical tools such as Calculus, Linear Algebra, Differential and Difference Equations, Probability and Statistical Inference
and their applications to Economics. Applications will not require knowledge of material covered in other optional papers but will assume knowledge
of the core first and second year papers. A detailed syllabus will be published every year.
WIOX Economic Theory
Questions on the paper will be on theoretical aspects of economic analysis with applications to topics such as: with applications to topics such as:
producers, consumers and general equilibrium; uncertainty and contracts; game theory; welfare and social choice; foundations of macroeconomics;
growth theory.
Lectures and Tutorials: MT
WIOX Management
Topics include but are not limited to:
Accounting
Organisational Behaviour and Analysis
Employment Relations
Strategic Management
Marketing
Technology and Operations Management
International Business
297
WIOX Engineering Science
WIOX Engineering, Economics, and Management
WIOX English Languages and Literatures
http://www.english.ox.ac.uk
Visit the following website for a full list of courses offered: http://www.english.ox.ac.uk/prospective-undergraduates/course-structure.html#fhs
WIOX English Literature (surveys)
The following courses offer general introductions to the literature of specific periods of English history. There are no prerequisites for these courses,
but usually they are available only in the terms indicated below. Exeter's Williams Fellow in English is normally available to teach WIOX 330c, d,
e, and f to Williams students; a, b, and g are taught by other tutors.
English Literature from 600 to 1100 MT, HT
English Literature from 1100 to 1509 MT, HT
English Literature from 1509 to 1642 MT, TT
English Literature from 1642 to 1740 HT, TT
English Literature from 1740 to 1832 TT
English Literature from 1832 to 1900 MT
English Literature from 1900 to present HT
WIOX Shakespeare
Consideration of Shakespeare's work in its broader literary and historical context, with a focus on both the range of Shakespeare's writings and the
details of specific plays. Students may choose to focus on specific aspects of Shakespeare's work.
No prerequisites, normally available in all three terms
WIOX The History, Theory, and Use of the English Language
The history, use, and theory of the English language, with special reference to literary language, from Chaucer to the present day. Topics in linguistic
theory (such as vocabulary, syntax and morphology, social and geographical aspects of the use of English), as well as in the history and theories of
literary language (such as figurative language, relations between oral and written discourse, and literary language as persuasion and social action.
No prerequisites; normally available in all three terms.
WIOX Old English
WIOX Old English Literature
WIOX Old English Philology
WIOX Middle English Dialectology
WIOX Modern English Philology
WIOX Linguistic Theory
WIOX Special Authors
This course allows students to focus in detail on the work of one or more authors.
Prerequisite: some background in the close reading of literary texts and a general familiarity with the literature of the period.
The following are the Special Authors who are currently studied for the Special Authors course of the Oxford University syllabus.
The Beowulf poet, or Alfred, or the Exeter Book (600-1100) MT
Chaucer, or Langland, or the York Cycle, or the N-Town Cycle (1100-1509) MT
Spenser, or Milton, or Jonson (1509-1642) MT
Marvell, or Dryden, or Eliza Haywood (1642-1740) MT
Wordsworth, or Austen, or Byron (1740-1832) MT,
Tennyson, or Dickens, or Wilde (1832-1900) MT
Conrad, or Yeats , or Woolf (1900-present) MT
Walcott, or Roth, or Friel MT
Emerson, or Dickenson, or Faulker, MT
These papers can possibly be taken during Hilary Term
WIOX Special Topics
It is open to Williams students to devise a general topic of their own choice for study, falling within one of the categories below, when tutors are avail-
able. The option is similar to the Special Topic course followed by third-year Oxford undergraduates. The choice of Special Topic is usually configured
so as approximately to correspond chronologically with the period papers on offer at any given point in the year, and with the provision of teaching
and lectures-although in practice there may often be some overlap across periods.
Prerequisite: some background in the close reading of literary texts and a general familiarity with the literature of the period.
Linguistic Theory
Medieval and Renaissance Romance
Scottish Literature
Old Norse
Gothic
Old Saxon
Medieval French Literature
Medieval Welsh Language and Literature
Classical Literature
Fiction in English
Drama in English
Prose in English
Poetry in English
American Literature from the beginnings to the present day
Women's Writing in English
History and Theory of Criticism
Postcolonial Literature
WIOX English and Modern Languages
WIOX European and Middle Eastern Languages
WIOX Experimental Psychology
298
WIOX Fine Art
http://www.ruskin-sch.ox.ac.uk/
WIOX Drawing
WIOX Practical Studio Based Work
WIOX History and Theory of Visual Culture
WIOX Human Anatomy
WIOX Geography
WIOX Earth Systems Processes
The course will require an understanding of the physical geography of the Earth, based around core concepts and principles. Students should be able
to display familiarity with mechanisms and processes under the headings of atmosphere, biosphere, and lithosphere, and a grasp of linkages between
topics taught under these headings.
WIOX Human Geography
This course will examine the following themes and the relationships between them at a variety of scales: cities, societies, and migrants; ecologies,
resources, and economies; territories, states, and identities.
WIOX Critical Thinking for Geographers
This course will require an understanding of the practices of critical thinking, examined using the history of geography, its major debates and episodes
as source material.
WIOX Geographical Techniques
The subject will comprise the theoretical and practical aspects of geographical techniques. Students will be expected to be conversant with problem
solving in both human and physical branches of the discipline.
WIOX The Geographical Environment: Physical
The Nature of the major world physical environments their internal interrelationships and their significance to humans, plants, and animals; processes
of environmental change with particular reference to those that directly affect humans; humans as agents of change in the physical environment.
WIOX The Geographical Environment: Human
The philosophical, technical, and social basis of approaches to and use of the environment; the history, economics, and politics of environmental ex-
ploitation and conservation in the major physical regions of the world; the definition of space and territories and the principles of spatial organization
in different societies; geographical variations in patterns of resource use, human activity, population growth, and well-being, and their expression in
the cultural landscape; the processes of international interdependence.
WIOX The Philosophy, Nature, and Practice of Geography
The development of theory and practice in physical and human geography; the ideas and methods associated with the major schools of thought.
WIOX History
http://www.history.ox.ac.uk/
For more information on History lectures offered, visit: http://www.history.ox.ac.uk/lecturelist/index.htm
For a full list of courses offered in History, please visit:
http://www.history.ox.ac.uk/currentunder/prelims/modhist/index.htm
http://www.history.ox.ac.uk/currentunder/honours/history/index.htm
WIOX General History
The following courses offer general introductions to western history during specific time periods. There are no prerequisites for these courses and
tutorials can generally be arranged for any of them in Michaelmas and Trinity terms.
For a full list of General History courses see:
http://www.history.ox.ac.uk/currentunder/PRELIMS_HBK_2008-9.pdf#page=31
http://www.history.ox.ac.uk/currentunder/honours/history/general/index.htm
General History i, 285-476
General History ii, 476-750
General History iii, 700-900
General History iv, 900-1122
General History v, 1122-1273
General History vi, 1273-1409
General History vii, 1409-1525
General History viii, 1500-1618
General History ix, 1600-1715
General History x, 1715-1799
General History xi, 1789-1871
General History xii, 1856-1914
General History xiii, 1914-1945
General History xiv, 1941-1973
General History xv, Britain's North American Colonies: from settlement to independence, 1600-1812
General History xvi, From Colonies to Nation: the history of the United States, 1776-1877
General History xvii, The History of the United States sine 1863
General History xviii, Imperial and Global History 1750-1914
General History, periods I to IV
The following courses offer general introduction to western history during specific time periods. There are prerequisites for these courses and tutorials
can generally be arranged for any of them in Hilary terms.
General History I. 370-900: The Transformation of the Ancient World
General History II. 1000-1300: Medieval Christendom and its Neighbors
General History III. 1400-1650: Renaissance, Recovery, and Reform
General History IV. 1815-1914: Society, Nation, and Empire
WIOX History of the British Isles (surveys)
299
The following courses offer general introductions to the History of the British Isles, paying particular attention to the evolution and development of
Britain as a nation and to the major political, social, and economic trends that have shaped the course of the nation's development.
There are no prerequisites for these courses and while lectures are normally delivered in Michaelmas Term, tutorials can generally be arranged for
any of them in Michaelmas and Trinity terms.
For a full list of courses see:
http://www.history.ox.ac.uk/currentunder/PRELIMS_HBK_2008-9.pdf#page=21
http://www.history.ox.ac.uk/currentunder/honours/history/HistoryoftheBritishIsles.htm
I. c.300-1087
II. 1042-1330
III. 1330-1550
IV. 1500-1700
V. 1685-1830
VI. 1815-1924
VII. 1900 to the present
WIOX FHS Further Subjects, Periods I to IV
Offered in Hilary Term, these require attendance in classes as well as tutorials. Each is based on a large number of primary sources which must be
read in advance over the Christmas holiday. In order to gain admission to these courses, students must register well in advance, by the end of first
week of Michaelmas Term.
http://www.history.ox.ac.uk/currentunder/honours/history/further/index.htm
1. Anglo-Saxon Archaeology of the Early Christian Period. c600-750
2. The Near East in the Age of Justinian and Muhammad, 527-c.700
3. The Carolingian Renaissance
4. The Crusades
5. Culture and Society in Early Renaissance Italy, 1290-1348
6. Flanders and Italy in the Quattrocento, 1420-1480
7. The Wars of the Roses, 1450- 1500
8. Women, Gender and Print Culture in Reformation England, c. 1530-1640
9. Literature and Politics in Early Modern England
10. English Society in the Seventeenth Century
11. Society and Government in France, 1610-1715
12. The Metropolitan Crucible, London 1685-1815
13. The First Industrial Revolution, 1700-1870
14. Medicine, Empire and Improvement, 1720 to 1820
15. The Age of Jefferson, 1774-1826
16. Culture and Society in France from Voltaire to Balzac
17. Nationalism in Western Europe, 1799- 1890
18. Intellect and Culture in Victorian Britain
19. The Authority of nature: Race, Heredity and Crime, 1800-1940
20. Imperialism and Nationalism, 1830-1980
21. Modern Japan, 1868-1972
22. British Economic History since 1870 (as prescribed for the Honour School of Philosophy, Politics, and Economics)
23. Revolutionary Mexico, 1910-1940
24. Nationalism, Politics and Culture in Ireland, c1870-1921
25. A Comparative History of the First World War, 1914-20
26. China in War and Revolution, 1890-1949
27. The Soviet Union, 1924-1941
28. Culture, Politics and Identity in Cold War Europe, 1945-1968
29. Scholasticism and Humanism
30. The Science of Society, 1650-1800
31. Political Theory and Social Science
WIOX History (Ancient and Modern)
WIOX History and Economics
WIOX History and English
WIOX An Introduction to Literary Studies
WIOX History and Modern Languages
WIOX History and Politics
WIOX Introduction to Politics: Analysis of Democratic Institutions
WIOX History of Art
http://www.hoa.ox.ac.uk/
Visit the following website for a brief summary of the courses offered:
http://www.hoa.ox.ac.uk/admissions/overview.htm
WIOX Introduction to the History of Art
WIOX Antiquity after Antiquity
WIOX European Art, 1400-1800: Meaning and Interpretation
WIOX Objects, Images, and Buildings in Oxford
WIOX Approaches to the History of Art
WIOX Further Subjects in Art
Anglo-Saxon Archaeology of the Early Christian Period (History FS)
The Carolingian Renaissance (History FS)
Northern European Portraiture, 1400-1800
300
Culture and Society in Early Renaissance Italy, 1290-1348
Flanders and Italy in the Quattrocento, 1420-1480
Court Culture and Art in Early Modern Europe (History FS)
Intellect and Culture in Victorian Britain (History FS)
WIOX Classical, Pre-Modern or Non-Western Art Option
Greek Art and Archaeology, c.500-300 BC
Art Under the Roman Empire, AD 14-337
The Formation of the Islamic World, AD 550-950
Byzantine Art: The transition from Antiquity to the Middle Ages, 500-1100
Gothic Art through Medieval Eyes
Art in China since 1911
Material Culture and the Anthropology of Things
Egyptian Art and Architecture
WIOX Modern Art Option
Literature and the Visual Arts from Diderot to Zola
German Expressionism in Literature and the Visual Arts
European Cinema
Modernism and After
Material Culture and the Anthropology of Things
The Experience of Modernity: visual Culture, 1880-1925
Art in China since 1911
WIOX Special Subjects in Art History
Royal Art and Architecture in Norman Sicily, 1130-1194
Painting and Culture in Ming China
Politics, Art and Culture in the Italian Renaissance: Venice and Florence, c.1475-1525
English Architecture 1660-1720 (Tyack)
A study of the principal buildings of Wren, Hawksmoor, Jones and Vanburgh in relation to the contemporary historical background.
Prerequisites: ArtH 101 and 102. Lectures: MT, HT. Tutorials: any term.
Art and its Public in France, 1815-67
WIOX Historiography and Methodologies of Art History
An overview of the development of the History of Art as a discipline. The course surveys influential projects of the field and the methods it has adopted
for executing them. Topics include: style and periodization; iconography, semiotics; narratology, spectatorship; the social functions of images and the
social history of art; art and the market;
gender and sexuality; and art-historical narrative as representation. With permission of the Art Department, counts as ARTH 301.
Prerequisites: ARTH 101-102. Lectures: MT and HT, with permission. Tutorials: depending on availability, any term.
WIOX Human Sciences
WIOX The Biology of Organisms including Humans
WIOX Genetics and Evolution
WIOX Society, Culture, and Environment
WIOX Sociology and Demography
WIOX Quantitative Methods for the Human Sciences
WIOX Behaviour and its Evolution: Animal and Human
WIOX Human Genetics and Evolution
WIOX Human Ecology
WIOX Demography and Population
WIOX Anthropological Analysis and Interpretation
WIOX Sociological Theory
WIOX Law (Jurisprudence)
http://www.law.ox.ac.uk/
Please refer to the Undergraduate Student Handbook at http://denning.law.ox.ac.uk/published/ughandbook.pdf for a detailed introduction to the sub-
ject and courses.
WIOX Constitutional Law
WIOX Criminal Law
WIOX Medical Law
WIOX Jurisprudence
WIOX International Public Law
WIOX Contract
WIOX Tort
WIOX Land Law
WIOX European Community Law
WIOX Trusts
WIOX Administrative Law
WIOX Materials Science
WIOX I. Structure of Materials
WIOX II. Properties of Materials
WIOX III. Transforming Materials
WIOXMathematics for Materials and Earth Science
WIOX Structures and Transformations
WIOX Electronic Properties of Materials
WIOX Mechanical Properties
WIOX Engineering Applications of Materials
301
WIOX Materials, Economics, and Management
WIOX Mathematics
http://www.maths.ox.ac.uk/
Please visit http://www.maths.ox.ac.uk/courses/materials for a full listing of undergraduate courses offered at Oxford. Moderation and Part A courses
are most relevant.
WIOX Introduction to Groups, Rings and Fields
Algebra is the study of properties and characteristics of sets with one or two operations: groups, rings, and fields; investigation may lead to the insolv-
ability of the classical construction problems or to the rudiments of Galois theory. Counts as Math 312 at Williams. Prerequisites: Math 209, 251, or
Stat 201. Lectures: HT or TT (Mods) and Tutorials HT or TT.
WIOX Topology
Topology is the study of when one geometric object can be continuously deformed and shaped into another object; topics may be drawn from point-set,
algebraic, or geometric topology, and from homotopy theory. Counts as Math 324.
Prerequisites: Math 301, 305, or 312. Lectures: First 2 weeks of MT (Part A: Analysis (topology of R, R^2), HT (Part A: Topology). Tutorials: HT.
WIOX Probability
Motivated by historical gaming questions, modern probability is concerned with random variables, distribution and expectation, laws of large numbers,
and the Central Limit Theorem, with applications from classical and newer fields of study. Counts as Math 341.
Prerequisites: Math 211 or 251. Lectures: HT (part A: Probability). Tutorials: HT.
WIOX Number Theory
Analytic or algebraic number theory treats the integers and generalizations thereof with explorations of topics such as primes, divisibility, and congru-
ence along with applications. Counts as Math 313.
Prerequisite: Math 211 or 251. Lectures: TT (Part A: Number Theory). Tutorials: TT.
WIOX Real Analysis I, II & III
The theory of calculus as applied in the calculus of variations to various topics which may include geodesics, harmonic functions, minimal surfaces,
optimal economic strategies, and general relativity. Counts as Math 301.
Prerequisites: Math 105 and 211. Lectures: all three terms (mods). Tutorials: over two terms (MT-HT or HT-TT).
WIOX Algebra, Analysis and Differential Equations
WIOX Complex Analysis
The theory of functions of a complex variable. Topics include: Holomorphic fuctions, Couchy-Reimann equations, Couchy's Theorem, Path integra-
tion, Residue Theorem. Prerequisites: Math 301. Counts as Math 302. Lectures: MT. Tutorials: MT.
WIOX Mathematics and Computer Science
WIOX Mathematics and Philosophy
WIOX Philosophy of Mathematics
WIOX Mathematics and Statistics
WIOX Medical Sciences
WIOX Neuroscience
WIOX Molecular Medicine
WIOX Myocardial, Vascular and Respiratory Biology
WIOX Infection and Immunity
WIOX Signaling in Health and Disease
WIOX Modern Languages
http://www.mod-langs.ox.ac.uk
WIOX Language Papers
WIOX Linguistic Studies
WIOX Period of Literature or Period Topics
WIOX Early Texts
WIOX Modern Prescribed Authors
WIOX Early Modern Literary Texts
WIOX Special Subjects
WIOX General Linguistics
WIOX Modern Languages and Linguistics
WIOX Music
WIOX Topics in Music History before 1750
WIOX Topics in Music History after 1700
WIOX Techniques of Composition I
WIOX Techniques of Composition II
WIOX Musical Analysis and Criticism
WIOX Musical Thought and Scholarship
WIOX Orchestration
WIOX Music Theory ?
WIOX Oriental Studies
http://www.orinst.ox.ac.uk/
Courses offered by the Faculty of Oriental Studies include language, literature, history and culture, and there are a wide range of options in such fields
as art and archaeology, history, literature, philosophy, religion and modern social studies. Some of these courses may require knowledge of the primary
302
sources. It is imperative that students possess the requisite language skills before requesting any of these courses.
WIOX Arabic and Islamic Studies
Please visit the following link for a brief course outline on Islamic Studies: https://beta.weblearn.ox.ac.uk/access/content/group/
a55c44d3-9f21-4dec-b48c-2dc6fa4e4bee/Handbooks/Handbook_BA_Islamic.pdf
Arabic
Persian
Turkish
Arabic Literature
Islamic History, 570-1500
Islamic Religion
Further Subjects:
Hadith
Early Islamic Monetary History
Classical Arabic literary texts
The Ethos of the jahiliya in the Muallaqa of Imrual-Qays
Early Islamic historiography
Early Islamic art and archaeology, 550-1250
Muslims and Christians in Sicily, 827-1246
The rise of the Sufi orders in the Islamic world, 1200-1500
Sufism
Ghazali, Munqidh
Ibn Tufayl, Hayy ibn Yaqzan
Ibn al-Arabi Fusus al-Hikam
Religion and politics during the Mongol period
Ottoman state and society, 1566-1700
History of the Middle East in the late Ottoman age, 1750-1882
A modern Islamic thinker (e.g., Sayyid Qutb, Mohamed Talbi, Rashid Rida)
Modern Arabic vernacular literature, 1900 to the present day
Society and Culture in the Modern Arab World
History of Jewish-Muslim Relations
Later Islamic art and architecture, 1250-1700
WIOX Chinese
Information on core courses offered can be found at https://beta.weblearn.ox.ac.uk/access/content/group/a55c44d3-9f21-4dec-b48c-2dc6fa4e4bee/
Handbooks/Handbook_BA_Chinese.pdf
Modern Chinese prose composition
Spoken Chinese
Unprepared translation from Modern Chinese
Classical Chinese I
Classical Chinese II: Narrative Prose
Special Texts
Modern Chinese
History of Chinese in the 19th and 20th Centuries
WIOX Egyptology and Ancient Near Eastern Studies
WIOX Hebrew
Biblical and Rabbinic Hebrew
Medieval and Modern Hebrew
Please visit the following link for a guideline on undergraduate courses offered in Hebrew: https://beta.weblearn.ox.ac.uk/access/content/group/
a55c44d3-9f21-4dec-b48c-2dc6fa4e4bee/Handbooks/Handbook_BA_Hebrew.pdf
WIOX Japanese
Japanese
Information on core courses offered can be found at https://beta.weblearn.ox.ac.uk/access/content/group/a55c44d3-9f21-4dec-b48c-2dc6fa4e4bee/
Handbooks/Handbook_BA_Japanese.pdf
Japanese Prose Composition
Japanese unprepared translation I: classical and modern literature
Japanese unprepared translation II: modern non-fiction
Special Texts:
Classical Literature
Theatre
Modern Literature
Politics
Society and social history
Economics
Linguistics
Special Subjects:
Japanese art
Japanese history I: to 1185
Japanese history II: feudal Japan
Japanese history III: the emergence of modern Japan, 1868-1972
The government and politics of Japan
The intellectual history of the Tokugawa period
The history of modern Japanese literature to the end of the Tokagawa period
The history of modern Japanese literature from the beginning of the Meiji period
Modern Japanese economic history
The modern Japanese economy
303
Japanese theatre
Japanese linguistics
Korean is only offered as a minor at Oxford, as a subsidiary language to Chinese or Japanese majors. However, Williams students can choose from
one of the three papers (courses) that are offered: Korean Language, Korean Text Reading and Korean History and Culture.
Korean History I: to 1392
Korean History II: 1392 to 1876
Korean History III: 1876 to the present
WIOX Jewish Studies
The following courses are offered under Jewish Studies and may require knowledge of biblical or modern Hebrew.
Biblical History
Biblical Archaeology
Biblical Narrative
Biblical Prophecy
Second Temple Judaism
Second Temple History
History of the Talmudic Period
Mediaeval Jewish History
Jewish Aramaic Literature
Haskalah
Modern Jewish Society
State of Israel
Modern Hebrew Literature
Yiddish Literature
History of Jewish-Christian Relations
History of Jewish-Muslim Relations
History of Jewish Bible Interpretation
Hebrew Texts for Jewish Studies
Biblical Religion
Mediaeval Jewish thought
Modern Jewish History
Modern Judaism
For more information, please read the Jewish Studies Handbook at: https://beta.weblearn.ox.ac.uk/access/content/group/
a55c44d3-9f21-4dec-b48c-2dc6fa4e4bee/Handbooks/Handbook_BA_Jewish_Studies.pdf
WIOX Persian
Persian prose composition and unprepared translation
Spoken Persian
Classical Poetry: Lyric Genres
Classical Poetry: Narrative Genres
Classical Prose
Modern Literature
Modern social and political writing
Persian History and Culture: General Questions
Iranian history from 1501 to 1722
Iranian history from the rise of the Qajars to the end of the Constitutional Revolution
Iranian history from 1921 to 1979
The development of Shi'ism up to the late 19th century
Modern Shi'ism
WIOX Turkish
Unprepared translation from Ottoman and modern Turkish
Translation into Turkish and essay in Turkish
Spoken Turkish
Ottoman historical texts
Turkish political and cultural texts, 1860 to the present
Modern Turkish literary texts
Turkish and Ottoman literary texts, 1300-1900
Turkish literature: general questions
Turkish language reform and language politics from 1850 to the present day
Islamic History, 570-1500
The Ottoman Empire, 1300-1566
The Ottoman Empire, 1566-1807
The Ottoman Empire and the Republic of Turkey
WIOX Additional Languages
Akkadian
Aramaic and Syriac
Armenian
Hindi
Old Iranian
Pali
Prakrit
Sanskrit
Tibetan
WIOX Philosophy
http://www.philosophy.ox.ac.uk/
304
The following link takes you to a complete listing of philosophy undergraduate courses:
http://www.philosophy.ox.ac.uk/undergraduate/course_descriptions
Apart from 150, 198, and 199, most of the other courses are potentially open to Williams students.
Although Lectures and Tutorials are given term designations, students need to go to the Philosophy Faculty website to insure that these have not been
changed.
WIOX The History of Philosophy from Descartes to Kant
A consideration of the main philosophical ideas of the period, focusing in particular on the work of Descartes, Spinoza, Leibniz, Locke, Berkeley,
Hume, and Kant.
No prerequisites. Lectures: MT and HT. Tutorials: any term.
WIOX Knowledge and Reality
Knowledge and justification; perception; memory; induction; other minds; a priori knowledge; necessity and possibility; reference; truth; facts and
propositions; definition; existence; identity; substances, change, events; properties; causation; space; time; essence; realism and idealism; primary and
secondary qualities.
No prerequisites. Some background in Philosophy in useful. Lectures: MT and HT. Tutorials: any term.
WIOX Ethics
Ethical concepts (obligation, goodness, virtue); objectivity and the explanation of value beliefs; moral psychology; freedom and responsibility; conse-
quentialism and deontology; self-interest, prudence, and amoralism; rights, justice, and equality; Kant; happiness, welfare, and a life worth living.
No prerequisites. Lectures: MT and HT. Tutorials: any term.
WIOX Philosophy of Mind
The nature of persons; the relation of mind and body; self-knowledge; knowledge of other persons; consciousness; perception; memory; imagination;
thinking; belief; feeling and emotion; desire; action; subconscious and unconscious mental processes.
Prerequisites: Philosophy 101 or 102. Lectures: MT and HT. Tutorials: any term.
WIOX Philosophy of Science and Philosophy of Psychology and Neuroscience
A) The nature of theories; scientific observation and method; scientific explanation; the interpretation of laws and probability; rationality and scientific
change; major schools of philosophy of science.
B) philosophical issues arising from the history and practice of psychology and neuroscience.
WIOX Philosophy of Science and Social Sciences
A) The nature of theories; scientific observation and method; scientific explanation; the interpretation of laws and probability; rationality and scientific
change; major schools of philosophy of science. B) Social meaning; individualism; rationality; rational choice theory; the explanation of social action;
prediction and explanation in economics; historical explanation; ideology.
Prerequisites: Philosophy 101 or 102. Lectures: HT. Tutorials: HT or TT.
WIOX Philosophy of Religion
An examination of claims about the existence of God, and God's relation to the world; their meaning, the possibility of their truth, and the kind of
justification which can or needs to be provided for them; the philosophical problems raised by the existence of different religions.
Prerequisites: Philosophy 101 or 102. Lectures: MT. Tutorials: any term.
WIOX Philosophy of Logic and Language
Topics will include meaning, truth, logical form, necessity, existence, entailment, proper and general names, pronouns, definite descriptions, intention-
al contexts, adjectives and nominalization, adverbs, metaphor, and pragmatics.
Prerequisites: Philosophy 101 or 102. Lectures: HT. Tutorials: HT or TT.
WIOX Aesthetics and the Philosophy of Criticism
The nature of aesthetic value; the definition of art; art, society, and morality; metaphor; criticism and interpretation; expression; pictorial representation.
Focus on the principal authorities on the subject, including Plato, Aristotle, Hume, Kant.
Prerequisites: Philosophy 101 or 102. Lectures: HT. Tutorials: HT or TT.
WIOX Medieval Philosophy: Aquinas
WIOX Medieval Philosophy: Duns Scotus, Ockham
WIOX The Philosophy of Kant
WIOX Post-Kantian Philosophy
The main developments of philosophy in Continental Europe after Kant, excluding Marxism and analytical philosophy. Students choose to focus on
one or more of the following philosophers: Hegel, Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, Husserl, Heidegger, Sartre, Merleau-Ponty.
Prerequisites: Philosophy 101 or 102. Lectures: all three terms. Tutorials: any term.
WIOX Theory of Politics
The critical study of political values and of the concepts used in political analysis: the concept of the political; power, authority, and related concepts;
the state; law; liberty and rights; justice and equality; public interest and common good; democracy and representation; political obligation and civil
disobedience; ideology; liberalism, socialism, and conservatism. Prerequisites: Philosophy 101. Lectures: MT and HT. Tutorials: any term.
WIOX Plato
WIOX Aristotle
WIOX Frege, Russell, and Wittgenstein
WIOX The Later Philosophy of Wittgenstein
WIOX Formal Logic
WIOX Intermediate Philosophy of Physics
WIOX Advanced Philosophy of Physics
WIOX Philosophy of Mathematics
305
WIOX Philosophy of Science
WIOX General Philosophy
WIOX Moral Philosophy
WIOX Philosophy and Modern Languages
WIOX Politics (PPE)
http://www.politics.ox.ac.uk/
For a complete list of courses (Papers) offered, please visit http://www.politics.ox.ac.uk/teaching/ug/reading_lists/
WIOX Comparative Government
Party and electoral systems; forms of government and the allocation of power between institutions; the political executive; the roles of legislatures;
the structure and political power of bureaucracy; public policy-making; judicial review; regime transformation, civil-military relations; democratiza-
tion.
Lectures: MT and HT. Tutorials: any term.
WIOX British Politics and Government Since 1900
British politics (including major domestic political crises, ideologies and political issues) and the evolution of the British political and constitutional
system (including elections and the electoral system, political parties, parliament, the cabinet system, and machinery of government) in the twentieth
century.
Lectures: all three terms. Tutorials: any term.
WIOX Theory of Politics
The critical study of political values and of the concepts used in political analysis: the concept of the political; power, authority, and related concepts;
the state; law; liberty and rights; justice and equality; public interest and common good; democracy and representation; political obligation and civil
disobedience; ideology; liberalism, socialism, and conservatism. Prerequisites: Philosophy 101. Lectures: MT and HT. Tutorials: any term.
WIOX Modern British Government and Politics
The course aims to provide a specialist knowledge of contemporary British government and politics. It provides candidates with both an awareness
of the most significant debates in the academic literature and of different methodological approaches to the subject and a thorough understanding of
the issues and controversies surrounding the operation of British government. This involves the study of the UK electoral system, political parties and
voting behaviour; of the organisation and political activities of the executive, legislature, judiciary and civil service; of the powers of Parliament and
local government; of the devolution of power to regions of the UK; and of the political influence of the media and pressure groups. The interaction
of these political institutions with the European Union is also studied. Current and recent proposals for reforming the constitution are a particular focus
of attention. The course includes the examination of a wide range of primary documents, including parliamentary papers and government reports. It
aims to provide candidates with the ability to retrieve and analyse official information and other primary documents and to place them in historical
and political context. On completion of the course students will be familiar with the detailed workings of British governmental institutions, with deci-
sion-making processes in government and the evolution of strategies for managing the public sector, and with the political dynamics of the system.
Lectures: all three terms. Tutorials: any term.
WIOX Government and Politics of the United States
The constitution; federalism and separation of powers; the presidency; congress; the federal courts; the federal bureaucracy; parties and the party sys-
tem; electoral politics; mass media; interest groups; state and local politics; processes of policy formation and implementation; political culture.
WIOX Government and Politics in Western Europe
Comparative focus on governmental structures and political processes in at least three Western European nations, normally France, Germany, and Italy.
Lectures: MT. Tutorials: any term.
WIOX Politics in Europe
This paper is a comparative study of the national party and institutional systems of Europe, and of comparative issues in European politics, including
democratization, institutional relations political economy and party politics.
WIOX Russian Government and Politics
The government and politics of the Soviet Union (especially 1953-1991) and of post-Soviet Russia, focusing on the changing relationships between
political institutions and on the process of political transformation. Topics include: political leadership; ideology and political culture; the national
question and federalism; the relationship between economic and political power.
Lectures: HT and TT. Tutorials: HT and TT.
WIOX Politics in Sub-Saharan Africa
Students will learn about the politics of the countries of Sub-Saharan Africa with respect to their political institutions, political sociology, and political
economy. The following topics may be considered: nationalism; forms of government, civilian an military; parties and elections; conditions for democ-
racy; class, ethnicity, religion, and gender; business, labour and peasantries; structural adjustment and agricultural policies; the influence of external
agencies.
WIOX Politics in Latin America
Students will learn about politics in Latin America; the structure of government of the major states of the area; their political sociology and political
economy. The following topics may be considered: presidential systems; the role of congress; public administration; party and electoral systems; the
politics of major groups such as the military, trade unions and business groups, and the churches; political ideologies; political movements; the politics
of economic stabilization; the politics of gender; theories of regime breakdown, and of democratic transition and consolidation; the influence of exter-
nal factors.
WIOX Politics in South Asia
Students will learn about political developments in South Asian countries since their independence, with regard to their political institutions, political
sociology, and political economy. The following topics may be considered: the nature of the state; government an political institutions; party and elec-
toral systems; politics in the provinces or states of a federation; the evolution of political ideologies; the politics of gender, caste, religion, language,
ethnic regionalism, and national integration; the political economy of development, social change, and class relations; 'New' social movements and
Left politics; regional conflicts in South Asia and the influence of external factors on South Asian politics. South Asia is taken to include India, Paki-
stan, Sri Lanka, and Bangladesh.
WIOX Politics in the Middle East
306
Students will learn about political developments in South Asian countries since their independence, with regard to their political institutions, political
sociology, and political economy. Topics to be considered may include the emergence of the state system in the modern Middle East; the influence
of colonialism and nationalism in its development; the military in state and politics; party systems and the growth of democratic politics; the politics
of religion; women in the political sphere; the influence of major inter-state conflicts and external factors on internal politics. The Middle East is taken
to comprise Iran, Israel, Turkey, and the Arab States.
WIOX International Relations in the Era of the Two World Wars
The relations between the major powers; the 20th century origins of the First World War and the origins of the Second World War; war aims, strategies,
and peace-making; the disintegration of war-time alliances; the League of nations and the establishment of the United Nations; the impact of major
political movements (Communism, Fascism, nationalism) on international society; monetary and economic developments as they affected internation-
al politics.
Lectures are usually in MT and HT.
WIOX International Relations in the Era of the Cold War
The relations among the major powers, 1945-91, including domestic and external factors shaping foreign policy: the origins and course of the Cold
War, including dtente and the end of the Cold War; East-West relations in Europe with particular reference to the foreign policies of France and the
Federal Republic of Germany; European integration; the external relations of China and Japan, especially with the USA and USSR; decolonization;
conflict in the developing world.
Lectures: MT and HT. Tutorials: any term.
WIOX International Relations
The primary topics will be: the competing approaches to the study of international relations; the principal institutions of international relations; contem-
porary patterns of war and peace; globalization. Other topics will include: law and norms, order, self-determination, security, war and conflict resolu-
tion, foreign-policy analysis, international political economy, regional integration, and international institutions.
Lectures: all terms. Tutorials: any term.
WIOX Political Thought: Plato to Rousseau
A critical study of the classical political theorists, including Plato, Aristotle, Aquinas, Machiavelli, Hobbes, Locke, Montesquieu, Rousseau, and
Hume.
Lectures: MT and HT. Tutorials: any term.
WIOX Political Thought: Bentham to Weber
A critical study of modern social and political theorists, including Bentham, Mill, Hegel, Saint-Simon, Tocqueville, Marx, Weber, and Durkheim.
Lectures: MT and HT. Tutorials: any term.
WIOX Marx and Marxism
The study of the ideas of Marx and Engels, of later Marxists and the critics of Marxism. Students will be expected to study Marxism as an explanatory
theory, and also to examine its political consequences.
WIOX Sociological Theory
Theoretical perspectives including rational choice; evolutionary psychology; interpersonal interaction; social integration and networks; functionalism.
Substantive problems including stratification; gender; race and ethnicity; collective action; norms; ideology.
WIOX The Sociology of Industrial Societies
Candidates will be expected to show knowledge of the following aspects of the social structure of urban-industrial societies: occupation and economic
structure; social stratification and mobility; education and the family; the social significance of gender and ethnicity; the social structure of religion;
the social context of politics and the impact on society of the state. Candidates must have knowledge of modern Britain and at least one other industrial
society, and of the main general theories of industrial society.
Lectures: MT, HT. Tutorials: MT, HT, TT.
WIOX Political Sociology
In this Final Honour School subject students will study in more detail the major theoretical approaches to social class, race and ethnicity, gender,
religion, nationality, states, interest groups including unions, parties, movements and single issue campaigns, and the interrelationships between cul-
ture, economy, social structure, and political processes and institutions. The theoretical approaches will be critically assessed in the light of empirical
evidence from a range of countries, and also put in the context of the philosophically rigorous analysis of power and change. To aid students in attaining
a comprehensive grasp of the field of study, they will have the opportunity to look at 'approaches' such as structuralism, rational choice theory, political
culture theory, and the historical and comparative perspective as such, as well as studying the application of these to the specific topics mentioned.
Thus by the end of the course students should have an understanding of recent sociological explanations of political processes and events, a grasp of
the competing approaches in the field, an understanding of the main methods of data collection and analysis, and an appreciation of the role of models
and theories in sociological knowledge.
WIOX British Society in the Twentieth Century
The course aims to introduce undergraduates to issues and controversies in modern British social history and to the types of evidence and modes of
analysis employed by social historians. Candidates have some freedom to select themes for study but they must familiarise themselves with the main
features of social change - for example, in demography, class structure, gender, living standards and urban and rural development. They must also
acquire a critical knowledge of the recommended documents that have a bearing on their chosen topics. By the end of the course they should be able
to give their own account of patterns and processes of social change, making use of primary sources and taking an informed view on controversial
questions. The course is administered by the Faculty of History.
WIOX Labour Economics and Industrial Relations
WIOX The Government and Politics of Japan
This course provides a study of one of the very few nations outside the Western world whose politics appears to be stably based on democratic principles
and a democratic constitution. It introduces students to Japanese political history since 1945 and the social context of Japanese institutions and policy-
making, enabling them to understand the vicissitudes of Japanese experience in the last twenty years: from the 1980s, when Japanese exports were
seen as threateningly ultra-competitive in Europe, North America and elsewhere, through the more difficult 1990s and 2000s which have precipitated
a concentrated debate on "restructuring" both of the economy and of the political system. The course covers the constitutional framework and structure
of government; parliamentary and local politics; the electoral and party systems; the role of corporate interests and pressure groups; the bureaucracy;
foreign policy. It aims to provide an understanding of the major debates on the nature of Japanese liberal democracy, and to some of the main interpretive
models: "bureaucratic polity", "developmental state", "irontriangle dominance by bureaucrats, business leaders and politicians", "patterned plural-
ism" etc. The underlying principle of the course is that Japanese politics is just as capable of being understood empirically as is any other political
system, so long as preconceptions are not allowed to get in the way of understanding. No previous knowledge of Japan is required.
WIOX Social Policy
The course enables students to develop a critical understanding of welfare
307
states, different approaches to social policy, and definitions and explanations of problems such as poverty, deprivation, and social exclusion. It permits
students to draw on different perspectives in their previous study of, for example, public economics or political theory. Students are expected to read
widely in the empirical research literature on policy formulation and implementation and to make themselves familiar with current statistics and re-
ports. The course encourages students to engage with both theoretical principles and empirical evidence across a range of issues and policy areas such
as: the development and problems of welfare states; voluntary effort and the informal sector; the mixed economy of welfare; citizenship, rights, markets
and welfare; the impact of demography on social policy; poverty, inequality, deprivation and social exclusion; urban policy and inner cities; underclass
and welfare dependency; income maintenance; family policy; health policy; housing policy and homelessness; education policy; ageing societies. Prin-
ciples, concepts and institutions are analysed on a cross-national basis. Where specific policy areas are examined, the focus is on contemporary Britain.
However, the policies of EU member states and other countries are considered when these have a bearing on British arrangements.
WIOX Comparative Demographic Systems
WIOX Quantitative Methods in Politics and Sociology
Students will be expected to develop an understanding of applications of quantitative methods in politics and sociology including the following: the
principles of research design in social science: data collection, the logic of causal inference, and comparative method; major statistical methods and
concepts: types of random variables, independence, correlation and association, sampling theory, hypothesis testing, linear and non-linear regression
models, event-history analysis, and time-series. Candidates will also be expected to interpret information and show familiarity with major methodolog-
ical debates in Politics and Sociology.
WIOX Politics in China
This course will enable students to acquire a knowledge and understanding of the recent history and contemporary politics of China. China has been
in transition from the long rule of Mao Zedong since 1978, and its politics and society have transformed radically during that period. Students will
gain an understanding of the Chinese Communist party (the most powerful Communist party left in the world), looking at its historical background
before analysing its current strategy to remain in control of China in the post-Cold War era. The reform era under Deng Xiaoping and Jiang Zemin
will be analysed through a variety of themes, including elite politics and the Tian'anmen crisis of 1989, rural reforms, urban culture, and gender. China's
new status as a regional power in international relations will also be examined, as well as its relations with Taiwan and Hong Kong, two very different
Chinese societies. This course will allow students to develop a strong knowledge of one of the world's most important countries, and could serve as
stimulation for further work in and about China in journalism, business, government, NGOs and academic research. Please note that demand sometimes
outstrips teaching supply on this paper.
WIOX The Politics of the European Union
The history and development of the institutions of European integration since the 1950s; the structure and power of the Council, the Commission, and
the Parliament; growth and expansion into Eastern Europe; monetary integration and the advent of the Euro; future prospects.
Tutorials: any term.
WIOX Philosophy and Theology
WIOX The Gospels and Jesus
WIOX God, Christ, and Salvation
WIOX The Development of Doctrine in the Early Church to 451
WIOX Christian Moral Reasoning
WIOX Physics and Astrophysics
http://www.physics.ox.ac.uk/
http://www-astro.physics.ox.ac.uk/
Students can access the list of courses at http://www.ox.ac.uk/admissions/undergraduate_courses/courses/physics.html
WIOX Thermal Physics
The course includes statistical methods and probability distributions, the Boltzmann distribution, the Maxwell-Boltzmann velocity distribution func-
tion, molecular effusion, collision times and transport processes (viscosity, thermal conductivity and self-diffusion), the laws of thermodynamics, ener-
gy, entropy, equations of state, thermodynamic potentials, chemical potential and phase changes.
Prerequisites: Physics 210.
WIOX Electromagnetism and Optics
Similar to the counterpart at Williams, we study electromagnetic phenomena and their mathematical description. Topics include electrostatics, magnet-
ic fields, electromagnetic induction, DC and AC circuits, electromagnetic properties of matter, mutual inductance and the transformer, Maxell's equa-
tions, displacement current and electromagnetic waves in vacuum.
Prerequisites: Physics 201. Recommended Physics 202.
WIOX Quantum Physics
Synopsis of the course: Amplitudes, quantum states, the energy representation, Operators and observables, The TDSE, the position representation,
Particle dynamics, Two slits revisited, extensions to three dimensions, composite systems, Harmonic oscillator: the stationary states, Dynamics of
oscillators, Motion in a magnetic field, Transformations and observables: transformations of kets, Transformations and observables: transformations
of operators, Symmetries & conservation laws, geometry and commutators, The square well, A pair of square wells, ammonia maser, Reflection by
a square well or barrier, tunneling, Eigen values of J_z and J^2, spectra of diatomic molecules, Orbital angular momentum, generation of circular
translations, tangential KE, Eigenvalues of L_z and L^2, The 3d harmonic oscillator (time permitting), Spin, Addition of angular momentum, Gross
structure of hydrogen, Spare
Prerequisites: Physics 141 and Physics 210. Recommended: Physics 142 and Physics 201.
WIOX Atomic Structure, Special Relativity, and sub-Atomic Physics
WIOX Condensed Matter Physics and Photonics
WIOX Astrophysics and Atmospheric Physics
WIOX Mathematical Physics
WIOX Astrophysics
WIOX Laser Science and Quantum Information Processing
WIOX Condensed Matter Physics
WIOX Particle Physics
WIOX Physics of Atmospheres and Oceans
WIOX Theoretical Physics
WIOX Biological Physics
WIOX Stellar Structure and Cosmology
308
WIOX Physics and Philosophy
WIOX Physiological Sciences
WIOX Physiology and Pharmacology of the Systems of the Body
WIOX Neuroscience
WIOX Biochemistry and Cell Biology
WIOX Psychology, Philosophy, and Physiology
http://www.psy.ox.ac.uk/
The list of courses usually pursued by Oxford students can be found at http://www.psy.ox.ac.uk/undergrad/coursestructure_PPP and
http://www.psy.ox.ac.uk/undergrad/coursestructure_EP.
WIOX Introduction to Psychology
Methods and Topics in: individual differences; social behaviour; animal behaviour; the neural basis of behaviour; perception; learning; memory; lan-
guage; cognition; skills; abnormal behaviour
WIOX Developmental Psychology
Psychological development: the biological and physiological, environmental and hereditary influences which affect development in humans; evidence
from comparative studies; development of intelligence and personality; sex differences; developmental aspects of perceptual and cognitive processes.
Prerequisite: Psychology 101. Lectures: MT and TT. Tutorials: TT recommended.
WIOX Social Psychology
The biological and cultural background to social behavior; comparison of animal and human social behavior; communication and social interaction;
behavior in organizations; social relationships and exchange processes; cognitive social psychology.
Prerequisite: Psychology 101. Lectures: MT. Tutorials: MT recommended.
WIOX Individual Differences
Origins and development of differences in human abilities, personalities, and attributes; their analysis, measurement, and understanding.
Prerequisite: Psychology 101. Lectures: MT and HT. Tutorials: HT recommended.
WIOX Psychological Disorders
The "abnormal" nature of abnormal behavior; theories and classifications of abnormal behavior; causes and treatment.
Prerequisite: Psychology 101. Lectures: HT. Tutorials: HT recommended.
WIOX Brain and Behaviour
WIOX Language and Cognition
WIOX Multisensory Perception
WIOX Psychology of Religion
WIOX Cognitive Neuroscience
WIOX Behavioural Neuroscience
WIOX Human Experimental Psychology:
WIOX Perception, Attention, and Information Processing;
WIOX Language and Cognition
WIOX Experimental Design and Statistics
WIOX Theology
http://www.theology.ox.ac.uk/
A full list of lecture courses can be found at http://resources.theology.ox.ac.uk/lecseries.phtml
WIOX God and Israel in the Old Testament
WIOX Jesus and the Gospels
WIOX Pauline Literature
WIOX The Development of Doctrine in the Early Church to AD 451
WIOXGod, Christ, and Salvation
WIOX Luke-Acts
WIOX History and Theology of Western Christianity, 1040-1350
WIOX History and Theology of Western Christianity, 1500-1619
WIOX Christian Life and Thought in Europe and the English-Speaking World, 1789-1921
WIOX Issues in Theology, 1789-1921
WIOX Philosophy of Religion
WIOX Christian Moral Reasoning
WIOX The Nature of Religion
WIOX The Formation of Rabbinic Judaism
WIOX Judaism in History and Society
WIOX The Classical Period of Islam
WIOX Islam in the Modern World
WIOX Early Buddhist Doctrine and Practice
WIOX Buddhism in History and Society
WIOX Brahminism
WIOX Bhakti
WIOX Old Testament Prophecy and Apocalyptic
WIOX Old Testament Wisdom and Liturgy
WIOX The Hebrew of the Old Testament
WIOX Archaeology in Relation to the Old Testament
WIOX Religions and Mythology in the Ancient Near East
WIOX Hebrews to Revelation
WIOX The New Testament in Greek
WIOX Varieties of Judaism, 100 BC - AD 100
WIOX The Beginnings of the Church and Its Institutions to AD 170
WIOX Christian Liturgy
WIOX Early Syriac Christianity
309
WIOX History and Theology of the Church in the Byzantine Empire from AS 100 to AD 1453
WIOX Science and Religion
WIOX Christian Spirituality
WIOX The Sociology of Religion
WIOX Psychology of Religion
WIOX The Bible: Its Use and Influence
WIOX English Church and Mission, 597-754
WIOX The Christian Doctrine of Creation
WIOX The History of the Church from Nero to Constantine
WIOX Introduction to the Study of Religions
WIOX Aquinas
WIOX Augustine
WIOX Christology from Kant to Troeltsch, 1789-1914
WIOX Theology and Oriental Studies
WIOX Buddhism
WIOX Eastern Christianity
WIOX Hinduism
WIOX Islam
WIOX Judaism
NON-CREDIT FOREIGN LANGUAGE STUDY
In addition to their regular tutorial courses, students may begin or continue the study of a wide range of foreign languages on a non-credit basis through a
variety of arrangements available through the University as well as a number of other educational and cultural institutions in the city of Oxford. The Programme
normally subsidizes such study.
STUDENT LIFE
By virtue of the fact that, while in Oxford, they are officially Visiting Students at the University-and full members of Exeter College-Williams students are
offered every opportunity to become fully integrated into student life in Oxford. Both Exeter College and Oxford University are home to an exceptional variety of
sports clubs, debating societies, interest groups, cultural organizations, and social activities, virtually all of which are available to Visiting Student members of the
University. Students are encouraged to participate fully in the social life of Exeter College-to dine in Hall as often as they wish, to frequent the College bar, to use
the College's athletic facilities, and to become members of the various College clubs and organizations. Furthermore, Williams students also have access to the
University's athletic events, concerts, theatrical productions, museums, and libraries. All Williams students in Oxford are encouraged to join the Oxford Union,
which, in addition to its debating activities and club rooms, possesses dining facilities and the largest lending library in the University.
At the Ephraim Williams House, all Williams students are housed in large double rooms and enjoy full access to the House's library, common rooms, laundry
facilities, computer lab, and a large dining room, in which a weekly catered meal is served during the eight weeks of term. There are also a number of small
kitchens in the House which students may use. The entire facility has high-speed wireless internet access. Bedrooms are hard wired for high-speed internet access
and are fully equipped with furnishings, bed linens, and a telephone. The grounds include a courtyard, sheltered bike racks, barbecue facilities, and gardens. A
number of student jobs are available during the academic year for students who wish to earn a little spending money by helping to maintain the facilities and
organize Programme activities. Ephraim Williams House is a short bike or bus ride (or a twenty-minute walk) from Exeter College and the center of town, and is
within easy walking distance of the University parks and the local shops, restaurants and banks of Summertown. The Programme will partially subsidize student
bus passes to facilitate travel around Oxford.
Before the academic year begins--on Thursday, 27 September 2012--ten days of orientation activities are scheduled. Students are expected to be in residence
for all of these many activities, some of which take place in Ephraim Williams House, others at Exeter College. At this time students will become acquainted with
the workings of the Programme, of Exeter College, and of the University, and will be familiarized with the rules and regulations they are expected to abide by
during their residence in Oxford.
Throughout the academic year, provision will be made for trips to a few of sites of historical, cultural, or political interest. In the past these have included the
Cotswolds, Salisbury, Stratford, Stonehenge, Bath, Wells, Warwick Castle, Blenheim Palace, and various sites of interest in London. Students will also be given
the opportunity to attend a number of theatrical productions and other cultural events. Oxford's proximity to London gives students ready access to that city's
multiple attractions and many resources. The Oxford-London train service is frequent and the journey takes just over an hour. The buses to London run even more
regularly (and are generally cheaper), and the one-way journey takes about ninety minutes.
During the summer before students arrive in Oxford, they will receive a copy of the latest edition of Ephs Among the Dreaming Spires, which will further
explain the perks, policies, and procedures of the Programme, the rules and regulations they are expected to follow, and tips for how best to enjoy a fulfilling year
in and around Oxford.
ILLNESS AND INSURANCE
Students must ensure they are covered either by the Williams College health insurance policy or by some other comprehensive health insurance plan (generally
a family health insurance policy). While in Britain, students will be covered by the National Health Service (NHS) for routine visits at the Group Medical Practice
used by Exeter College and for emergency hospital treatment. The programme also works with a physician in private practice attached to a local private hospital.
Prescription drugs are available through the NHS for a nominal fee. There are limited outpatient psychological counseling services available through the NHS
and the Programme, although, as Visiting Students at the University, Williams students are entitled to make use of the University Counseling Centre. Any exten-
sive or long-term counseling, however, would need to be covered by the student's personal health insurance policy. Finally, students are not likely to be covered
under the NHS for medical services received in foreign countries, especially those countries that do not enjoy membership of the European Union.
FEES
The tuition and room fees paid by students on the Williams-Exeter Programme at Oxford are the same as those for a year spent in residence at Williams.
Students are responsible for some of their own meals and for all of their personal expenses. They are also responsible for arranging and funding the cost of their air
travel to and from Britain, although they may select to take the group flight to London arranged by the Programme at competitive rates. They are provided with
three meals a day for the first four or five days in Oxford and with a weekly catered meal in Ephraim Williams House during the eight weeks of term. They may
also eat breakfast, lunch, and/or dinner on any day of the week at Exeter. Students will not be charged the full Williams board fee during their year in Oxford, but
they will pay a proportion of the board fee to help cover these costs. For planning purposes, students and their parents should expect the cost of a year on the
Programme to be roughly the same as a year at Williams. Financial aid eligibility will be figured on the usual basis of tuition, fees, room, board, and personal and
book expenses, as if the student were at Williams for the year. Similarly, the normal self-help contribution would be expected. Since the academic year ends later
at Oxford than at Williams, the summer earning expectations for students for the following year will be reduced by one half and the difference will be made up by
additional Williams aid.
APPLICATION
Admission to the Programme is on a competitive but flexible basis. Students must apply to the Dean's Office by the prescribed deadline (normally early in
February) and, prior to applying, should consult with the chair of their major department. Any questions students might have about curricular offerings at Oxford
can also be raised with the director of the Programme in Oxford. In addition to completing the formal application form, students can expect to be interviewed at
Williams and will subsequently need to complete an application for Visiting Student status at Oxford University. All admissions to the Programme are subject to
approval by Exeter College. Students can expect to be notified of acceptance before Spring Break. It is normally expected that they will have completed the
College's distribution requirement by the end of their sophomore year. In making its decisions, the Admissions Committee of the Williams-Exeter Programme at
Oxford University takes student GPA into account, with a minimum GPA requirement of 3.0, expects all applicants to have demonstrated capacity for rigorous
independent work and extensive essay writing, and looks favorably on those students whose intellectual maturity, curiosity and enthusiasm would best prepare
them for a demanding course of study in Oxford. All applicants must identify two Williams faculty members who are willing to provide references. Because of
the emphasis at Oxford on weekly written work for each tutorial course, at least one of those faculty members should be able to offer an assessment of the
applicant's writing ability.
310
WILLIAMS-MYSTIC MARITIME STUDIES PROGRAM
Director, JAMES T. CARLTON
Faculty: JAMES T. CARLTON (Williams College), LISA GILBERT (Williams College; on assistant professor leave, 0910),GLENN S. GORDINI-
ER (University of Connecticut), CATHERINE ROBINSON HALL (Mystic Seaport Museum), MARY K. BERCAWEDWARDS (University of
Connecticut; Mystic Seaport Museum), RICHARD KING (Mystic Seaport Museum), DIANE BENNETT (Mystic Seaport Museum).
The Williams College-Mystic Seaport Maritime Studies Program offers students a unique opportunity to explore the ocean, travel the Atlantic, Pacific, and
Gulf coasts, and undertake original research of their own design in the humanities and sciences. Sophomores, juniors, and seniors of all majors welcome. A term
at Williams-Mystic includes credit for one semester plus one winter study requirement, as well as intensive writing course credit. Four Williams courses are
offered as an integrated, multidisciplinary curriculum in the semester-long program at Mystic Seaport, in Mystic, Connecticut: Maritime History, Literature of the
Sea, Marine Policy, and either Marine Ecology or Oceanography (see the Maritime Studies section in this catalog). Travel includes an offshore voyage on the
open ocean sailing aboard a tall ship, a seminar along the Pacific Coast, and a Louisiana field seminar, all of which are cross-disciplinary and interdisciplinary
exercises. Students live in historic, cooperative, co-ed houses at Mystic Seaport, the world's largest maritime museum, and have full access to world-class mari-
time collections, a maritime library, a state-of-the-art Marine Sciences teaching and research center, and diverse coastal habitats (where field research can be
undertaken in a wide variety of environments, ranging from tidepools and salt marshes to sandy beaches and estuaries). Students also participate in maritime skills
under professional instruction, with choices such as celestial navigation, music of the sea, boat building, or small boat handling and sailing. Williams-Mystic
seeks candidates who are willing to try new things and work in a compelling academic environment. No sailing experience necessary. Participation in Williams-
Mystic can also be used in partial fulfillment of the Maritime Studies Concentration at Williams. Interested students should email admissions@williamsmys-
tic.org, call (860-572-5359), visit the website (www.williams.edu/williamsmystic), or obtain a Williams-Mystic catalog from the Dean's office. Applications are
on the web and at the Dean's office.
MAST 211(F,S) Oceanographic Processes (Same as Geosciences 210)
(See under Maritime Studies for full description.) GILBERT
MAST 231(F,S) Literature of the Sea (Same as English 231) (W)
(See under Maritime Studies for full description.) KING
MAST 311(F,S) Marine Ecology (Same as Biology 231)
(See under Maritime Studies for full description.) CARLTON
MAST 351(F,S) Marine Policy (Same as Environmental Studies 351)
(See under Maritime Studies for full description.) HALL
MAST 352(F,S) America and the Sea, 1600-Present (Same as History 352) (W)
(See under Maritime Studies for full description.) GORDINIER
311
WINTER STUDY PROGRAM
REMINDERS ABOUT WSP REGISTRATION
All students who will be on campus during the 2011-2012 academic year must register for WSP. Registration will take place in the early part of fall semester.
If you are registered for a senior thesis in the fall which must be continued through Winter Study by departmental rules, you will be registered for your Winter
Study Project automatically. In every other case, you must complete registration. First-year students are required to participate in a Winter Study that will take
place on campus; they are not allowed to do 99's.
Even if you plan to take a 99, or the instructor of your first choice accepts you during the registration period, there are many things that can happen between
registration and the beginning of Winter Study to upset your first choice, so you must list five choices. You should try to make one of your choices a project with
a larger enrollment, not that it will guarantee you a project, but it will increase your chances.
If you think your time may be restricted in any way (ski meets, interviews, etc.), clear these restrictions with the instructor before signing up for his/her
project.
Remember, for cross-listed projects, you should sign up for the subject you want to appear on your record.
For many beginning language courses, you are required to take the WSP Sustaining Program in addition to your regular project. You will be automatically
enrolled in this Sustaining Program, so no one should list this as a choice.
The grade of honors is reserved for outstanding or exceptional work. Individual instructors may specify minimum standards for the grade, but normally,
fewer than one out of ten students will qualify. A grade of pass means the student has performed satisfactorily. A grade of perfunctory pass signifies that a
student's work has been significantly lacking but is just adequate to deserve a pass.
If you have any questions about a project, see the instructor before you register.
Finally, all work for WSP must be completed and submitted to the instructor no later than January 26, 2012. Only the Dean can grant an extension
beyond this date.
WINTER STUDY 99'S
Sophomores, juniors and seniors are eligible to propose "99's," independent projects arranged with faculty sponsors, conducted in lieu of regular Winter
Study courses. Perhaps you have encountered an interesting idea in one of your courses which you would like to study in more depth, or you may have an
interest not covered in the regular curriculum. In recent years students have undertaken in-depth studies of particular literary works, interned in government
offices, assisted in foreign and domestic medical clinics, conducted field work in economics in developing countries, and given performances illustrating the
history of American dance. Although some 99's involve travel away from campus, there are many opportunities to pursue intellectual or artistic goals here in
Williamstown.
99 forms are available online: http://www.williams.edu/Registrar/winterstudy/99direct.html
The deadline for submitting the proposals to faculty sponsors is September 29, 2011.
AFRICANA STUDIES
AFR 10 Black Gospel Music, History and Performance Ensemble (Same as Music 10)
A historical look at and performance ensemble covering American Black Gospel, stressing the vocal tradition of the African American Church. Vocalist and
rhythm section players are strongly urged to participate. Course will consist of historical workshops and rehearsals of Gospel music. Required reading The Gold-
en Age of Gospel by Horace Clarence Boyer and Lloyd Yearwood and will require a minimum of 7-page report. Music covered for performance and rehearsals
will cover music from the mid 1800's to contemporary gospel music. Field trip will include trip to a African American Church service(Sunday morning). Concert
will be given by ensemble at end of semester.
Requirements: 7-page paper, performance of ensemble occurring at the end of semester and a field trip to church.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 30. If overenrolled, preference given to seniors.
Cost: $50.
Meeting time: mornings.
AVERY SHARPE (Instructor)
SINGHAM (Sponsor)
Legendary Bassist Avery Sharpe has performed with Jazz greats from McCoy Tyner to Dizzy Gillespie. Sharpe has a strong up bringing in "The Church of
God in Christ" and is a Gospel Historian.
AFR 13 Understanding Similarities, Bridging Differences (Same as Latina/o Studies 13 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 13)
(See under LEAD 13 for full description.) TAJ SMITH (Instructor)
KITTLESON (Sponsor)
AFR 24 Politics and History in Cuba (Same as History 24 and Political Science 24)
(See under PSCI 24 for full description.) BENSON and MAHON
AFR 29 Eyewitness to the Civil Rights Movement: Mississippi, 1964-1965 (Same as History 29)
(See under HIST 29 for full description.)
AFR 30 Senior Project
To be taken by students registered for Africana Studies 491 who are candidates for honors.
AMERICAN STUDIES
AMST 10 Experimenting with Poems
This is a poetrywriting class but not your typical poetry workshop. We will not be writing the sorts of firstperson "expressive" lyric poems privileged in The
New Yorker magazine nor will we be approaching poetry as if it began with a capital "P." Poetry should not seem intimidating or esoteric or hoitytoityin other
words, forget everything you learned in high school and in your English classes about poetry.
You will be given various short readings by poets, assigned brief exercises, and asked to write a few poems. We will experiment with various aspects of poems
from sounds and visual layout to syntax and pronouns and other things. By the end of the course, you will have completed a portfolio of four to five poems.
To take this class you do not have to have written any poetry before or taken a poetry class. Just bring your interest and curiosity!
Requirements: final portfolio of 4-5 poems, short exercizes, class participation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10.
Cost: $30.
Meeting time: afternoons.
WANG
AMST 15 Contemporary American Songwriting (Same as Special 15)
(See under SPEC 15 for full description.)
AMST 30 Senior Honors Project
To be taken by students registered for American Studies 491 or 492.
ANTHROPOLOGY AND SOCIOLOGY
ANSO 11 Berkshire Farm Internship
A field placement at Berkshire Farm Center and Services for Youth in Canaan, New York. Berkshire Farm Center is a residential treatment facility for troubled,
at-risk adolescent boys who have been remanded by the Family Court for treatment and intervention. These youths come primarily from lower socio-economic
strata, are very ethnically diverse, and hail from both urban and rural areas throughout New York State. The issues that bring them to placement are mainly a result
of the psychological scars developed from physical, emotional, and sexual abuse. The manifested behaviors include chemical dependency, juvenile delinquency,
inability to function in the school setting, inability to follow the rules at home, running away and/or mental health issues. The residential treatment model is
strength based and focuses on teaching healthy decision making. Williams students will commute to Berkshire Farm and work under supervision in various
settings including school, cottage life, substance abuse program, recreation, adventure-based therapy, performing arts, animal husbandry or individual tutoring.
The students are responsible to be proactive in developing their learning experience. Requirements: students will keep a journal reflecting on their experiences,
312
and a weekly seminar with the instructor will draw on service learning experience. Students will also be required to submit a final 10-page paper at the end of the
course. Prerequisites: YOU MUST HAVE A TELEPHONE INTERVIEW WITH THE INSTRUCTOR, who can be reached at 518-265-6218. Enrollment limit:
15. Please note: all queries about this course should be directed to the instructor.
Donelle Hauser, LMSW, is the Non-Secure Detention Program Coordinator, Burnham Youth Safe Center, Berkshire Farm Center
Cost: $25 to cover transportation to and from Berkshire Farm Center. Meeting times to be arranged.
DONELLE HAUSER (Instructor)
NOLAN (Sponsor)
Donelle Hauser, LMSW, is the Non-Secure Detention Program Coordinator, Burnham Youth Safe Center, Berkshire Farm Center.
ANSO 12 Children and the Courts: Internship in the Crisis in Child Abuse
The incidence of reported child abuse and neglect has reached epidemic proportions and shows no signs of decreasing. Preventive and prophylactic social pro-
grams, court intervention, and legislative mandates have not successfully addressed this crisis. This course allows students to observe the Massachusetts Depart-
ment of Social Services attorney in courtroom proceedings related to the care and protection of children. Students will have access to Department records for
purposes of analysis and will also work with social workers who will provide a clinical perspective on the legal cases under study. The class will meet regularly to
discuss court proceedings, assigned readings, and the students' interactions with local human services agencies. Access to an automobile is desirable but not
required; some transportation will be provided as part of the course.
Requirements: full participation, a journal, and a 10-page paper to be submitted at the end of the course.
Enrollment limit: 15. Please note: all queries about this course must be directed to the instructor, Judge Locke (phone messages may be left at 458-4833).
Cost: $25 for books and photocopies. Meeting times to be arranged.
JUDITH LOCKE (Instructor)
NOLAN (Sponsor)
Judith Locke is Associate Justice of the Juvenile Court, Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
ANSO 13 Epidemiology, Public Health, and Leadership in the Health Professions (Same as Leadership Studies 13)
Epidemiology, the study of disease and disability in human populations, has been called the basic science of public health and preventive medicine. Epidemiology
has made substantial contributions to the advancement of health and improved illness care through a deeper understanding of the natural history of disease, the
multiple "causes" of disease, including the role of behavioral factors, and the control of epidemics of both infectious and (later) non-infectious disease. Epidemio-
logical approaches, both descriptive and analytical, are used constantly to test new medicines and guide prevention and treatment strategies. They underpin the
practice of evidence-driven clinical medicine.
Making use of epidemic exercises and student presentations, selected original papers from the medical and public health literature, and a basic text, this course
will begin by examining and reviewing the history, logic, and approaches of epidemiology. What is a hypothesis? How does it originate? How does a possible
relationship between an exposure and an outcome get studied, analyzed, and described reliably? When is an exposure a causal factor?
At almost every session we will set aside some time to discuss aspects of leadership in the health professions using biographical material and other sources.
Finally, and with the help of guest lecturers/discussion leaders, we will bring the course together by examining examine the principles of epidemiology and
leadership as illustrated in at least two of the following topical areas:
*Evaluation of illness care services
*International health, specifically malaria control, drug resistant tuberculosis, or HIV/AIDS, with special consideration of how best to find the balance between
treatment and prevention in high prevalence countries
*Behavioral issues in prevention and treatment, perhaps with focus on obesity.
*Sports injuries, their incidence and prevention.
Active student participation will be required. After individual consultation with the instructor, students will be asked to write a paper on selected aspects of
leadership in health or an epidemiologic analysis based on available original literature concerning a topic of personal interest. Grading will depend on participa-
tion, the quality of the paper, and presentation during the discussion of unknown epidemics.
Prerequisites: Curiosity, a personal interview over coffee at Tunnel City, and a paragraph stating your reasons for interest in the course and what you think you can
contribute. Enrollment limit: 12.
Cost: no more than $100 for books and reading materials.
Meeting time: at least 3 times a week, for approximately 6-8 hours each week; there may be evening meetings, depending on the schedules of individual instruc-
tors.
NICHOLAS H. WRIGHT '57 MD, MPH, and others (Instructor)
NOLAN (Sponsor)
Dr. Wright is a retired medical epidemiologist, and lives in Williamstown.
ANSO 17 Learning Intervention For Troubled Teens (LIFTT) (Same as Legal Studies 17 and Special 17)
(See under LGST 17 for full description.)
ANTHROPOLOGY
ANTH 15 Afghanistan in Photos and Film
This course looks at how Afghanistan has been represented in photographs and film since the advent of photography as a royal hobby in Afghanistan in the late
19th century, through mid-twentieth century National Geographic photo layouts and Hollywood films like The Bengal Lancers, The Man Who Would be King
and The Horsemen, culminating finally in contemporary Afghan and foreign photojournalism and film (feature and documentary) on the current crisis in Afghan-
istan. In the course, we will read articles and books on Afghan history and culture and examine the work of theorists on visual representation. Students will be
expected to develop a photo or video essay for inclusion on a newly developed website dealing with media representations of Afghanistan.
Requirements: final video/photo project.
Prerequisites: some knowledge of web design and/or video editing. Enrollment limit: 12. Students will be selected based on letter explaining interest and back-
ground.
Cost: $100.
Meeting time: afternoons.
D. EDWARDS
ANTH 31 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Anthropology 493-494.
SOCIOLOGY
SOC 10 Trajectories of Economic Practices in India
With much hubris, India is being hailed as an economic giant in the making. In this course, we will examine representations of Indian economic production and its
spaces of consumption. This course will also examine economic themes in relation to South Asia through lenses from anthropology, sociology and history. The
course will examine contemporary economic practices and set them against a canvas which links history, culture, and politics. Multiple readings aim to push
participants to closely study the workings of commonly assumed economic practices, by pointing to their specificity in different parts of India, and with an aim to
interrogate popularized domains of economic activity that touch on information technology, industrial production, telephony etc.
Requirements: full participation and attendance, 3 class presentations, and 3 extended essays.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15. If overenrolled, selection will be based on an application.
Cost: $70.
Meeting time: afternoons.
VALIANI
SOC 31 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Sociology 493-494.
313
ARABIC
ARAB S.P. Sustaining Program for Arabic 101-102
Students registered for Arabic 101-102 are required to attend and pass the Arabic Sustaining Program.
Prerequisite: Arabic 101.
Evaluation will be based on regular attendance and active participation.
Meeting time: mornings, 9:00-9:50.
ARAB 31 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for ARAB 493-494.
ART
ART HISTORY
ARTH 10 Art and Exhibition (Same as Latina/o Studies 10)
Asco was a collaborative group of Chicano artists active in Los Angeles from 1972-1987. During this time they produced a wide array of experimental and
conceptual art works that were often ephemeral and spanned various media including performance, video, photography, muralism, and other innovative multime-
dia practices. A retrospective focused on this artists group is being organized by the Los Angeles County Museum of Art and the Williams College Museum and
will be on view at WCMA during spring semester 2012. This class will provide the opportunity to study this work closely and explore the museum installation
process. We will examine techniques used by museums to organize and display works of art, consider the challenges posed by performance and conceptual-based
art works, and investigate methods used for presenting such projects in other recent exhibitions. We will also explore the role of education in museum exhibitions.
Course readings will be drawn from the exhibition catalogue, additional materials on the artists, and art reviews. Writing projects will be modeled on museum
educational texts, including explanatory brochures, short interpretative texts (such as, wall labels and object labels), and educator's guides.
Requirements: weekly assignments, collected writing portfolio (12-15 pages), oral presentations.
Prerequisites: ARTH 102 or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 12. Priority given to Art majors and Latina/o Studies concentrators.
Cost: $100 for books.
Meeting time: mornings.
CHAVOYA
ARTH 11 Editorial Cartooning and the Art of Propaganda (Same as Political Science 11)
This hands-on course, taught jointly by an editorial cartoonist for a major metropolitan daily newspaper and a member of the Art Department faculty, introduces
students to the "Ungentlemanly Art" through discussion and an emphasis on the creation of their own work. It is not an art course so much as an exercise in
disciplining the mind to distill abstract concepts and opinions into visual and verbal symbols that can be clearly, economically and persuasively communicated to
the reader. In addition, elements of creativity and ways to harness its potential will be explored. Previous drawing experience is neither a prerequisite nor an
advantage. In fact, non-art majors are particularly encouraged to enroll. The basics of perspective, proportion, and shading will be covered as needed to provide all
students with the necessary skills to express themselves. What is much more important is that the prospective student have an inquisitive mind, a healthy interest
in the current national discourse, a willingness to enter into spirited classroom discussion, and an appreciation of satire. Class assignments will be critiqued in a
non-threatening atmosphere. The instructor, who will be continuously producing daily cartoons for his newspaper, will also present his own work for criticism.
Class meetings, at least two hours per meeting three days a week, will alternate between the studio experiences described above and lectures that will acquaint
students with aspects of the history of caricature, cartooning and art with a propagandistic or overtly political purpose. The lectures will provide students with
knowledge that they can, if they choose, use in their own work as cartoonists.
The success of this course depends on the commitment and motivation of all participants. Course requirements will include the drawing of several editorial
cartoons per week, outside reading and viewing of news media (including analysis and commentary by the nation's opinion shapers), and active involvement in
class discussion. There will be a field trip to the Norman Rockwell Museum in Stockbridge.
To be considered for acceptance, applicants are requested to email Chan Lowe, in advance, a short statement (max. 200 words), describing an issue currently in
the national spotlight, and why it resonates with them. Email: chanlowe@bellsouth.net
Enrollment limit: 15.
Cost: $75 for art materials.
Meeting time: afternoons.
CHAN LOWE AND E.J. JOHNSON
CHAN LOWE, '75, is the editorial cartoonist for the South Florida Sun Sentinel and Tribune Media Services. His work is nationally syndicated and appears
regularly in newspapers, magazines and online throughout the country and the world. He is also the author of an award-winning daily blog, The Lowe Down
(www.sunsentinel.com/chan)
ARTH 31 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for ArtH 493, 494.
ARTH 33 Honors Independent Study
To be taken by candidates for honors by the independent study route.
ART STUDIO
ARTS 12 Figure Modeling
This course is designed as an introduction to the challenges of working with the figure in a sculptural context. The class will be structured as a working studio with
the students sculpting in clay from a live model.
The first half of the course will emphasize learning the technical and physiological aspects of the human figure: structure, proportion, gesture, and basic anatomy.
The latter half of the course will be concerned with the creative aspects of working with the figure and of developing individual interpretations of the human form.
In addition to working studio sessions, there will be two presentations on the human form in art.
Each student will be evaluated on the success of their sculpture, attendance, participation, and effort. This course requires approximately 15 hours per week of
individual investigations into the human form.
Prerequisites: ARTS 100. Enrollment limit: 12. Priority given to art majors.
Cost: $105.00.
Meeting time: afternoons.
PODMORE
ARTS 13 Design Garage
This course is a hands-on deep dive into impactful design. Explicitly and implicitly, we will use design to promote, encourage, and intervene towards sustainabil-
ity at Williams. By learning and applying design techniques to this real-world challenge, students will emerge with an actionable and tested concept for a new
product, service, or experience.
The format of final projects will range depending on student passions in each small group team, but all will tackle inspiring questions. For example: How might
we design a program that reduces water waste without decreasing pleasurable water usage? How might we design a backpack that supports reuse of materials
without sacrificing style? How might we design a mobile phone application that rewards groups of friends for reducing energy use throughout their day?
Each class session will introduce new methods that are part of a user-centered design process with a lens towards sustainability. We will practice ethnographic
interviewing, needfinding, rapid ideation, improvisation, brainstorming, physical, digital and experiential prototyping, in-situ testing, and idea-pitching. Class
sessions will be high-energy and require hands-on participation and radical collaboration. Students should expect to spend time outside of class working with their
project team. No specific skills or prior experience are necessary, and students from any and all disciplines are encouraged to apply.
Evaluation will be based on successful completion of weekly assignments, and a final, physical, project and public presentation.
No prior experience with art or design is necessary, but a willingness to get messy while learning is required.
Cost: $80.
Meeting time: mornings.
CARISSA CARTER (Instructor)
GLIER (Sponsor)
Carissa Carter is a practicing user experience and product designer. She merges her background as a geologist with a passion for purposeful and informed
design to both explore and push design methods as well as create physical products. Her personal research involves combining digital crowdsourcing tech-
314
niques with hand-drawn maps collected from thousands of people around the world to gather design insights. She graduated from Williams College and has
a graduate degree in design from Stanford University. Carissa has worked as a designer and consultant for startups as well Google Inc, and currently works
full-time as a user experience design lead for Herman Miller Inc.
ARTS 25 Art of Experience in Egypt: Visual Documentation of Journey and Encounter
This studio art course immerses students in the contemporary culture of Egypt through travel in Luxor, Aswan and Cairo. Using watercolor, graphite and pen,
students learn a range of approaches for visually documenting their experiences and encounters. As traveling artists, we repeatedly return to the following ques-
tions: How porous is being; where does the self end and the `other' begin? What does it mean to be an artist traveler? Can we say that one encounter is `more
authentic' than another?
Williams College students will work with art students from the Luxor College of Fine Art during the first 10 days of the trip. Through sketchbook work and
assignments on larger format paper, students will undergo a "Drawing Intensive:" in the marketplaces, at cultural sites like Hassan Fathy's New Gourna Village
and Karnak Temple, and on the Luxor College campus for the study of portraiture. A Luxor College faculty member and I will provide specific skill and concept-
building workshops. We will then spend three days in Aswan working in landscape, and 5 days in Cairo in order to visit artist studios, museums and other cultural
sites. After the trip, students will meet to prepare an art exhibition and presentation for the Williams College community. This course requires more preparation
than is usual for a WSP course; it requires attendance at evening orientation meetings and a studio workshop during the Fall semester. Preliminary sketchbook
work and assigned cultural, political and historical readings including a complete text by a contemporary Egyptian author must be completed by the start of
Winter Study Period. The first three days of Winter Study will take place on the Williams College campus for reading discussions, presentations, and studio
workshops. Only those who can attend from the first day of Winter Study are eligible for this trip.
Requirements: completed sketchbooks and assignments, and successful execution of final project. In addition, a supportive demeanor throughout the trip and
group critique participation are required.
Prerequisites: prior drawing experience strongly suggested, but not required; open to all but first-year students. Enrollment limit: 10. Students will be selected on
the basis of individual interviews, campus recommendations, and seniority.
Cost: approximately $3000.
JULIA MORGAN-LEAMON (Instructor)
H. EDWARDS (Sponsor)
Julia Morgan-Leamon is a painter, installation artist, and media producer. She received her MFA in Visual Arts from Vermont College of Fine Arts, and her
BA in Studio Art from Mount Holyoke College. In 2009, she was one of 25 international artists invited to participate in the Luxor International Painting Sympo-
sium and residency.
ASIAN STUDIES
ASST 11 Lessons in Go (Same as Mathematics 11)
(See under MATH 11 for full description.) DEVADOSS
ASST 31 Senior Thesis
To be taken by all students who are candidates for honors in Asian Studies.
CHINESE
CHIN S.P. Sustaining Program for Chinese 101-102
Students registered for Chinese 101-102 are required to attend and pass the Chinese Sustaining Program. Classes meet Mondays, Tuesdays, and Thursdays from
9:00-9:50. Prerequisite: Chinese 101. Evaluation will be based on regular attendance and active participation. Cost: one xerox packet.
LANGUAGE FELLOWS
CHIN 10 Theory and Practice of Chinese Cooking
Much more than in the US., in China people are always talking about food; as the Chinese saying has it, min yi shi wei tian `the people consider eating as heaven.'
This hands-on course will foster an appreciation of the historical and cultural background of Chinese cooking, as well as the development of practical skills in
preparing a variety of Chinese dishes. To the extent possible, we will use locally available ingredients (organic if possible) to cook authentic Chinese food,
primarily Chinese home cooking. Since climate has had a huge impact on availability of ingredients, the course includes an introduction to the four primary
regions, or schools, of Chinese cooking--Northern, Eastern, Western, and Southern. While we will cook most dishes together, every student will also have the
opportunity to cook independently. Students will be expected to complete assigned readings, write book reviews, view films outside of class and write film
reviews, dine at a Chinese restaurant, interview chefs, write food critiques, and shop at an Asian supermarket to learn about the various cooking ingredients.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 8. In case of over enrollment, preference will be given to seniors, and then Juniors.
Cost: $100 for materials.
Meeting time: two three-hour sessions per week from 10:00 AM to 1:00 PM.
JERLING KUBLER (Instructor)
CHANG (Sponsor)
CHIN 31 Senior Thesis
To be taken by all students who are candidates for honors in Chinese.
JAPANESE
JAPN S.P. Sustaining Program for Japanese 101-102
Students registered for Japanese 101-102 are required to attend and pass the Japanese Sustaining Program. Classes meet Mondays, Tuesdays, and Thursdays
from 9:00-9:50. Prerequisite: Japanese 101. Evaluation will be based on regular attendance and active participation. Cost: one xerox packet.
YAGI
JAPN 10 Looking into Nihongo and Its Culture
Have you ever studied Japanese or thought of studying Japanese? This is an ideal course for students who are curious about the Japanese language and culture. It
will examine different aspects of Japanese language (Nihongo) in comparison to English and other languages through broader theoretical perspectives. We will
discuss variation and change in Nihongo, sounds and scripts of Nihongo, gestures and signals in Nihongo, interaction strategies in Nihongo, and selected popular
culture genres from comics to cell-phone novels. Requirement: Class participation, reading and homework assignments (data collection and analysis). 6-7 page
research paper and presentation on selected issues on Japanese language.
No prerequisite; no Japanese language ability is required to take this course, but some knowledge would be very helpful. Students will be asked to collect speech
samples.
Cost: about $50 for books and printed materials.
Meeting time: mornings.
YAMAMOTO
JAPN 11 The Samurai in Japanese Film
Some of the finest films ever crafted and celebrated in cinematic history have projected the lives and legends of the samurai. Like the gunfighter and cowboy of
the American West, the samurai is an extraordinarily iconic figure, if not, an enduring expression of a distinct Japanese ethos. This course will examine the
samurai genre, the formulation of the samurai character, the code of Bushido he lived by, and the multiple roles he has assumed in Japanese filmmaking. Whether
as a warrior or loyal retainer to his lord, a symbol of purity of purpose or tragic sacrifice, the samurai has usually been apotheosized as a noble, revered hero. Why?
Notwithstanding this image, the films in this course will trace the rise and fall of the samurai class, the tangled legacies of its demise, and ultimate disappearance at
the end of the Shogunate era, when Samurai cut their top knots before the turn of the twentieth century, and put up their swords for good. The focus of this class
will be on the films of Kurasawa, Gosha, Kobayashi, Okamoto and lnagaki.
Requirements: students will write a 6- to 7-page evaluation after the completion of each film.
No prerequisites, but class attendance and participation is required. Enrollment limit: 30.
Meeting time: MWF, 10-12, with additional film screenings to be announced.
FRANK STEWART (Instructor)
YAMAMOTO (Sponsor)
JAPN 13 Japanese Animation (Same as Comparative Literature 13)
(See under COMP 13 for full description.) C. BOLTON
315
JAPN 31 Senior Thesis
To be taken by all students who are candidates for honors in Japanese.
ASTRONOMY
ASTR 11 The Amber Room and Hidden Treasures: Impressionist Art Held Hostage? (Same as History 11 and Special 12)
The course will explore the plunder of European cultural treasures during World War II, focusing on the Germans' seizure of Russia's famed amber panels ("the
eighth wonder of the world") from the Catherine Palace outside of Leningrad in 1942 and the removal of priceless Impressionist art (the "Hidden Treasures")
from Germany by the victorious Soviet army in 1945. Along the way we will look at Russian entrepreneurs' leadership in collecting Impressionist art prior to
World War I and the political, economic, and social changes that resulted in the Hermitage's rich Impressionist holdings after that war. Not incidentally, we will
also focus on the painterly goals of the Impressionists and the political and cultural environment that affected their fortunes in France. Finally, returning to the
present, we will examine the calculations that have prompted the Soviet Union to hold the "Hidden Treasures" hostage pending Germany's uncertain return of the
Amber Room panels to Russia. Other examples of wartime looting and recovery, including the issues surrounding return of art that involved such luminaries as
Williams professor Lane Faison will provide a starting point for students to explore further whatever aspects of the saga--artistic, social or political--interest
them. Interest in how history and politics affected the fate of Impressionist artists and their art lies behind the conception of this project.
On the Astronomy Department side, the current status of the Amber Room was visited in suburban St. Petersburg, while reconnoitering for the 2008 total solar
eclipse that was later observed from Siberia. Williams astronomers will, in 2012, observe the transit of Venus, only the fifth to occur since M. V. Lomonosov and
Chappe d'Auteroch observed the 1761 transit of Venus from St. Petersburg and Siberia, respectively. Chappe d'Auteroch's description of Siberia and of its inhab-
itants, and of the Russian peoples in general, was so negative that Catherine herself wrote a rebuttal. These aspects will be covered in a guest lecture by Prof.
Pasachoff.
Evaluation will be based on class presentations and a 10-page research project.
No prerequisites, however, interest in art history and/or French and Russian cultural history is recommended. Enrollment limit: 30. If overenrolled, preference
will be given to history and art history majors, or students interested in taking art history or cultural history courses.
Cost: $50 to cover photocopy costs and purchase of The Amber Room, by Scott-Clark and Levy, 2004 ("reads like a Cold War Thriller" and presents the saga of
the amber panels search in all its frustrating complexity).
Meeting time: mornings, 10-noon, MWR.
MARGO R. BOWDEN (Instructor)
PASACHOFF (Sponsor)
Margo Bowden is a former independent school history and politics teacher in New York as well as a NYC Teaching Fellow and an adjunct professor at Queens
College. She served as a docent at the Guggenheim Museum before becoming a docent at the Clark Art Institute.
ASTR 12 Transits: Venus's Atmosphere, the Size of the Solar System, and Planets Around other Stars
Transits of planets across the faces of their parent stars have been and continue to be a powerful method of astronomical discovery. The exceedingly rare transits
of Venus--seen until recently only in 1639, 1761, 1769, 1874, and 1882--were, since the work of Edmond Halley, the main way foreseen of measuring the size
and scale of the Solar System, leading to over 100 expeditions being sent around the world to study the 18th- and 19th-century transits. We will discuss not only
the science but also the human stories involved: Le Gentil being marooned near India in 1761 and choosing to stay on until 1769; Captain Cook observing the
1769 transit from Tahiti and, as long as he was nearby, going on to explore the coasts of Australia and New Zealand; Henry Chamberlain Russell organizing and
observing the 1874 transit from Australia; Jules Janssen inventing his "revolver" to take multiple photos, a precursor to movie cameras, soon after his escape from
Paris in a balloon to observe a total solar eclipse. Nobody on Earth had been alive to see a transit at the time of the 2004 transit that a Williams College team
observed from Greece and with space satellites. Now we are preparing to observe the 5-6 June 2012 transit of Venus with 19th-century and 21st-century tele-
scopes, and students in the course can participate in planning and testing historic and new equipment.
The transit method is being used in the 21st century by NASA's Kepler spacecraft to detect, so far, over 1000 planets around other stars, and the number is
continually rising. Another spacecraft and ground-based telescopes are similarly studying transits of such "exoplanets." We will discuss the process and the
results of these discovery searches. The discovery of these planetary systems, and consideration of the implications for our role in the Universe, is one of the most
exciting topics in contemporary astronomy.
Evaluation will be based on class presentations and two 5-page papers.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 30. If overenrolled, selection will be based on a brief personal statement.
Cost: $0.
Meeting time: two-hour classes twice a week, Tuesdays and Fridays.
PASACHOFF
ASTR 31 Senior Research
To be taken by students registered for Astronomy 493, 494.
ASTROPHYSICS
ASPH 31 Senior Research
To be taken by students registered for Astrophysics 493, 494.
BIOLOGY
BIOL 10 Observational Drawing from the Natural World
This is a drawing course for science students and others who are interested in developing their skills in drawing from nature. Much of the class work will deal
directly with drawing from plant forms and the animal world and to this end we will be using an interesting collection of stuffed mounts and skeletons that belong
to the Williams Biology department. We will also spend time in the Morley greenhouse. Beyond the subject matter at hand, assignments will also address and
analyze the more formal aspects of drawing and two-dimensional design with outside assignments including independent visits to the Clark, the WCMA study
collection and the Chapin Library of Rare Books.
Evaluation will be based on completion of in-class work and outside drawing assignments with a focus on the depiction of content, effort, and development of the
work. Evidence of technical and skill development as well as attendance and participation will also be taken into consideration. Exhibition and review of work at
the final class meeting is required.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20. If overenrolled, selection will be based on seniority.
Cost: $75.
Meeting time: 3 hours, twice a week.
JOHN RECCO (Instructor)
SWOAP (Sponsor)
John Recco lives and works in Hoosick, NY and holds an MFA from Columbia University. He has taught at a variety of institutions including Bennington
College and Williams. He is the recipient of numerous awards including a Fulbright, fellowships at Yaddo, The Millay Colony, The European Cultural Centre
of Delphi, Greece and a NYSCA Individual Artist Grant.
BIOL 11 Project BioEyes: Zebrafish Genetics and Development in the K-12 classroom
Project BioEyes brings tropical fish to 4th and 11th grade classrooms in Williamstown and beyond, in a science teaching workshop. Elementary and high school
students will breed fish in the classroom, then study their development and pigmentation during one week per school. Williams students will write lesson plans
that adapt the project to the science curriculum for the grades we visit, work with classroom teachers to introduce concepts in genetics and development, help the
K-12 students in the classroom, and assess student learning. A final eight-page paper describing the goals and outcomes for each grade level is required. No
zebrafish experience is necessary; during the first week students will learn to set up fish matings, and learn about embryonic development and the genetics of fish
pigmentation, as well as about supporting the K-12 curriculum with hands-on experiments using living animals. In the subsequent two weeks we will work at the
schools, and in the final week, students will write up the assessment data.
Evaluation will be based on a final 8-page paper.
Prerequisites: Biology 101 or equivalent, or permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 8.
Cost: $0.
Meeting times: varies depending on needs of schools and on laboratory requirements.
JENNIFER SWOAP (Instructor)
SWOAP (Sponsor)
Jennifer Swoap, an elementary school teacher, currently coordinates Williams Elementary Outreach, where Williams students teach hands-on science lessons
at area elementary schools.
316
BIOL 13 Ferment, Leaven and Curdle: Pickle, Bake, Cheese-Make!
In this class we will learn simple and effective techniques for creating fluffy focaccia, rich paneer and quick kimchee. Students will complete the course with an
in-depth understanding of the importance of yeast, rennet and bacterial-mediated fermentation in food production. Theory will come to life through practical,
hands-on investigation of these biological processes, as they are involved in baking, cheese making and pickling. Each class will involve a lesson, cooking
practice and tasting!
Students will be expected to read short articles on the cultural history and basic biology of each featured cooking technique, as well as articles on related hot topics
such as the raw-milk debate. Students will be encouraged to practice baking, pickling and cheese making at home and to bring in their questions for troubleshoot-
ing. A short writing assignment on a special technique or culinary topic of the student's choosing will be due each week. When time permits, we will discuss these
findings in class. A final paper on a richly debated issue in food production will be due at the end of the course. Development of cooking skills, attendance and
participation will also be evaluated.
Local milk and flour will be used!
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15 (depends on oven/kitchen space). If overenrolled, selection will be based on seniority.
Cost to student: $80.
Meeting time: 3 hours, twice a week. 6 pm-9 pm (location: Paresky Bakery).
RACHEL RUGGLES (Instructor)
SWOAP (Sponsor)
Rachel Ruggles studied anthropology at the University of Massachusetts in Boston and is a graduate of the Cambridge School of Culinary Arts. Her love
of culture and cuisine is reflected in her wide repertoire of cooking techniques and recipes. She currently bakes and makes cheese professionally in Williams-
town.
BIOL 21 Science Beyond Williams
Are you interested in hands-on experience in a science-related field beyond the Purple Valley? Are you curious to explore science in a university or medical
school research lab, a government agency, or a not-for-profit organization? This course is designed to help students take part in scientific work or research going
on outside of Williams in order to provide them with a broader sense of what it is like to work in a professional scientific setting. Any field of science or technolo-
gy can be explored via this course.
In consultation with the course instructor, students will use resources such as the Office of Career Counseling, science faculty members, and Williams alumni/ae
to locate a mentor in the student's area of interest at a work site in the United States. Once the course instructor approves the arrangement for a mentored, hands-on
experience for three weeks of Winter Study, the student will prepare for the internship by reading literature related to the project, and discuss the readings with a
faculty sponsor here at Williams in November/December. Once on site, students must remain in contact with their Williams faculty sponsor by having a weekly
phone conference. Participating students would not have to be on campus during WSP prior to beginning their fieldwork. Strong interest, enthusiasm and willing-
ness to plan and prepare for the internship are required for this course.
Evaluation will be based on a 10-page paper and post-WSP public presentation to a relevant department or program on the goals and accomplishments of the
project.
Prerequisites: two semesters of relevant course work in science and/or mathematics.
Enrollment limit: 10.
DEWITT
BIOL 22 Introduction to Biological Research
An experimental research project will be carried out under the supervision of Biology Department faculty. It is expected that the student will spend 20 hours per
week in the lab at a minimum, and a 10-page written report is required. This experience is intended for, but not limited to, first-year students and sophomores.
Interested students must submit an application form available on the Biology Department webpage: http://biology.williams.edu/current-students/applications/
Prerequisites: Biology 101. Enrollment limit: 15.
Cost: none
Meeting time: mornings
DEWITT
BIOL 31 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Biology 493, 494.
CHEMISTRY
CHEM 11 Science for Kids (Same as SPEC 11)
Are you interested in teaching? Do you enjoy working with kids? Do you like to experiment with new things? Here is a chance for you to do all three! The aim of
this Winter Study Project is to design a series of hands-on science workshops for elementary school children and their parents. Working in teams of 2-4, students
spend the first two and a half weeks of Winter Study planning the workshops. This involves deciding on a focus for each workshop (based on the interests of the
students involved) followed by choosing and designing experiments and presentations that will be suitable for fourth-grade children. On the third weekend of
Winter Study (January 21, 22) we bring elementary school kids with their parents to Williams to participate in the workshops.
You get a chance to see what goes into planning classroom demonstrations as well as a sense of what it's like to actually give a presentation. You find that kids at
this age are great fun to work with because they are interested in just about everything and their enthusiasm is infectious. You also give the kids and their parents a
chance to actually do some fun hands-on science experiments that they may not have seen before, and you are able to explain simple scientific concepts to them in
a manner that won't be intimidating. It is a rewarding experience for all involved.
Evaluation is based on participation in planning and running the workshops. Each group is expected to prepare a handout with descriptions of the experiments for
the kids, parents, and teachers.
No prerequisites. You need not be a science major; all that is needed is enthusiasm.
Enrollment limit: 25.
Meeting time: mornings. Classes meet three times a week for approximately three hours each session. The workshop is run on the third weekend of Winter Study
(January 21, 22) and attendance from 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. is mandatory that weekend. There are also one or two brief meetings held in the fall term for prelimi-
nary planning.
Cost: $0.
KAPLAN and RICHARDSON
CHEM 12 Spanish for the Health Sciences
The course is intended for those students with interest in the health sciences and with some knowledge of Spanish who want to develop their vocabulary and
conversational skills. The course covers essential dialogs associated with health assessment interviews as well as extensive review of physiology, biochemistry,
and public health issues affecting Spanish speaking communities in the United States. The class is open to both Spanish proficient and health sciences oriented
students.
Evaluation is based on class participation, final projects, a 10-page paper, and a class presentation.
Prerequisite: Intermediate to Advanced Spanish. Enrollment limit: 12. If the course is overenrolled, preference will be given to seniors, juniors, and those who
express the most and earliest interest and enthusiasm by email to Professor Peacock-Lopez (epeacock@williams.edu).
Meeting time: 9:00 a.m. to noon, three days per week.
Cost: $100 for books.
PEACOCK-LOPEZ
CHEM 13 The Principles and Practice of Peptide Chemistry
The course consists of lecture/discussion and hands on laboratory work. The lecture and lab sections meet on alternate days; the lecture in the morning and
laboratories in the afternoons. Some days may involve "long" lab days where the work begins in the morning, followed by a lunch period, then finishing in the
afternoon.
The lecture covers the development of synthetic techniques since the time of Fisher and Curtius through current methodology in use today: methods of peptide
bond formation and the problem of racemization, -amino protecting groups, amino acid side chain protecting groups, solution and solid phase methodologies,
orthogonal protection schemes with emphasis on Fmoc/t-Butyl strategies, and sequence specific problems. Students are assigned readings and reviews from the
original literature to compliment the materials discussed in class.
The laboratory portion of the course involves hands-on synthesis and characterization of model peptides using Fmoc/t-Butyl strategies. Depending on enrollment,
students may start with the synthesis of Fmoc--N-protected amino acid derivatives, or start right out with solid phase synthesis of model peptides. A number of
analytical techniques are employed to characterize the products and assess their purity, including: nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, infrared spectrosco-
py, high performance liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry, and matrix-assisted laser desorption mass spectrometry. Time permitting, students may also
learn solution-based synthesis.
Evaluation is based on laboratory performance, a report detailing the synthesis and characterization of the peptidic products, class participation, and a class pre-
sentation of a relevant topic from the current chemical literature.
317
Prerequisite: CHEM 251. Enrollment limit: 10. If the course is overenrolled preference will be given to students with advanced organic chemistry experience (i.e.
CHEM 342/CHEM 344).
Meeting time: mornings and afternoons.
Cost: $100 for books.
TONY TRURAN (Instructor)
THOMAN (Sponsor)
Dr. Truran was trained as a peptide chemist under Professor Louis Carpino. He has taught at the University of Connecticut, Storrs and Westfield State College
as a Visiting Assistant Professor. He is currently a Lecturer in the Chemistry Department at Williams College.
CHEM 14 Beyond Hooking Up: Creating Meaningful Relationships (Same as Psychology 14 and Special 14)
Looking back on past loves and crushes, have you ever wondered, "What on earth was I thinking?!" or "Why do I keep picking the wrong guys/girls for me?"
While intense sexual attraction or urges may first call the shots, people who take the time to carefully choose and build caring, mutual relationships tend to be
happier, healthier and more successful in their lives than those who don't. So how do we get there from here and make sense of all this? Well, no matter where you
are on the dating spectrum, this self-exploration and relationship-skill-building course is for you if you are ready to learn how to follow your heart AND your
mind to co-create a fulfilling relationship within the vortex of the "hook up" culture. The Myers-Briggs Type Indicator, "How to Avoid Falling In Love with A
Jerk," and "Keeping the Love You Find" curricula will guide this introspective, interactive relationship mastery course through meaningful discussions and
exercises that explore the common issues, dirty fighting tactics, subconscious directives and emotional allergies that often sabotage relationships. Experiential
exercises, personal experiences and journaling will also give you the opportunity to practice effective communication and conflict resolution skills that honor the
constructive use of differences and promote intimacy.
Evaluation is based on 8 hours of attendance per week, class participation, MBTI inventory completion, 20-hours per week of assigned readings, journaling,
assignments, 1:1 consultations, and final 10-page reflective paper.
Email your statement of interest to SSmith@williams.edu if you are curious about relationships and are ready and willing to delve into personal growth and take
your relationships to the next level.
Prerequisite: statement of interest. Enrollment limit: 16. If overenrolled, selection will be based on statement of interest.
Meeting time: 6-8 hours a week (12-3pm).
Cost: $100 for books and materials.
RACHELLE SMITH (Instructor)
THOMAN (Sponsor)
Rachelle Smith, MSW, is a holistic, strengths-based Clinical Social Worker, Consultant, Educator & Mentor bridging Relationships, Wellness, and Energy
Psychology.
CHEM 18 Introduction to Research in Biochemistry
An independent experimental project in biochemistry is carried out in collaboration with a member of the Department with expertise in biochemistry. Biochemis-
try is a branch of chemistry that deals with the molecular details of living systems including the interaction of biologically important molecules. In the Chemistry
Department, studies are underway to investigate the structure/function relationship of proteins, the interaction between proteins and RNA and DNA, and the
molecular basis of bacterial gene regulation.
A 10-page written report is required.
Prerequisite: variable, depending on the project (at least CHEM 151) and permission of the Department. Since projects involve work in faculty research labs,
interested students must consult with one or more of the faculty instructors listed below and with the Department Chair before electing this course. Non-science
majors are invited to participate. Enrollment limited to space in faculty research lab.
Meeting time: mornings.
Cost: $0.
GEHRING and LOVETT
CHEM 24 Introduction to Research in Physical Chemistry
An independent experimental project in physical chemistry is carried out in collaboration with a member of the Department with expertise in physical chemistry.
Current research projects in the Department include computer modeling of non-linear, chaotic chemical and biochemical systems, molecular modeling of water
clusters, laser spectroscopy of chlorofluorocarbon substitutes, and observing the dynamics in glasses using single molecule spectroscopy and molecular dynamics
simulations.
A 10-page written report is required.
Prerequisite: variable, depending on the project (at least CHEM 151) and permission of the Department. Since projects involve work in faculty research labs,
interested students must consult with one or more of the faculty instructors listed below and with the Department Chair before electing this course. Non-science
majors are invited to participate. Enrollment limited to space in faculty research labs.
Meeting time: mornings.
Cost: $0.
BINGEMANN, PEACOCK-LOPEZ and THOMAN
CHEM 31 Senior Research and Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Chemistry 493, 494.
CLASSICS
CLAS 11 The History of Words (Same as Comparative Literature 11)
This course will explore the fascinating history of words from a variety of linguistic and cultural perspectives. We will examine the methods and tools of etymo-
logical research and apply them to several fields of study including historical phonology and morphology, alphabets and other writing systems, dictionaries,
dialectal studies, slang and jargon, personal names, geographic names, word puzzles, and more. We will also consider the role of literary, social, and political
forces in shaping the development of languages and even individual lexical items. Our goal throughout will be to gain familiarity with a broad range of issues
concerning the internal and external history of words.
Method of Evaluation: class participation, several short writing assignments, and one longer research project.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15.
Cost: approximately $30.
Meeting time: afternoons
DEKEL
CLAS 12 Introduction to Old Irish (Same as Comparative Literature 12)
This class will introduce students to the form of Irish language spoken and written in the 8th and 9th centuries, known as Old Irish. The goal of the class is to work
quickly so that students will be able to read an Irish folktale in the original by the end of the session. Texts will include an as-yet-unpublished Old Irish textbook by
Maria Tymozcko (used with permission) and selections from David Stifter's Old Irish textbook, Sensoidelc, as well as the text of the folktale Scla Mucce Meic
Dath (The Tale of Mac Datho's Pig) in Old Irish and the Tin B Cailnge (The Cattle Raid of Cooley) in translation. We will meet 5 days a week for 2 hours a
day, as befits an intense language acquisition class.
Methods of instruction and evaluation include vocabulary quizzes, grammar exercises, short translations, and a final translation exercise.
Prerequisites: prior experience with an inflected language is helpful, but not required. Enrollment limit: 15.
Cost: approximately $35.
Meeting time: M-F mornings, 10 a.m.-noon.
SHANNON K. FARLEY (Instructor)
HOPPIN (Sponsor)
Shannon K. Farley is an alumna of Williams College, where she majored in Classics and History. She is currently a Ph.D. candidate in Comparative Literature
at the University of Massachusetts Amherst, where she has been teaching since 2004. Email skfarley@complit.umass.edu to contact the instructor.
CLAS 14 Plato's Symposium and Its Afterlife (Same as Comparative Literature 14, Philosophy 14, and Women's, Gender and Sexuality
Studies 14)
Plato's Symposium ostensibly commemorates a gathering held at the home of the tragic poet Agathon of Athens, in 416 BCE, whose participants dedicate their
evening to delivering speeches in praise of love (eros). This dialogue has been among Plato's most widely read, and its influence has ranged far beyond philoso-
phy. We will read the Symposium in translation, with close attention to is dramatic setting, its remarkable narrative structure, and the content of each character's
speech, as well as the conversations that come between. Our examination of Plato's text will be interwoven with consideration of selected receptions of and
reactions to the Symposium. These will include texts from later antiquity to the Renaissance to modernity (e.g., Philo, Plotinus, Ficino, Shelley, Woolf, Mann,
Forster) as well as visual and cinematic takes on aspects of Plato's work, ranging from Rubens to Hedwig and the Angry Inch. We will also consider a recent
318
appearance of the Symposium in the American courts (Romer v. Evans, 882 P. 2d 1335 Colorado Supreme Court, 1994).
Evaluation will be based on contributions to class discussion including oral reports, several short essays, final paper or project.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15. Preference given to majors and intended majors in Classics, Comparative Literature, Philosophy, and Women, Gender
and Sexuality Studies.
Cost: approximately $25 for books and coursepack.
Meeting times: Monday through Thursday, 10-11:30 a.m..
WILCOX
CLAS 31 Senior Thesis
May be taken by students registered for Classics 493, 494.
COGNITIVE SCIENCE
COGS 31 Senior Thesis
May be taken by students registered for Cognitive Science 494.
COMPARATIVE LITERATURE
COMP 10 The Grand Hotel in Modern Fiction and Film
In this course, we will visit actual hotel spaces in our area, read both contemporary and early twentieth-century hotel fiction, and discuss a broad range of hotel
films, from drama to comedy. The grand hotel with its dual promise of luxury and estrangement was considered a theatre of social transformation in the age of
travel. We will read novels, short stories, and discuss films that feature the hotel as a space that would either uphold class distinction or give rise to class conflict,
allow for sexual taboo breaking, or stage gendered identity performance. Authors and filmmakers in this early period will include Edith Wharton, Thomas Mann,
Franz Werfel, Vicki Baum, and F.W. Murnau. We will consider short theoretical readings by Thorstein Veblen, Georg Simmel, Siegfried Kracauer on conspicu-
ous consumption, modernity, and metropolitan spaces. In the present, hotel dramas focus on issues of ethnic violence (Hotel Rwanda), the invisible immigrant
worker (Dirty Pretty Things), cultural alienation (Lost in Translation), and the female body at work (A Single Girl). Comedies explore the fantasy of a dramatic
social climb through identity confusion in a hotel setting (Maid in Manhattan); satires highlight the confidence man who profits from social pretensions (from
Thomas Mann's trickster and sexual adventurer Felix Krull, to the hilarious high-school dropout/runaway posing as the scion of a wealthy executive in Thomas
Brussig's Wie es leuchtet). Fantasy writing creates virtual hotel spaces (Robert Coover's The Grand Hotels of Joseph Cornell). Theoretical readings focus on
private versus public spaces, social distinction, warped space, and shopping for brands by Pierre Bourdieu, Erving Goffmann, Tony Vidler and Sharon Zukin. We
will also study characteristics of real-life upscale area hotels like The Equinox, The Porches and The Orchards through site visits.
Requirements: active class participation, one oral presentation on an aspect of hotel culture, and one 10- page final paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15. Preference given to Comparative Literature, Literary Studies, and English majors.
Cost: $45 for books and xerox package.
Meeting time: TWR 10 a.m.-noon, plus excursions TBA.
DRUXES
COMP 11 The History of Words (Same as Classics 11)
(See under CLAS 11 for full description.) DEKEL
COMP 12 Introduction to Old Irish (Same as Classics 12)
(See under CLAS 12 for full description.) SHANNON K. FARLEY
COMP 13 Japanese Animation (Same as Japanese 13)
Read or Die is the title of a popular Japanese animated series about secret agents in the employ of the world's great libraries. But what does it mean to "read" in an
age and culture so dominated by visual media? This class is an introduction to reading and thinking about Japanese animation, or anime, with a focus on the
challenges it poses to traditional ways of interpreting literature and film. We will screen several landmark anime feature films and short series by major directors
like tomo Katsuhiro, Miyazaki Hayao, and particularly Oshii Mamoru; we will read the work of literature and media scholars who have tried to come to terms
with anime; and we will track the latest scholarship by getting an editor's inside look at the editing process for Mechademia, an annual journal for critical writing
on anime and manga. We will also look at things from the creators' side by meeting with students and faculty at the Center for Cartoon Studies in White River
Junction, Vermont.
Required activities: three 2-hour morning class meetings per week, two self-scheduled film screenings per week, plus weekly reading assignments in anime
criticism and theory, a day-long field trip, and a final project that addresses the course material in a sophisticated and interesting way. For the project, students may
choose either a 10-page paper or a visual presentation like a storyboard, comic, film, animation, theatrical design, installation, online project, etc. Evaluation will
be based on attendance, preparation, and participation, as well as the project.
No prerequisites. All material is translated or subtitled in English. Enrollment limit:15. Preference given to students with a strong interest in literary and film
studies.
Cost: approximately $75 for books.
Meeting time: Tuesday, Thursday, Friday 10 a.m.-noon.
C. BOLTON
COMP 14 Plato's Symposium and Its Afterlife (Same as Classics 14, Philosophy 14, and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 14)
(See under CLAS 14 for full description.) WILCOX
COMP 16 Chekhov, An Unlikely Revolutionary (Same as Philosophy 16, Russian 16 and Theatre 16)
(See under PHIL 16 for full description.) MILOS MLADENOVIC
COMP 31 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Comparative Literature 493, 494.
LIT 31 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Literary Studies 493, 494.
COMPUTER SCIENCE
CSCI 11 Mixology
This course examines the history, science, and culture of mixed drinks. Students will learn about the origin of modern cocktails, the properties and mixing quali-
ties of bitters, syrups, and fortified wines, the role of proportion, and the classification and appreciation of alcohol. Other topics include fermentation, modern
mixology, glassware, and responsible consumption. The class will meet with local mixologists and tour a local distillery.
Evaluation is based on class participation, a short in-class presentation, a 10-page paper, and a final project involving the research and creation of a new cocktail.
No prerequisites, however, students must be at 21 years old on or before 3 January, 2012. Enrollment limit: 10. Preference is given to students with an academi-
cally strong record in the sciences.
Cost: $250 for supplies, equipment, and incidental costs due to travel.
Meeting time: mornings.
HEERINGA
CSCI 14 Introduction to Ruby on Rails
This lab-based course will teach students how to create and deploy web applications with Ruby on Rails, the open-source web development framework used by
Hulu, Twitter, Groupon, and many other companies. We'll start with a whirlwind tour of the Ruby language and then dive into learning the Rails framework by
working on a web application. Along the way, we'll cover development best practices, evaluate third-party code, and learn how to use the online Rails community
for help.
The class will meet for at least two hours, three times a week, and significant additional lab work will be required to complete the final project.
Evaluation will be based on class participation and a final project.
Prerequisites: CSCI 136 (Data Structures) or comparable programming experience with instructor's permission. If overenrolled, selection will be based on stu-
dent's programming experience.
Cost: $100.
Meeting time: afternoons.
COURTNEY WADE (Instructor)
MURTAGH (Sponsor)
319
Courtney Wade is an Academic Application Developer for the Office for Information Technology. She has been a Ruby on Rails programmer at two internet
start-ups and holds degrees from Yale, NYU, and UMass Amherst.
CSCI 23 Introduction to Research and Development in Computing
An independent project is completed in collaboration with a member of the Computer Science Department. The projects undertaken will either involve the
exploration of a research topic related to the faculty member's work or the implementation of a software system that will extend the students design and imple-
mentation skills. It is expected that the student will spend 20 hours per week working on the project. At the completion of the project, each student will submit a
10-page written report or the software developed together with appropriate documentation of its behavior and design. In addition, students will be expected to
give a short presentation or demonstration of their work. Students should consult with the instructor before the beginning of the Winter Study registration period to
determine details of projects that might be undertaken.
Evaluation will be based on a final paper and presentation/demonstration.
Prerequisites: permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 10. Preference given to sophomores and juniors.
Cost: $0.
Meeting time: TBA.
BAILEY
CSCI 31 Senior Honor Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Computer Science 493-494.
CONTRACT MAJOR
CMAJ 31 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Contract Major 493, 494.
ECONOMICS
ECON 10 Dollars, Sense and Healthcare in the U.S.
This class will examine how we arrived at the current system of healthcare delivery and reimbursement in the U.S. and where it is headed. The issues of access,
quality and cost will be focused on, as will how well reform legislation fosters or fails these essential components. An assigned textbook and reading packet
comprise the course materials with reading averaging about 100-150 pages/week. Six hours of class time each week may be added to by a field trip and/or guest
lectures.
Final projects may include a 10-page paper, interview, debate, original video or other demonstration of thorough command of the material and issues.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20. Preference given to upper-classes.
Cost: $40.
Meeting time: mornings.
KAREN ENGBERG and DOUGLAS JACKSON (Instructors)
MONTIEL (Sponsor)
Doug Jackson, MD is Board Certified in Family Medicine and has been active on the boards of several IPAs. He has practiced in ER, solo, small group and
large group healthcare settings in Los Angeles and Santa Barbara, and is currently the Medical Director of a small primary care group. Karen Engberg, MD
is retired from the active practice of primary care medicine and is currently an administrative physician and the CEO of Jackson Medical Group, Inc.
ECON 11 Public Speaking
This course will help students become effective and organized public speakers, whether public speaking means giving a class presentation, participating in a
debate, or giving a formal speech before a large audience. We will primarily use extemporaneous and prepared class presentations as a means of learning this skill,
but we will also study the great American speeches and presidential debates of the twentieth century for further insights into persuasive public speaking tech-
niques. The class will provide a supportive environment to help each student create his or her own public speaking style that is comfortable, confident, and
conversational. We will also focus on organizational techniques, handling visual aids effectively, eye contact and body language. Finally, receiving feedback and
providing constructive criticism to other students in the class will be an important part of the course.
Evaluation will be based on in-class presentations, class participation, and a 10-page written critique of the student's own videotaped presentations.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10. Preference to juniors and seniors and reasons for enrolling.
Cost: $25.
Meeting time: mornings.
CAPRIO and SWAMY
ECON 12 How to Write a Business Plan
The course will meet three days a week for three hours. Classes will be spent reviewing the fundamentals of writing a business plan. Participants will receive
workbooks and handouts as background which they will be expected to read. They will also be expected to do worksheets. Working in teams, the participants will
be expected to research a business idea and write a draft of a business plan. They will also present the business plan to the class. There will be a number of guest
speakers including a lawyer, an entrepreneur, and a venture capitalist.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, presentations, and the business plan.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 12. Priority will be given to students who have a business plan they would like to analyze and develop.
Cost: less than $30.
Meeting time: afternoons.
STEVEN FOGEL (Instructor)
MONTIEL (Sponsor)
Steven Fogel is the Program Director of Berkshire Enterprises Entrepreneurial Training Program and has helped hundreds of people develop business plans
and start businesses.
ECON 13 Real Estate and the Dream of Prosperity
In the United States, the dream of achieving prosperity has generally included home ownership as a central feature. In advertising, the popular press and in film,
home ownership is presented as one of the defining characteristics of the "American Dream". In this course we will explore--through film and economics--the
role that home ownership and real estate markets play in defining the economic aspirations and welfare of individuals in the United States and elsewhere. We will
view and discuss six films that present and document the pathetic, comic and tragic aspects of pursuing this dream. Each film will be discussed, and students will
consider and write about the economic significance of home ownership and operation of real estate markets.
Evaluation will be based on participation in class discussions and on two-page critical essays submitted after viewing each film, (a total of 12 pages of writing).
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 19. Preference given to first-years and sophomores.
Cost: $0.
Meeting time: afternoons.
S. SHEPPARD
ECON 14 Accounting
The project will examine the theoretical and practical aspects of financial accounting. Although the beginning of the course will explore the mechanics of the
information gathering and dissemination process, the course will be oriented mainly towards users, rather than preparers, of accounting information. The project
will include discussion of the principles involved in accounting for current assets, plant assets, leases, intangible assets, current liabilities, stockholders' equity, the
income statement and the statement of cash flows. Students will be expected to interpret and analyze actual financial statements. The nature of, and career oppor-
tunities in, the field of accounting will also be discussed. The project is a "mini course." It will present a substantial body of material and will require a consider-
able commitment of time by the student, including regular attendance and participation in discussion and homework cases and problems.
The course is a web-based course. The course website will include required readings from various linked web sites, additional downloadable reading material,
required homework problems as well as self study material. The course grade will be determined on the basis of several quizzes and a written group report
presenting an analysis of a company's annual report.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 30.
Cost: possible cost of downloading about 200 pages of material from the course website.
Meeting time: the course will meet for two hours on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday of the first week of Winter Study. Monday, Tuesday and Thursday of the
second and third week of Winter Study and on Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday of the last week of Winter Study.
LEO MCMENIMEN (Instructor)
MONTIEL (Sponsor)
320
Leo McMenimen has taught in the Winter Study Program at Williams College since 1980. He retired as a professor emeritus from the School of Business,
Montclair State University.
ECON 15 Stock Market
Elementary description and analysis of the stock market. Emphasis will be on the roles of the market in our economy, including evaluation of business firms and
the success of particular capital investments, allocating savings to different types of investment, and providing liquid and marketable financial investments for
individual savers.
The course will focus on the description of mechanics of trading on various exchanges and other markets, stock market indexes or "averages" (Dow-Jones, S&P,
500, etc.), how to read the financial news, historical rates of return on stocks and portfolios, role of mutual funds, beta coefficients, and "random walk" theory. The
course will also involve a brief introduction to financial reports of firms and analysis of financial ratios.
The course is a web-based course. The course website will include required readings from various linked web sites and required homework problems.
Each student will participate in discussions, do some homework assignments and, as part of a team, give two presentations and write a 10-page report analyzing
the wisdom or folly of having chosen a particular investment portfolio. The course grade will be determined on the basis of performance on several quizzes and a
written group investment portfolio report.
No prerequisites; not intended for students who already know much about the stock market. Enrollment limit: 30.
Cost: possible cost of downloading about 100 pages of material from the course website.
Meeting time: the course will meet for two hours on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday of the first week of Winter Study. Monday, Tuesday and Thursday of the
second and third week of Winter Study and on Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday of the last week of Winter Study.
LEO MCMENIMEN (Instructor)
MONTIEL (Sponsor)
Leo McMenimen has taught in the Winter Study Program at Williams College since 1980. He retired as a professor emeritus from the School of Business,
Montclair State University.
ECON 16 Mechanisms of Arbitrage
Economic analysis presupposes the dominance of the "law of one price": the tendency of prices of a given item to converge. His WSP will focus on how that
occurs in financial and other traded markets subject to constraints of time, distance, variety of form and differentiation. This process is called "arbitrage." Its
various manifestations are important elements in the functioning of financial and commodity markets.
This course will begin with instances of "true" arbitrage and then deal with instances of multiple arbitrage pressures on the same instrument, as well as "near"
arbitrage where true arbitrage doesn't exist; but arbitrage pressures dominate the price relationships of different instruments. Different securities and commodities
markets will be discussed sequentially. Concepts of "faux" arbitrage and instances of fraud sold as arbitrage concepts will also be discussed. The course will
incorporate current topics in financial markets where applicable.
Requirements: there will be fairly extensive readings of up to 200-300 pages per week; there will be two short papers and a five page analytical paper for the final
week.
Prerequisites: enrollees should have a basic familiarity with accounting concepts. These can be achieved by reading How to Read a Financial Report (provided
upon request) prior to the start of the course. Enrollment limit: 25.
Cost: $0. Course materials will be provided.
Meeting time: twice per week for 3 hours per session.
PAUL ISAAC '72 (Instructor)
MONTIEL (Sponsor)
Instructor: Paul Isaac '72 has been engaged in different trading and analytical functions in financial markets for 40 years. He is Chief Investment Officer of
Cadogan Management, a fund of funds firm and principal of Arbiter Partners QP, an investment partnership in New York.
ECON 17 Entrepreneurship
Designed for students interested in starting a company, this course will focus on the interface between entrepreneurs and venture capital investors with the aim of
givingstudents an immersive, hands-on experience. Student teams will develop business plans based on seed concepts provided by local experts. The teams will
then present ("pitch") their proposals to venture capitalists for critique and feedback. We will learn from case studies of both successful and failed early-stage
companies. We will explore technical aspects of creating venture-backed start-ups, including capitalization, equity, intellectual property considerations, and re-
turns on investment. Each team's final project shall comprise a business plan (written) accompanied by a final presentation to potential investors. Student evalua-
tions will be based upon their team's success in developing its seed concept, their team's final project and upon classroom participation. Most class meetings will
include guest experts; attendance is mandatory. The course will include a required two-day trip to New York City for meetings with venture professionals.
Requirements: final project and presentation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 12. Preference to upperclass students.
Cost: $250 (for NYC trip).
Meeting time: afternoons.
JEFFREY THOMAS (Instructor)
MONTIEL (Sponsor)
Jeffrey Thomas holds an M.D. and Ph.D. from Indiana University. He helped start two biotechnology companies, Millennium Pharmaceuticals and Genstruct,
Inc.
ECON 22 Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) (Same as Political Economy 22)
This course examines tax policy towards low-income families in the United States, and has the following three objectives: 1) For students to understand the shift
of redistributive policy in the United States from income support through the transfer system (Aid to Families with Dependent Children/Temporary Assistance for
Needy Families) towards support of working individuals through the tax system (primarily the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC)); 2) For students to understand
the challenges that low income individuals have "making ends meet" and to understand the role that the EITC has played in increasing the standard of living of the
working poor; and 3) To enable students to understand the tax code well enough to prepare simple income tax returns, including those for filers claiming the
EITC. Students will be trained by the IRS to prepare income tax returns for low-income individuals and families. At the end of the term, students will use their
newly acquired expertise to help individuals and families in Berkshire County prepare and file their returns. Class meetings will involve a mixture of discussion of
assigned readings, and exercises that help develop tax preparation skills and understanding of poverty. Assignments outside of class include: a variety of short
readings on tax policy, the challenges of living in poverty in the U.S., and public policies that address these challenges; completion of an online course in IRS
VITA training; and staffing approximately six hours of tax preparation assistance during the final week of winter term.
Evaluation is based on the results of the IRS certification test, students' work as tax preparers, and a 10-page analytical and reflective essay.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 14. If overenrolled, selection will be based on written statement of interest.
Cost: $25.
Meeting time: mornings.
WATSON and PAULA CONSOLINI
ECON 23 Introduction to the Economics, Geography and Appreciation of Wine
This course provides an introduction to the economics, geography and appreciation of wine. We will be studying the economics and geography of wine produc-
tion, and will also learn to identify, understand and appreciate the major wine types of the world. The course will involve lectures, outside readings, and in-class
wine tastings. We will focus primarily on the Old World wine styles and regions of France, Italy, Germany, Austria, Spain and Portugal. However, this year, for the
first time, the course has been expanded to also cover some New World wine regions, including California, Oregon, Chile, Argentina, South Africa, New Zealand
and Australia. Evaluations will be based on short quizzes, including blind tastings, and either an oral presentation or 10 page paper at the conclusion of the course.
Requirements: short quizzes, including blind tastings, and either an oral presentation or 10-page paper. While this will be a fun and interesting course, it is also a
serious course in which students are
expected to learn the materials and skills presented in the lectures and wine tastings.
Enrollment limit: 10. Since the course will include wine tastings, it will also be restricted to those who are of legal age for wine consumption by the date of the first
class meeting. In the event that demand exceeds the maximum limit for the course, students will be selected on the basis of a mix of academic record and diversity
of backgrounds and interests.
Cost: approximately $225 in the form of a course fee, to be used for the cost of wine purchases for the course.
Meeting time: evenings.
P. PEDRONI
ECON 30 Honors Project
The "Specialization Route" to the degree with Honors in Economics requires that each candidate take an Honors Winter Study Project in January of their senior
year. Students who wish to begin their honors work in January should submit a detailed proposal. Decisions on admission to the Honors WSP will be made in the
fall. Information on the procedures will be mailed to senior majors in economics early in the fall semester.
321
Seniors who wish to apply for admission to the Honors WSP and thereby to the Honors Program should register for this WSP as their first choice.
Some seniors will have begun honors work in the fall and wish to complete it in the WSP. They will be admitted to the WSP if they have made satisfactory
progress. They should register for this WSP as their first choice.
ECON 31 Honors Thesis
To be taken by students participating in year-long thesis research (ECON 493-W31-494).
ECON 51 The Practice and Empirics of Monetary Policy in Emerging and Developing Economies
This course is an introduction to the empirical analysis of practical macroeconomic policy issues, particularly those having to do with monetary policy. One
objective is to provide an exposure to a few of the relevant econometric techniques. A second is to supply the background necessary for the critical evaluation of
applied macroeconomic research. Third, with a final paper as the main requirement, the course will furnish an opportunity to practice writing about economic
issues.
Requirements: final 12-page paper.
Prerequisites: ECON 509. Enrollment limit: 10.
Cost: $0.
Meeting time: mornings.
KUTTNER
ECON 52 Micro-Simulation Modeling for Ex Ante Policy Analysis
Micro-simulation modeling provides one of the most powerful tools for ex ante evidence-based analysis of economic and social policy interventions. Rooted in
representative household surveys of a country's population, the models provide a picture of poverty, employment, consumption and income levels throughout the
country. A micro-simulation model enables researchers to investigate the impact of existing economic and social policy interventions (such as tax and public
benefit interventions) on income levels, poverty, inequality and other outcomes. In addition, researchers are able to simulate the impact and estimate the cost of
new policy interventions.
During this course, students will learn to apply these methods to analyze public policies and interpret the findings. The course examines measurement issues,
analytical tools and their application to household survey data for a range of developing countries. The course also links the outcomes of the analysis with the
challenges of policy implementation, exploring how the political environment and/or institutional setting may result in the implementation of second-best options.
This is a hands-on modeling course, and students will build a micro-simulation model for a country of their choice and use this model in completing the course
requirements. The course will employ Excel, Stata and advanced micro-simulation packages. The final requirement for the course is a policy paper that provides
students with an opportunity to write accessible prose that communicates the methodology adopted and the key lessons of the analysis.
Requirements: exercises, presentation, policy paper.
Enrollment limit: 15. The course is intended for CDE students and undergraduate enrollment is limited and by permission of the instructor.
Cost: $0.
Meeting time: afternoons.
SAMSON
ECON 53 Practical Quantitative Tools for Development
In the day-to-day work as an economist for a developing country, you often lack the time, data, or software recreate the models detailed elsewhere in the CDE
curriculum. This course is designed to bridge the gap between academic research and real world answers. We will focus on using Excel to answer the types of
questions that require answers within a short time frame. Some examples of topics are: creating price indices from CPI data, growth accounting with applications,
IMF FPP scenarios, and cost-benefit analysis.
This course will meet daily for the entirety of winter study. Evaluation will focus on homeworks and a long paper due at the end. I expect students to work at least
two hours outside of class for every hour of class. The class is expected to take a minimum of 30 hours per week.
Evaluation will be based on home works and final project.
Prerequisites for undergraduate students: ECON 110, 120. Enrollment limit: 20.
Course is intended for CDE students and undergraduate enrollment is limited and by permission of the instructor.
Meeting time: afternoons.
ROLLEIGH
ENGLISH
ENGL 10 Fictions of Domesticity (Same as French 10)
We visit an author's home in search of a connection to the origin of their writing: here's the site from which a novel or poem sprang. Museums dedicated to
authors' homes feed this fantasy, that in looking at Melville's desk (complete with glasses) or at the room where Dickinson dwelt we are even closer to them than
in their words. However, as we will explore in the course, far from an unmediated visit to the source of genius, museums of author's homes construct narratives of
their own about authorship, art, even about the value of daily life. Moreover, the writers themselves shaped conceptions of domestic space in ways that do not
always correspond to the tales told by the museums made of their homes. We will visit the homes of, and read works by, Herman Melville, Emily Dickinson,
Mark Twain, and Harriet Beecher Stowe.
Students will write a 5-page final paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10.
Cost: $97 (for transportation and museum admission).
DAVIS and PIEPRZAK
ENGL 11 The Changing Landscape of Journalism Today (Same as Leadership Studies 11)
The purpose of this course is to give students an in-depth, personal view of the inner workings of various facets of journalism. The course will feature distin-
guished Williams alumni from a broad spectrum of today's media universe, including print, broadcast, and newer media formats. Among those planning to
participate in 2012 are David Shipley '85, formerly Editor of The New York Times Op-Ed page and now of the new opinion initiative at Bloomberg News; Shayla
Harris '97, Peabody Award-winning producer for Dateline and now video producer for nytimes.com; Dr. Richard Besser '81, previously at the CDC and now
Senior Health and Medical Editor at ABC News; and Elizabeth Rappaport '94, previously at the Dow Jones Newswires and TheStreet.com and now staff reporter
for The Wall Street Journal. Each guest lecturer will discuss specific skills and experience in his or her background as well as lead a dialogue about the issues with
which they deal today.
Students will be required to do weekly research assignments as well as one major project of their choosing.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20. Preference given to juniors and seniors.
Cost: $75.
Meeting time: mornings.
KLEINER
ENGL 12 Making Jewelry: Design and Techniques
This course will teach students to design and create jewelry in a wide range of styles and materials. We'll start with basic techniques for assembling beaded
jewelry and move on from there to decorative wire wrapping and twisting, creating beads and components from colored art clay, working with the new metal
clays to create metal shapes, pav, and cutting and soldering metal wire and sheets to make settings for stones. Class will be held in Prof. Case's jewelry studio in
her home in North Adams, and the studio will also be open to students for work outside of class hours. We'll also travel to a glass-blowing studio for a one-day
workshop on making glass beads.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 8. Students will be selected based on an interview.
Cost: $100.
Meeting time: afternoon.
CASE
ENGL 13 Hipster Reading
What could be more hopeless than the fate of the little magazine--the ones with a taste for culture and critique that you'll likely only find in museum shops, on the
racks of independent bookshops, or maybe on the side tables of the hipper inhabitants of Williamsburg, Brooklyn-in today's moment of digitization and media
consolidation? Magazines, you may have noticed, or not, appear to be dropping like flies as the web supplants old-fashioned glossies. So, it's all the more interest-
ing that one could plausibly claim we're living in a gold age of hipster periodicals, journals devoted to art, culture, and intellectual life without fustiness or even a
sense of impending doom around intellectual life: Cabinet, N+1, The Believer, McSweeney's, to name just a few. These journals, many but not all out of Brooklyn,
will be the subject of this course: we'll try to think about what role journals like these have in the broader scene of American intellectual life, what they're up to,
and how they position themselves both alongside and well outside the university, the usual go-to site for the conversations about culture, politics, and art these
journals are way into. Do these journals offer alternate ways of engaging with culture (Cabinet, for example, recently held a sance in honor of James Merrill's
Ouija-board poem, The Changing Light of Sandover)? What does intellectual life look like outside the academy? We'll have editors from some of these maga-
zines to class in order to talk about their aims, as well as the nuts and bolts of journal editing. The final project: a journal of one's own, a pitch, as it were, for your
322
own arts and culture journal.
We will meet three times a week for two hour sessions. There will be significant outside reading, and we may make a field trip to New York.
Evaluation will be based on the final project.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20. Preference given to English majors and interview.
Cost: $25.
Meeting time: mornings.
MCWEENY
ENGL 14 Writing Nonfiction
Students will explore the craft of writing nonfiction-principally through frequent journalism and reporting assignments, but also in the form of essays and criti-
cism. Twice-weekly three-hour seminars will review fundamental principles and practices; analyze examples of excellent writing in diverse forms pertinent to
students' writing assignments (the examples will be read aloud and analyzed in class discussions, as will samples from the students' work); and discuss solutions
to common writing problems and challenges. There are no required readings outside of class; rather, students will be expected to complete seven pieces of written
work (one after each seminar meeting, following the initial class), and to discuss their work and possible revisions in individual meetings with the instructor. It is
envisioned that research or reporting, drafting, consultation with the instructor, and revision will require 20 hours of additional weekly work, at least, for conscien-
tious students who seek to get the most out of the course.
Instructor evaluation of writing assignments, student meetings, and revisions, completed on a timely basis, 80%; class participation and out-of-class meetings
with instructor, 20%.
Prerequisites: a written statement of interest (one page or less), and a NON-academic writing sample (i.e., not a term or course paper). Students need not major in
English or a similar humanities discipline--in fact, those studying social sciences or natural/life sciences are strongly encourage to apply-nor to have active
experience in a writing-related extracurricular activity. Diversity of backgrounds, activities, and interests will enrich the course for fellow students. Enrollment
limit: 12.
Cost: $24 for two paperback books.
Meeting time: Monday and Friday afternoons.
JOHN ROSENBERG (Instructor)
LIMON (Sponsor)
John Rosenberg has been a professional writer and editor for three decades; his most recent experiences have been as editor of Vermont Magazine, 1991-1994,
and of Harvard Magazine (harvardmagazine.com), 1995-present. In the latter capacity, he has overseen all assignments and contents for the magazine in print
and online; written extensively for each issue; and selected and supervised two undergraduate student fellows chosen to join the editorial staff each year.
ENGL 15 Film and/as Philosophy (Same as Philosophy 15)
This is a course that will introduce students to recent discussions about the philosophical significance of film, with a special focus on the writings of the philoso-
phers Stanley Cavell and Robert Pippin. During each class, we will discuss one film along with at least one philosophical text about it. We will view a wide variety
of films, likely including: Alien, Blade Runner, Bringing Up Baby, The Philadelphia Story, The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance, The Searchers, Memento, and
Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind. We will meet for two hours of class discussion, three times a week (Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday). Each discussion
session will be followed, after a brief break, by a required in-class film screening of the film that we will discuss the following class meeting. So be prepared to
meet for about 4.5 hours, three days a week. Prior experience with either philosophy or film are not required.
Evaluation will be based on a final 10-page paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15. Priority based on seniority.
Cost: $60 for books and course packet.
Meeting time: afternoons.
RHIE
ENGL 16 Henry James, The Golden Bowl
In this course we will read Henry James' last novel, The Golden Bowl, which dramatizes many of James' crucial preoccupations. Centered on a wealthy Ameri-
can collector living in England at the turn of the twentieth century, the novel examines the personal and cultural costs of an American obsession with amassing
relics of a collapsing European empire, as well as the potentially ruinous effects of wealth and refined sensibility on tangled love relations. The novel's ethical and
perceptual intricacies are conveyed in an ingeniously demanding style that presses syntax to its limits. We will read critical essays on the novel, and draw on
Walter Benjamin's work on collecting and on the Arcades of 19th century Paris.
Requirements: 10-page paper.
Prerequisites: 100- or 200-level English course. Enrollment limit: 15. Preference based on major and seniority.
Cost: approximately $20.
Meeting time: afternoons.
SOKOLSKY
ENGL 17 Anarchism and Form: Conrad
Europe around the turn of the twentieth century was deeply alarmed by the specter of anarchism and revolutionary terrorism: bombings, assassinations, uprisings,
and strikes seemed to announce a dreadful upheaval in European society and culture. Several of Joseph Conrad's novels offer among the most compelling ac-
counts of this sense of crisis, staging dramatic confrontations between revolutionaries and authorities in their narratives, and enacting in their own aesthetic form
analogous conflicts between order and its negation or subversion. In this course we will spend one to two weeks studying the theory of anarchism and surveying
celebrated instances of terrorism in the late 19th and early 20th century, before turning to two of Conrad's studies of revolutionary violence and its complex moral,
political, and aesthetic implications: The Secret Agent (1907) and Under Western Eyes (1911). Class meetings three times a week, reading assignments, and
writing, totalling about 20 hours per week.
Requirements: two or three class presentations and a short final paper, totalling about 10 pages of writing.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15. Preference to majors.
Cost: about $30 for books and photocopies.
Meeting time: afternoons.
TIFFT
ENGL 18 Stories and Pictures
What would you do if Vladimir Nabokov suddenly appeared and said: "Read this thing I wrote, and then make a twenty second stop-motion animation that
captures what it feels like to long for a country that doesn't exist anymore. You have a week."? What if Miranda July asked you to make a drawing or a perfor-
mance that offers a realistic solution to a magical problem? You don't even want to know what Kurt Vonnegut would want from you.
"Stories and Pictures" can help you prepare for these kinds of situations. In this class, we will read a short story every week, and produce a visual response to it.
We will talk about the different ways in which the written word can provide fuel for image-making, and figure out how to make good art fast. In our meetings we
will discuss the stories we've read, see how other visual artists have used literature and narrative to inform their work and try out various art-making techniques
such as drawing, digital photography and video, the intricate art of the flip book, and other ways to make awesome things. We will meet 2-3 times a week for
3-hour sessions, and students should plan to invest an equal amount of time on their projects outside of class.
Requirements: active discussion in class and four artworks.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15. Preference will be given to students with literary/art background.
Cost: $65 for art supplies and photocopies.
Meeting time: mornings.
GABRIELA VAINSENCHER (Instructor)
LIMON (Sponsor)
Gabriela Vainsencher is a Brooklyn-based visual artist, whose drawings, videos and installations have been exhibited in the US and abroad. She was Williams
College's Levitt artist-in-residence in 2009.
ENGL 19 Humor Writing (Same as Mathematics 19)
(See under MATH 19 for full description.) ADAMS
ENGL 20 Tavern of Crossed Destinies: The Video (Same as Philosophy 20)
(See under PHIL 20 for full description.) WHITE
ENGL 25 Morocco (Same as International Studies 25 and Philosophy 25)
Students in this course will spend winter study in Morocco. Morocco presents a compelling blend of historical influences and modern world currents. Threads of
Islam, Arab traditions, and the heritage of the native Berber people are woven into a distinctive cultural tapestry, while traces of French colonialism can still be
seen in the political and social structure. Morocco is at the intersection of the West, the Middle East, and Africa. Travel there is therefore a powerful way to
323
introduce intellectual themes that require and reward a subtle blending of insight from history, political science, religion, and philosophy.
We will take the first steps in engaging some of these challenging topics in order to enable independent study facilitated by serious and multifaceted exposure to
the country. For the first two weeks, students will study at the Center for Cross Cultural Learning (CCCL) in Rabat, taking Arabic lessons (classical or Moroccan
dialect) each morning and then gathering for lectures by local university faculty in the afternoon. During this span students will live with Moroccan families in the
Rabat medina. In the third week of the course students will travel in the interior of Morocco, exploring Fez and Marrakech, riding camels in the desert, and hiking
through Berber villages in the Atlas Mountains.
Students will be expected to attend all seminars, lead a group presentation, and complete a substantial research paper (10-15 pages). The presentation and research
paper will be occasions to explore a special topic in depth including, for instance, justice and gender, art, literature, colonial studies, or Islam.
No prerequisites. Arabic is the official spoken language of Morocco, and French is spoken widely. While desirable, neither is required. Enrollment limit: 11.
Preference: Student interest is more important than class year or academic major. Final participants will be chosen on the basis of interviews regarding student
goals and intellectual interests.
Estimated cost: $4000.
KNOPP and BARRY
ENGL 27 Printmaking on Paper Clay
This course introduces the technical and creative possibilities of print making on paper clay without the use of a press. Students will learn how to make paper clay
and will explore monoprinting, relief printing, and offset printing. Historical examples will be introduced through lectures, field trips and assignments. Students
will receive feedback on their work through group critiques and open studio sessions. They will be evaluated based on completion of assignments with attention
to detail, content, and development of their work. Attendance and participation are required along with a group exhibition on the last day of Winter Study.
Requirements: attendance, assignments and final exhibition.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 8-10. Preference based on seniority.
Cost: $100.
Meeting time: mornings.
DIANE SULLIVAN (Instructor)
LIMON (Sponsor)
Diane Sullivan is an artist who lives and works in North Adams, MA.
ENGL 29 Peer Writing Tutor Workshop (Same as INTR 29)
The purpose of this course is to train peer writing tutors and assistants to be more effective reviewers and editors of student work. Format: workshop/discussion.
Students will read and discuss literature on the teaching of writing; they will also do analytical writing assignments, which they will then bring into the workshop.
Evaluation will be based on analytic writing assignments and course participation. Students who complete this training will be eligible for assignment as Writing
Workshop tutors and/or as Writing Assistants for selected Williams classes.
Prerequisites: admission to Williams Writing Writing Pilot or by permission of the instructor. Enrollment limit: 15.
Cost: under $50.
Meeting time: MWF 2-4.
STEPHANIE E. DUNSON, Writing Coordinator at Williams
ENGL 30 Honors Project: Specialization Route
Required during Winter Study of all seniors admitted to candidacy for honors via the specialization route.
ENGL 31 Honors Project: Thesis
Required during Winter Study of all seniors admitted to candidacy for honors via the thesis route.
ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES
ENVI 12 Landscape Photography (Same as Geosciences 12)
(See under GEOS 12 for full description.)
ENVI 13 United States Environmental Law: Its Historic Past, Its Uncertain Future (Same as Legal Studies 13)
(See under LGST 13 for full description.) PHILIP R. MCKNIGHT '65
ENVI 14 Environmental Education--What, Why, and How
Public school teachers are in the best position to take us safely across the precipice at which humanity finds itself. Our side of the abyss: business as usual with
dirty fuels, rampant growth of population and pollution, and consumption practices that use up natural resources at an accelerating rate. The other side: industry
mimics nature by recycling resources, waste is eliminated, consumers consider factors other than price; a paradigm shift in collective consciousness where envi-
ronmental impact is at the forefront of decisions rather than an afterthought.
Public school teachers are in the best position to teach the fundamentals of environmental education, which will arm students with the knowledge set they need to
live a life that accounts for the human
impact on ecosystems and make informed decisions for the rest of their lives. How to optimize the effectiveness of environmental education in classes K-12 is the
question this course will explore.
We will examine several environmental education models, then focus on California's Education and the Environment Initiative as the leader, as being the largest
lever ever attempted to raise environmental literacy to the same level of importance as the three "Rs": reading, 'riting and 'rithmatic. We'll learn how the land-
mark legislation came about that created the curriculum and consider other countries and states already hoping to duplicate its success. We'll use case studies to
assess implementation in the school districts that have adopted it over the last two years. We'll explore ways of making the curriculum adoption even more
widespread. And we'll discuss how success can be measured. We will explore education theories including studies that show better student engagement when
topics are taught through an environmental lens. We'll discuss theories about how learning happens and how it affects behavior change, looking especially at the
Transcendent Function. And we'll discuss the efficacy of using the education system to foster behavior change.
The class will be conducted mostly as a seminar, with some short lectures, a lot of discussion, debates, and presentations. We will meet three times a week in
sessions lasting approximately two hours each; there will be guest speakers and one or two field trips to local schools. There will be some reading required outside
of class.
Evaluation will be based on a 10-page paper or audiovisual presentation of similar effort or other effort as approved by the instructor. Attendance and participation
will also be taken into account.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 16.
Cost: $0.
Meeting time: afternoons.
WILL PARISH '75 (Instructor)
FRENCH (Sponsor)
Will Parish '75, has been teaching Environmental Science at a San Francisco Public Charter School for nine years and was appointed to the California State
Board of Education's Curriculum Commission in 2009 and chairs. In fall of 2010, he was elected to Chair the Executive Committee of the Education and
the Environment Initiative. Prior to teaching, he flew airplanes for an environmental advocacy organization, ran an alternative energy development company,
practiced law in San Francisco, and drove a Jeep around the world.
ENVI 25 Sustainable Eleuthera: Community Development through Community Gardening
This course is a hands-on group research and community development project that will initiate a community garden, conduct community outreach about garden-
ing and nutrition, and work with a local school on a garden-based learning project. The focus area is Weymms Bight, South Eleuthera, a low-income underserved
settlement, which was formerly an agricultural area, but is now suffering from high unemployment, high rates of nutrition based diseases, and a shortage of fresh
nutritious food.
The class will work in conjunction with the permaculture manager at the Cape Eleuthera Institute, and will partner with a community development organization,
the South Eleuthera Emergency Partners (SEEP). A site is already chosen for the garden, which will be adjacent to a planned emergency center/community
center. Students will learn about cultivation techniques from the permaculture manager, and will work creating a demonstration organic garden along with com-
munity volunteers. Students will work with the community organization to develop an outreach program to involve people in the garden, including workshops
and written materials on gardening and nutrition. We will also collaborate with the local school to involve the children and to help develop a garden-based learn-
ing curriculum focusing on cultivation, soil maintenance, and nutrition.
Requirements: active and involved participation in group research project, including conducting interviews, farm tours, group discussions, taking photos and film
footage, conducting primary research, data analysis, writing group report, and preparing and delivering two public presentations. Last week of winter study class
meets on campus finalizing written report and power point presentation and/or film.
324
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10. Selection will be based on relevant coursework or extracurricular involvement in environmental, sustainability or agricul-
ture projects. Not open to first-year students.
Cost: approximately $2100 (airfare, room and board, course packet).
The class will spend the first two weeks of winter study on Eleuthera and the third week on campus writing and editing the report and editing and cutting a short
film.
GARDNER
ENVI 31 Senior Research and Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Environmental Studies 493-494.
GEOSCIENCES
GEOS 10 Ultimate Wellness: Concepts for Living a Happy Healthy Life (Same as Maritime Studies 10)
(See under MAST 10 for full description.)
GEOS 11 Mapping Data--a Spatial Approach to Research
While visual presentation of research data can be an effective means of getting your point across, the use of GIS (Geographic Information Systems) to perform
spatial and temporal analyses can lead to the discovery of interesting correlations in your data.
Using appropriate software, this course will take you through basic skills and advanced GIS statistical analysis topics. In addition to lab exercises, you will use
yourr own research topic/data to explore and visualize hidden potentials. Additional readings on various GIS topics will be required.
Evaluation will be based on completion of assignments, discussions, process documentation and class presentation of your project work.
Cost: $0.
Prerequisites: basic computer skills and a project to work on. Enrollment limit: 10. If overenrolled, selection will be based on planned project.
Meeting time: mornings, 3 times a week for 3 hours with additional lab time required to complete assignments.
SHARRON MACKLIN (Instructor)
DEHTIER (Sponsor)
Sharron Macklin is an Instructional Technology Specialist at Williams College specializing in instruction and support of Geographic Information Systems.
She has been an adjunct faculty member at MCLA for 5 years and also co-taught the Williams' ENVI/GEOS 214 course during the Spring 2010 semester.
GEOS 12 Landscape Photography (Same as Environmental Studies 12)
This class will broaden students' appreciation for the appearance and history of the landscape and teach the skills of making a successful photograph. Williams-
town, situated in a valley between the Green and Taconic Mountains and bisected by the Green and Hoosic Rivers, is a place of great natural beauty. The local
landscape is a subject that inspires both professional and amateur photographers alike. While Williamstown will be the subject of most of our work, we will use it
to learn principles of universal application. Students will discover the importance of light in making a photograph. They will also learn camera skills and the
mechanics of digital photography, which will be reviewed at biweekly class meetings. In addition to photographing and critiquing images, the class will visit
collections at the Clark Art Institute and WCMA to see original work and examine and discuss books on reserve at Sawyer Library. An overview of the history of
landscape photography will be provided with an emphasis on American workers such as Carlton Watkins, Eadweard Muybridge, Alfred Stieglitz, Eliot Porter
and Ansel Adams. We will also demonstrate examples of different cameras such as medium format, view cameras, and panorama cameras. Students will produce
a body of successful photographs that will be projected at the Winter Study presentation day and on display at http://drm.williams.edu/projects/. Students will
submit short written explanations with each of their photographic assignments.
Evaluation will be based on attendance, the student's photography, and their presentation.
Prerequisites: students will need a digital single lens reflex camera (DSLR). See http://digital-photography-school.com/blog/how-to-buy-a-dslr-camera/. Enroll-
ment limit: 15. Preference given to first-year students and sophomores.
Cost: $50.
Meeting time: mornings.
NICHOLAS WHITMAN (Instructor)
DEHTIER (Sponsor)
Nicholas Whitman is a professional photographer and the former Curator of Photography at the New Bedford Whaling Museum. A 1977 graduate of the
Rochester Institute of Technology, he has honed his craft to make landscape photographs of power and depth. See more at www.nwphoto.com.
GEOS 31 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Geology 493-494.
GERMAN
GERM S.P. Sustaining Program for German 101-102
Something new and different for students enrolled in German 101-102. Practice in the use of German for everyday purposes; creation and performance of short
dramatic sketches through group collaboration; games; songs; storytelling; reading. No homework.
Requirements: active participation and regular attendance earn a "Pass" grade.
Prerequisites: German 101 or equivalent. Limited to German 101-102 students.
Cost: approximately $5 for photocopied materials.
Meeting time: mornings, three times a week 9-9:50 a.m.
GERM 30 Honors Project
To be taken by honors candidates following other than the normal thesis route.
GERM 31 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for German 493-494.
HISTORY
HIST 10 Soccer Fandom: Race, Violence, and Hooligans
This course will examine the historical and cultural meanings of soccer fandom in specific national and transnational contexts. U.S. media sources often portray
soccer fans as particularly violent. This course will examine both the construction of "rabid" soccer fans and the lived experience of those branded as hooligans.
We will analyze both first-hand written accounts and film depictions to address questions that include: How and why does someone identify with a particular club
or national side? What (and how) do soccer/football/futebol/ftbol teams mean to their supporters? Are racism and violence inevitable outgrowths of passionate
team support or just objectionable but commonplace ones?
Evaluation will be based on class participation and a 10-page paper.
No prerequisites, but preference will be given to History majors and students with strong backgrounds in soccer. Enrollment limit: 30.
Cost: about $50 for book and course packet.
Meeting time: mornings, twice per week, three hours per session.
KITTLESON
HIST 11 The Amber Room and Hidden Treasures: Impressionist Art Held Hostage? (Same as Astronomy 11 and Special 12)
(See under ASTR 11 for full description.) MARGO R. BOWDEN
HIST 12 Reading Childhood
In this course we will embark on two related projects. First, we will think about how literacy and children's literature shape childhood and our memories of
childhood. To investigate this question, we will read memoirs about childhood and historiography on children's literature in America, as well as write our own
essays on a well loved book from childhood or on a "reading experience". Second, we will work with local youngsters--primarily at the Williamstown elementa-
ry school--who are at the beginning of their reading lives. Each student will work alongside a local child, reading aloud and/or silently and discussing the books.
The child and the Williams student will also co-author book reviews.
Evaluation will be based on class attendance and participation, successful meetings with their underage reading partners, and completion of all reading and
writing assignments.
No prerequisites. Enrolment limit: 30 students; preference given to first-year students and sophomores.
Cost: approximately $40.
Meeting times: there will be four morning meetings per week (including class time and work with local youngsters); students must be able to walk from campus
to the Williamstown elementary school.
LONG
325
HIST 14 "I Will Bear Witness Until the Bitter End": The Experience of a German Jew in the Third Reich, 1933-1945 (Same as Jewish
Studies 14)
This course will be devoted to reading the two-volume diary of Viktor Klemperer, a German Jew living in Dresden, who managed to survive both the Holocaust
and the fire-bombing of that city. From 1933 to 1945, Klemperer, a professor of Romance languages and literature, kept a diary in which he described his personal
experiences in Nazi Germany. The diary raises important issues of identity, victimization, resistance, and the relationship between writing and life. It illuminates
German-Jewish attitudes and relations over the course of the Third Reich and paints a vivid portrait of life in Germany from 1933 to 1945. But most of all, the
diary gives an account of one person's day by day experience of the gradually tightening Nazi noose that takes the reader's breath away.
Evaluation: students will keep a journal in which they record their personal response to the diary entries and are expected to participate actively in class discussion.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25; preference will be given to juniors and seniors if the class is oversubscribed.
Cost: approximately $50 for three books.
Meeting time: afternoons.
KOHUT
HIST 15 CAMP IT UP! The Politics of Queer Performance (Same as Theatre 15 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 15)
Cher. Liberace. John Waters films. Swan Lake. 1920s women's fashion. Batman. Drag. The operas of Richard Strauss. What do they have in common? They are
all items, performances, cultural artifacts and icons from the canon of Camp. Camp is a theoretical concept and aesthetic sensibility embraced by performers,
writers, filmmakers and designers, and richly described and analyzed by scholars from various disciplinary perspectives. Whether nave or intentional, camp is
always over the top and passionately committed to artifice, emphasizing form and devaluing content. It is seriousness that fails; a mode of enjoyment; a taste for
excess and larger than life personality; parody and self-parody served with tender feeling. This course is an exploration of the meanings, practices, and theories of
camp. It looks at the uses of camp as performance and analytic tool, and asks if it is primarily an apolitical style or an ironic but nonetheless powerful mode of
cultural criticism. We will watch ballet, 1960s sitcoms, drag shows, and opera to investigate camp from its first appearance in the eighteenth century court to its
present manifestations in pop culture, queer spaces and discourses, theatre and literature. Through movies, animation, theoretical texts, and fashion blogs this
course will attempt, as camp often does, to question, please, confuse, lampoon, and provoke cultural and social critique.
Evaluation will be based on class participation and a 10-page final paper, or on a camp performance and 3-page paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15 students; preference will be given to juniors and seniors.
Estimated cost to students: negligible
Meeting times: Tuesday and Thursday afternoons, 3 hours per meeting.
FISHZON
HIST 22 Realities and Representations of Native Americans
In this course, we will explore the lives and times of four iconic Native Americans--as well as how their stories are constantly interpreted and reinterpreted--as a
way of understanding more about the history of Native North America. Most of these figures are familiar from textbook and legend: Pocahontas, the original
"Indian Princess"; Squanto, who famously taught the Pilgrims how to cultivate maize; Sacagawea, the quintessential guide, interpreter, and cultural go-between
of the Lewis and Clark expedition; and Crazy Horse, a Lakota warrior and leader who participated in the Battle of the Little Big Horn. By considering how these
individuals' stories have been told through a variety of media such as films, websites, historic sites, sculpture, and more, we will explore the symbolic uses of
these individuals in American culture. We will also delve into the realities behind the symbols to contrast the actual experiences of diverse Native peoples with the
stereotypes that continue to evolve into the present day. We will meet three days a week for two hours, and students will view films and other media and complete
secondary reading assignments outside of class.
Evaluation will be based on class participation and a 10-page paper analyzing at least three popular representations of a Native American individual.
No prerequisites, but preference will be given to History majors. Enrollment limit: 25.
Cost: about $50 for books and course packet.
Meeting time: mornings, twice per week, three hours per session.
LAURA KEENAN SPERO (Instructor)
WATERS (Sponsor)
Laura Keenan Spero received her Ph.D. in early American history from the University of Pennsylvania. Her research interests include colonialism, Native
North America, and gender studies.
HIST 23 Gaudino Winter Study Fellows Program
The Gaudino Winter Study Fellow designation is available to up to ten students who create their own independent projects that involve critical, reflective, and
experiential learning during Winter Study. Each student works independently under the direction of a faculty sponsor, who will help shape and monitor the
project. The project must receive approval from the Winter Study Committee, as well as from the Gaudino Scholar and Gaudino Board of Trustees. The Gaudino
Board is looking for projects that address specific intellectual problems through direct experience, undertaken preferably in a social milieu that is previously
unfamiliar or even uncomfortable to the applicant. Projects must be academically rigorous and worked out carefully with faculty sponsors. Projects should also
entail systematic self-reflection on how the experiences affect students personally, and students may be asked to discuss their project with the Gaudino Board after
it is completed. The Gaudino Scholar will meet with students as a group before and after Winter Study. All students whose projects are approved will receive the
Gaudino Fellow designation. In addition, students on Financial Aid will receive Gaudino funding from a minimum of 50% to a maximum of 90% of the budget
for the project up to $2,500, as determined by the Financial Aid office. No additional funding for students' projects will be provided by the College. Students
selecting this course will register for HIST 23. More information about the Gaudino Fellows Winter Study Program and guidelines for applying can be found at:
http://www.williams.edu/resources/gaudino/overview.php.
BERNHARDSSON
HIST 24 Politics and History in Cuba (Same as Africana Studies 24 and Political Science 24)
(See under PSCI 24 for full description.) BENSON and MAHON
HIST 26 Travel Course: Resettling Refugees in Maine (Same as Special 26)
(See under SPEC 26 for full description.) JEFF THALER '74
HIST 28 Sex and the First Amendment (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 28)
This course will introduce students to the history and current law regarding First Amendment protections for sexual expression. Historical background, including
the suppression of sexuality education and the Hays Code regulating sexual content in films, will be reviewed. Students will learn the legal distinction between
obscenity and pornography, and current legal approaches to child pornography, virtual child pornography, nudity and other material that has sexual content or
overtones. The course will also address the continuing legal and cultural conflict over sexual speech, as manifested in federal mandates for "abstinence-only-until-
marriage" sex education, efforts to remove books like Judy Blume's novel Forever from public school libraries, and censorship of art work depicting nudity.
Evaluation will be based on class participation and several short papers.
Prerequisites: none. Enrollment limit: 20 (chosen by seniority).
Cost: approximately $50.
Meeting times: Thursday and Friday afternoons.
JOAN BERTIN (Instructor)
WATERS (Sponsor)
Joan Bertin is currently Executive Director of the National Coalition Against Censorship and was formerly on the national legal staff of the ACLU. She is
a member of the faculty at Columbia University and held the Joanne Woodward Chair in Public Policy at Sarah Lawrence College in 1995-1997.
HIST 29 Eyewitness to the Civil Rights Movement: Mississippi, 1964-1965 (Same as Africana Studies 29)
During sixteen months in 1964-1965, I worked as a civil rights organizer in rural Mississippi with the Student Non-violent Coordinating Committee (SNCC). I
witnessed and aided in the heroic efforts by black citizens to dismantle the pervasive structure of Jim Crow that had oppressed them for generations. I met relative-
ly uneducated people with the stature of giants. What I encountered was an apartheid America--a vicious police state reinforced by government and random
violence--beyond the understanding of most Americans and certainly beyond the imagination of young people today. This course will explore this transforma-
tive moment in recent American history, largely through discussion. Topics will include non-violence, the role of the black church, black nationalism, Malcolm X
and Black Power, the role of women, the role of whites, the third party politics of the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party and the actions of the federal
government during the civil rights era. The course will examine how these events and issues have played out over the ensuing decades, up to and including the
election of Barack Obama. It is the intent of the instructor to convey the immediacy that only first person experience can invoke. Reading materials will include
I've Got the Light of Freedom by Charles Payne, From the Mississippi Delta by Endesha Ida Mae Holland, and Freedom Summer: The Savage Season That
Made Mississippi Burn and Made America a Democracy by Bruce Watson. The documentary films, Eyes on the Prize and Freedom on my Mind, as well as
music from the time will be utilized. Other veterans of the civil rights movement will visit the class to tell their stories.
326
Evaluation will be based on class participation and a final project in any media approved by the instructor.
Prerequisites: none. Enrollment limit: 20 (chosen randomly if the course is oversubscribed).
Cost: approximately $125.
Meeting times: afternoons.
CHRIS WILLIAMS (Instructor)
WATERS (Sponsor)
Chris Williams is the College architect. He has recently returned from a tour of the Deep South, where the events in this course took place. He has offered
Winter Study courses at Williams on previous occasions and has taught courses in architecture at the Pratt Institute and Parsons School of Design in New
York City.
HIST 31 Senior Thesis
To be taken by all senior honors students who are registered for HIST 493 (Fall) and HIST 494 (Spring), HIST 31 allows thesis writers to complete their research
and prepare a draft chapter, due at the end of WSP.
WATERS
INTERNATIONAL STUDIES
INST 25 Morocco (Same as English 25 and Philosophy 25)
(See under PHIL 25 for full description.) BARRY and KNOPP
INST 30 Senior Honors Project
To be taken by candidates for honors in International Studies.
INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES
INTR 29 Peer Writing Tutor Workshop (Same as English 29)
(See under ENGL 29 for full description.)
JEWISH STUDIES
JWST 10 Diary Writing, Children, and Experiences of Genocide
Dozens if not hundreds of diaries from WWII and the Holocaust are extant, as are diaries written by children affected by modern war and genocide in such
countries as Iraq, Israel, Palestine, Afghanistan, Bosnia and others. The diarists, often writing under life-threatening circumstances, are alternately terrified, in-
sightful, courageous, hopeful, often humorous and poignant. In their diaries, they cut through politics with a universal question: How and Why have adults gone
insane enough to start these wars? This course examines the meaning of diary writing to children under extreme circumstances and how children, in their own
words, reflect on the nature of children's experiences of war. Students will meet twice a week for three hours a session. Readings will include Clara's War, based
on the Holocaust-era diary of the Polish Jewish teenager Clara Schwarz, and other selected diaries chosen by the instructor and by students. Several diarists,
including Zlata Filipovic, writer of Zlata's Diary, Clara (Schwarz) Kramer, and several additional diarists will be skyped into the classroom to discuss their diaries.
Evaluation will be based on attendance, participation in class discussions, and two writing assignments. The first is a creative writing assignment in which each
student will research a particular genocidal context and keep a diary written from the perspective of a person in that time and place. The diaries will be handwritten
on a media similar to those used by the diarists. Students will also write a 10-page paper analyzing their writing experience.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15. Preference to students who have previously taken a course in Comparative Literature, English, History, Jewish Studies.
Cost: approximately $50 for books and materials, including composition book, old-style fountain pen, ink, pencils.
Meeting time: mornings.
STEPHEN GLANTZ (Instructor)
GARBARINI (Sponsor)
Stephen Glantz is a prolific writer and screenwriter whose work has ranged from feature films to documentary films, television series, theater, and journalism.
For the last decade, Glantz's work has focused on the Holocaust and genocide with a special emphasis on children and children's diaries.
JWST 14 "I Will Bear Witness Until the Bitter End": The Experience of a German Jew in the Third Reich, 1933-1945 (Same as History 14)
(See under HIST 14 for full description.) KOHUT
LATINA/O STUDIES
LATS 10 Art and Exhibition (Same as ArtH 10)
(See under ARTH 10 for full description.) CHAVOYA
LATS 11 Race 2.0: Race and New Media Representations
This course provides an overview of how race is represented in new media, especially social media networks, blogs, and You Tube. Students will gain an
introductory sense of how to critically analyze new media representations using race as the object of analysis in relation to other axes of difference such as gender,
nation, class, religion, ability, and sexuality. Some of the major questions we will explore include: How has new media participated in the racialization process?
How is the digital divide structured by race? How do changes in technology reproduce and challenge our understandings of race? How do these changes force us
to re-examine how we think about the relationship between race and the media? Students will not only read and discuss scholarly work on the topic, but also
engage in interactive exercises to analyze different forms of new media in order to answer these questions.
A 10-page final paper and presentations will be required. Attendance and participation will also be considered.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 12. If overenrolled, preference will be based on seniority.
Cost: $60 for books.
Meeting time: afternoons.
BAEZ
LATS 13 Understanding Similarities, Bridging Differences (Same as Africana Studies 13 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 13)
This course is an introduction to issues of social identity, social & cultural diversity, and societal manifestations of power, privilege and oppression. Mini lectures,
presentations, readings, dialogues, inclass activities, audio and visual materials will help us analyze social identity development, social group difference and
similarities, and levels and types of oppression, including racism, classism, sexism, and heterosexism as well as, linkages between them.
Requirements: weekly readings, 3 short journals, a project, and a final paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20.
Cost: $42.51 for book.
Meeting time: afternoons.
TAJ SMITH (Instructor)
KITTLESON (Sponsor)
LATS 31 Latina/o Honors Thesis Seminar
Students must register for this course to complete an honors project begun in the fall or begin one to be finished in the spring.
Prerequisite: approval of program chair. Enrollment limited to senior honors candidates.
LEADERSHIP STUDIES
LEAD 10 Institutional Leadership and Social Responsibility
This course will examine a wide variety of issues related to leadership and responsibility, in both public-and private-sector settings. We will explore these issues
through the experiences of men and women who have held leadership roles in these contexts. We will look at issues of corruption and fraud in the private sector.
We will examine the changing role of lawyers in advising and guiding their clients. We will look at environmental issues from the perspective of both private
institutions and government regulators. We will discuss issues facing leaders in higher education. We will look at questions of responsibility facing political
leaders at the state level in our federal system. And we will examine leadership issues as they have arisen in historical contexts, including crucial questions
regarding the origins and development of American involvement in Asia. The majority of class sessions will be led by guest speakers, most, though not all, of
327
whom are distinguished alumni of the college. Students will be expected to take an active role in introducing and helping to lead discussions involving the guest
speakers.
Students will be expected to take an active role in introducing and helping to lead discussions involving the guest speakers. Evaluation will be based on atten-
dance, preparation, and participation in class discussions, and a final 10-page paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20. Preference given to Leadership Studies concentrators.
Cost: approximately $30 for reading materials.
Meeting time: mornings.
EARL C. DUDLEY and FRED HITZ (Instructors)
MCALLISTER (Sponsor)
Earl C. Dudley and Fred Hitz teach at the University of Virginia Law School.
LEAD 11 The Changing Landscape of Journalism Today (Same as English 11)
(See under ENGL 11 for full description.) KLEINER
LEAD 13 Epidemiology, Public Health, and Leadership in the Health Professions (Same as ANSO 13)
(See under ANSO 13) NICHOLAS H. WRIGHT '57
LEAD 14 Making Sense of the CIA (Same as Political Science 14)
(See under PSCI 14 for full description.) MCALLISTER and DONALD GREGG '51 (Instructors)
LEAD 18 Wilderness Leadership
This Winter Study project is for students who would like to participate in an off-campus experiential education opportunity. Students will be required to research
an appropriate accredited program i.e. National Outdoor Leadership School, Outward Bound etc., that will provide a suitable learning environment and be at least
22 days in length. The Director of the Williams Outing Club will assist students in their search if necessary. Upon choosing a program and being accepted,
students will meet with the Director in a pre-program meeting in December to create a framework for observing group dynamics and studying a variety of
leadership styles. A required 10-page paper based on their journals will be required immediately after their return to campus for the start of third quarter. There
will also be a follow up class to debrief the experience in the first week of February. All programs must meet with the approval of the Outing Club Director. In
addition to off-campus opportunities, there will be a Wilderness First Responder Emergency Care course that will take place on campus. Contact Scott Lewis for
details.
Requirements: course approval by WOC Director, daily journal writing with focus on leadership and group dynamics, 10-page paper and 2 class meetings pre
and post trip. Student assessment will be based on ten page paper and class discussions.
No prerequisites. Off-campus opportunities are not open to first-year students. Interested students must consult with WOC Director before registration. Enroll-
ment limit: 20.
Cost to student will vary depending on the program selected-range is generally from $1,500-3,000.
SCOTT LEWIS, Director of the Outing Club
LEGAL STUDIES
LGST 13 United States Environmental Law: Its Historic Past, Its Uncertain Future (Same as Environmental Studies 13)
Taught from the perspective of an experienced trial attorney, this course will examine the role environmental law plays in the United States today in light of how
that role has developed during the nearly forty years since the modern era of environmental law began. As a preface, we will consider the significantly more
limited influence of environmental law in our national affairs before 1970 and some of the historical and political reasons for that situation. We will examine the
reasons why the law's early application in the first half of the 20th century almost exclusively to the conservation and preservation of natural resources took on in
the second half a markedly different approach, one emphasizing pollution control and all but ignoring resource conservation.
The course will begin by tracing the development of an American consciousness towards the environment through an examination of our law and our literature.
The term "law" includes state and federal judicial decisions and legislation, particularly during the presidency of Theodore Roosevelt and during the decades
which followed the year 1970 when much of the legal basis for the American environmental protection movement was established. The term "literature" includes
not just the written word (the first book we look at is "The Lorax" by your favorite childhood author, Dr. Seuss) but also painting, sculpture, and music. Nothing
too heavy! We will examine the historical and legal choices we as Americans have made which have put our environment on trial. What has occurred in our
development as a people that explains this quintessentially American phenomenon? Our journey begins with the Puritans of New England and the planters of
Virginia and their predecessors in the New World and then moves swiftly to the beginning of the modern era in environmental law and to its now uncertain future.
In light of this historical situation students will examine state and federal legislative and judicial attempts to address environmental problems and then try to reach
informed, rational conclusions as to whether those attempts were successful. What were the political, social and economic issues involved and, ultimately, how
did their context affect the legal solutions imposed. Cases decided at the appellate level will be introduced and examined through their trial court memoranda
opinions in order to observe how the legal system actually works and how frequently the reasoning behind the trial judge's decision changes as the case works its
way through the appellate process.
This course will be presented from a litigator's point of view, that is to say, both the practical and the theoretical, emphasizing what is possible to achieve in the
litigator's real world as informed by what the academician would present from the security of the classroom. Evaluation will be based on attendance and class-
room participation. Students will prepare several short papers, including single page "clerk's notes," which will present one or more sides of an issue and form the
basis for classroom discussion.
They will be asked to defend or reject the conclusions reached or approaches taken by our courts and legislatures and by our literature, as broadly defined, on
environmental issues.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15. This course is appropriate for students eager to explore the material presented and prepared to argue assigned positions on
important legal, literary and historical issues.
Cost: approximately $80 for books and materials.
Meeting time: mornings, 3 two-hour sessions a week.
PHILIP R. MCKNIGHT '65 (Instructor)
SHANKS (Sponsor)
Philip R. McKnight '65 is a trial and appellate attorney. At Williams he completed the honors program for both American History and Literature and European
History. He earned his law degree from The University of Chicago Law School and then practiced in the state and federal courts of New York and Connecticut,
as well as in Europe.
LGST 14 Mock Trial: Simulation of a Civil Trial
This course provides the opportunity for students to simulate the role of a civil trial attorney formulating trial strategy, opening statement, direct and cross ex-
amination of witnesses, and closing argument. Using case materials from the American Mock Trial Association which has a website at www.collegemock-
trial.org, teams of 5-6 students will prepare for a civil trial. The initial class will review the role of trials in the American legal system, the anatomy of a trial,
approaches to witness presentation, styles for direct and cross examination, and the role of opening statement and closing arguments. After the initial lecture, the
students will go through the process using the materials provided to select the necessary witnesses to present their case as both plaintiff and defendant. Students on
each team will then play the roles of the attorneys and witnesses to present their case, once as the plaintiff and once as the defendant. Evaluation will be based on
the following: (1) short (2-3 page) memo on the strategy for the case as plaintiff/defendant and reasons for witness selection; (2) preparation of direct and cross
examinations; (3) preparation of opening and closing arguments; (4) effectiveness as witnesses and (5) oral presentation of the case to a panel of "judges" as
plaintiff and defendant.
No prerequisites, but interest in the legal system and potential career in law helpful. Enrollment limit: 24.
Cost: less than $100 for photocopying of case materials.
Meeting time: two 4-hour sessions on Mondays at 12:00 to 4:00 and Tuesdays at 10:00-2:00.
DAVID C. OLSON '71 and GENE M. BAUER '71 (Instructors)
SHANKS (Sponsor)
David C. Olson graduated from Williams in 1971 and then from Ohio State's Law School in 1978. He joined what is now Frost Brown Todd 32 years ago
and practices as a civil trial attorney. He handles a wide range of complex civil matters with a concentration on construction cases. Please see his attached
firm profile for more details.
Gene M. Bauer graduated from Williams in 1971 and then from Harvard Law School in 1974. He held a variety of positions with law firms in New York for
6-7 years and thereafter assumed several positions as Associate General Counsel, General Counsel and other senior management positions with companies
in New York, New Jersey and Massachusetts. Please see his attached Career Summary for more details.
328
LGST 17 Learning Intervention for Troubled Teens (LIFTT) (Same as ANSO 17 and Special 17)
The objective of this program and winter study course is to provide an alternative sentence for adolescents involved in the Juvenile Court system in Berkshire
County. Many of these children cut school, are disruptive in the classroom, and do not find learning stimulating. The goal of this program is to teach these
children, through experience, that learning can be fun, providing them with the motivation to succeed in school. These students, under the guidance of Williams
College undergraduates, will select a topic of interest and learn how to research and present this topic to their peers in the program, with access to Williams
College facilities. Williams undergraduate students will gain experience in teaching and motivating troubled teenagers and will also present a topic of their choos-
ing to the students in the program, modeling a classroom setting. Furthermore, Williams students will be exposed to the Juvenile Court system, gaining insight
into the causes of and solutions to the incidence of juvenile crime. Williams students will be expected to read relevant training materials, meet with their teenagers
three times a week in the afternoons, give a final presentation, and keep a weekly journal detailing the meetings.
Evaluation will be based on the quality of the journal, the Williams students own topic presentations, and a final paper about the experience, with a focus on how
to improve the program, the juvenile sentencing system, and what they learned about the social and psychological repercussions of adolescent crime.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 6. Students will be asked to write an essay describing why they want to take the course.
Cost: $0.
Meetings with the teens will be from 3-5 p.m. three times a week.
MIKE WYNN '93 (Instructor)
SHANKS (Sponsor)
Mike Wynn is the Chief of Police of the Pittsfield Police Department and graduated Williams College in 1993.
MARITIME STUDIES
MAST 10 Ultimate Wellness: Concepts for Living a Happy Healthy Life (Same as Geosciences 10)
This course provides an opportunity to drastically improve your life by introducing concepts that can start making a difference in the way you feel today. We will
be approaching post-modern Integrative Nutrition concepts such as: Bio-individuality, crowding out, deconstructing cravings, and primary food through discus-
sion, reading material, and videos. Students will develop a healthy eating and feasible living approach that includes: Menu planning, food label reading, navigat-
ing the grocery store, overcoming sugar addiction, self-care, physical activity, journaling, and achieving balance.
Evaluation will be based on completion of assignments, class participation, reflective 10 page paper or equivalent creative project, and final presentation that
demonstrates a level of personal growth.
After signing up for this course please email Nicole at nicole@zentreewellness.com with a brief statement describing your interest in the course and what you
hope to get out of it. In the event of over-subscription, these statements will be used in the selection process.
There will be several books, videos, grocery store field trip and simple cooking required for this class.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15.
Cost: $100.
Meeting time: mornings, twice a week for three-hour sessions.
NICOLE ANAGNOS (Instructor)
COX (Sponsor)
Nicole Anagnos is a local Health & Nutrition Coach and the founder and director of Zen Tree Wellness. She also holds a masters degree in education.
MATHEMATICS and STATISTICS
MATH
MATH 10 Contemporary Movie Criticism
Are there some movies that you love? Are there any movies that you despise? If so, can you make it clear why you feel so strongly about a film? In this course,
students will watch the films of contemporary directors that have a very distinctive style-styles which they will either love or hate. The students will then study
how various critics have reacted to these directors, and then write their own responses. Directors that will be focused on include David Gordon Green, Larry
Clark, Terry Zwigoff, Kore-eda Hirokazu, P.T. Anderson, Errol Morris, and Todd Solondz. Students will be required to turn in and present several critical essays
throughout the term. Preference given to upperclassmen.
Evaluation will be based on a 2-page critical essay due every other class meeting.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15.
Cost: $0.
Meeting time: mornings, Monday-Friday, with two meetings at least two hours to show movies.
BOTTS
MATH 11 Lessons in Go (Same as Asian Studies 11)
Go is probably the oldest board game in the world, originating in China more than 4,000 years ago, and played today by millions of people. Unlike (Western)
Chess, which focuses on hierarchical society and strictly defined and limited powers, and unlike (Middle Eastern) Backgammon, which is preoccupied with fate,
chance and a wave of luck, Go has an Eastern spirit, where every piece is of equal value and can be played anywhere on the board. The aim is not to destroy but to
build territory, where single stones become groups, and groups become organic structures. Two players alternate in placing black and white stones on a 19 x 19
ruled board with the aim of surrounding territory. The stones are left as they stand throughout the game, so that the game itself takes shape as a visible record of the
thinking that went into it. The result is an amazing aesthetic and intuitive movement with deep complexity. Although easy to learn, no computer program exists
which can beat a strong amateur player (even with a $5 million reward incentive). We look at how Go helped shape Asian culture, namely in Japan, and how this
game is a reflection of Asian values. Strategic topics include: Joseki (openings), Tesuji (tactical magic), life and death, territory and influence, endgame, and
handicap strategy. We will analyze famous games, discuss problems, as well as moderate a tournament among students and computer programs.
Evaluation will be based primarily on attendance, participation, problem sets and a final exam.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 32.
Cost: approximately $35 for books and supplies.
Meeting time: mornings.
DEVADOSS
MATH 12 Modern Dance--Muller Technique
This dance class will be based on the modern dance technique developed by Jennifer Muller, with whom I danced professionally for 5 years in New York City and
in Europe. Jennifer Muller was a soloist in the dance company of Jos Limon before she started her own company in 1974. She has added her own style of
movement to the Limon technique, creating an expansive, free-flowing dance that is wonderful to do and to watch. The class will be multi-leveled and open to
both men and women alike. Students will have the opportunity to choreograph a short piece either as a soloist or in small groups. We will finish the course with a
short lecture-demonstration illustrating what we have learned.
Previous dance experience preferred, but not required. Enrollment limit: 24.
Cost: $0.
Meeting time: Mornings. Six hours per week, 10-12, M, T, TH, F
SYLVIA LOGAN (Instructor)
SILVA (Sponsor)
Sylvia Logan received her B.A. in Slavic Literature from Stanford University. She danced professionally with the Jennifer Muller Dance Company, a modern
company based in New York City for five years.
MATH 14 The Art and Science of Baking
This course will provide an introduction to baking, including cakes, meringues, cookies, pastry, quick breads, and chocolate. We will study the science behind the
baking in addition to techniques of baking. Students will also contribute to a food blog, where they will write about and display their creations. The course is
aimed at those without extensive baking experience, though some knowledge would be helpful.
Assessment will be based on class participation (in the Williams College bakeshop in Paresky), homework, and a final project that will include both a baking and
writing component.
Evaluation will be based on final project and presentation.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10.
Cost: $200.
Meeting time: afternoons; class will meet afternoons (not Friday's, an average of three days (9 hours) per week.
PACELLI
MATH 15 Mathematics of the Rubik's Cube
The Rubik's cube, one of the greatest toys ever invented, hides deep and subtle mathematical concepts. In this course the students will learn how to solve the
Rubik's cube and will investigate the solution using abstract mathematics and geometric intuition. The mathematical model associated with the cube is the Ru-
329
bik's Group, an algebraic structure with more than 43 quintillion elements. We will study the basics of Group Theory, an area of algebra used in the study of
symmetry in two- and three-dimensional geometric figures. The mathematical theory will help us understand the beauty and some of the complexity of the
Rubik's cube. We will also briefly investigate the other Rubik's cubes: the 2x2x2 Mini Cube, the 4x4x4 Rubik's Revenge and the 5x5x5 Professor's Cube.
Should the course be oversubscribed, selection will be based on responses to a questionnaire.
Evaluation will be based on class participation and homework.
Prerequisites: Mathematics 104 or its equivalent. Enrollment limit: 25.
Cost: $15 for Rubik's cube.
Meeting time: mornings.
STOICIU
MATH 16 A Critical Study of the Coen Brothers
Over the past 25 years, Joel and Ethan Coen, known professionally as the Coen brothers, have established themselves as among the most important independent
filmmakers of our time. They write, direct, and produce their own films and have won numerous critical distinctions for their work, including tying the existing
record for the most Academy Award nominations for a single nominee for their 2007 blockbuster No Country for Old Men. Notorious for their dark humor and
twisted plots based upon a simple storyline, their filmography pays tribute to nearly every classic American movie genre, with a particular recurring postmodern
twist on film noir. We will watch and critique a wide ranging sample of Coen brothers movies, such as Raising Arizona, Fargo, The Big Lebowski, No Country
for Old Men, and True Grit. The class will meet daily, with movie screenings and discussions on alternate days.
Evaluation will be based on attendance, participation in class discussions, and a 2-page critical essay due every other class meeting.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20.
Cost: $0.
Meeting time: Monday through Friday mornings, with 2-3 meetings per week at least 2 hours for movie screenings.
TOWNSEND BEAZLEY
MATH 19 Humor Writing (Same as English 19)
What is humor? The dichotomy inherent in the pursuit of comedic intent while confronting the transient nature of adversity can ratchet up the devolving psyche's
penchant for explication to a catastrophic threshold, thwarting the existential impulse and pushing the natural proclivity for causative norms beyond the possibility
of pre-situational adaptation.
Do you know what that means? If so, this is not the course for you. No, we will write funny stuff, day in and day out. Or at the very least, we will think it's funny.
Stories, plays, fiction, nonfiction, we'll try a little of each. And we'll read some humor, too.
Is laughter the body's attempt to eject excess phlegm? Why did Plato write dialogues instead of monologues? Who backed into my car in the Bronfman parking
lot on the afternoon of March 2, 2011? These are just a few of the questions we will not explore in this course. No, we won't have time because we will be busy
writing. (But if you know the answer to the third question, there's a $10 reward.)
Plan to meet 6 hours a week, and to spend at least 20 hours a week on the course. No slackers need apply. Produce or become produce. Everyone will submit at
least one piece for publication. Selection based on submitted samples of humor writing.
Requirements: Reading, attendance, participation and writing at least 20 pages of material.
Prerequisites: sense of humor (broadly interpreted.) Enrollment limit: 15.
Cost: no more than $50.
Meeting time: mornings.
ADAMS
Colin Adams is the author of the book "Riot at the Calc Exam and Other Mathematically Bent Stories" and the humor columnist for the Mathematical Intelli-
gencer.
MATH 30 Senior Project
To be taken by candidates for honors in Mathematics other than by thesis route.
MATH 31 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Mathematics 493-494.
MUSIC
MUS 10 Black Gospel Music, History and Performance Ensemble (Same as Africana Studies 10)
(See under AFR 10 for full description.) AVERY SHARPE
MUS 11 Tuning and Temperament
Our musical system conceals a fundamental flaw--an inherent, mathematical incommensurability of its intervals: a finite collection of tones cannot be built from
pure fifths and thirds and also be closed at the octave (i.e. twelve fifths from C returns not to another C, but to the distinct pitch B#). Equal temperament is our
modern solution to this problem: we make the space between all tones exactly the same, spreading the discrepancy between C and B# evenly among all intervals,
thereby making all intervals slightly impure. Historically, this was always the case; in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, myriad competing methods arose
to distribute the discrepancy in uneven but usable ways. As a result, different keys had different sounds--some were more harmonious, others less so; triads in
those keys were not simply major or minor, but involved many shades of major and minor. Drawing on ancient legends, writers ascribed specific characters to
particular keys, and such key characters undoubtedly shaped composers' choices: Mozart, for instance, reserved g minor for particularly tragic topics; E-flat
suggested particular paths for modulation by Bach. The class will explore the theory, the mythology, and most importantly, the practice of diverse, microtonal
tuning systems from the Baroque era: much of the class work will involve learning how to tune a harpsichord, realizing various historical temperaments on the
instrument, and performing works thereupon in multiple keys, exploring the distinct sound worlds those temperaments create. Evaluation will be based on a
student's tuning project, and its accompanying presentation and paper.
Enrollment limit: 12. Preference given to music majors, performers, and students who have taken a music theory course.
Meeting time: mornings.
ED GOLLIN
MUS 12 African Marimba Music
Created in the 1960s, Zimbabwean marimba band has made its mark in countries around the world. The compositions of Alport Mhlanga are in the repertoire of
virtually every marimba band that plays in Zimbabwean style. Beginning students (no musical prerequisites) will learn to play simpler Zimbabwe marimba
songs, many composed by Alport Mhlanga. Advanced students will learn to play more advanced Zimbabwean songs and, time permitting, new compositions and
arrangements commissioned by the Zambezi Marimba Band.
Students in this intensive course will learn to play Zimbabwean marimba music, perform with the Zambezi Marimba Band in the last week of WSP, and investi-
gate the history, aesthetics, and acoustics of the African marimba. The course will be taught by Prof. Ernest Brown, Director of the Zambezi Marimba Band who
designed the chromatic African marimbas played by Zambezi and broadened the repertoire of Zambezi, and Mr. Alport Mhlanga, a composer, teacher, and
marimba virtuoso who helped develop the Zimbabwean marimba style and has toured internationally with his own marimba bands. Mr. Mhlanga currently
teaches marimba at Maru a Pula School in Botswana.
Beginning Section: Mondays-Fridays 10 AM to 12 PM. Advanced Section: Mondays-Fridays 4-6 PM. Possible weekend rehearsals Jan. 21 and/or 22, 2012.
Evening Concert in the last week of WSP. Students are required to practice individually and to come to group lessons prepared to play the material taught in the
last lesson. Performing with the Zambezi Marimba Band in the last week of WSP. Students are expected to attend all lessons, rehearsals, and the final concert.
Medical emergencies must be documented. Students who are not present for the first class will be dropped from the class and may not be allowed to re-enroll.
Readings, listening, and video viewings will be assigned.
Method of evaluation: 50% from 1 five page paper, topic to be arranged. 50% from regular participation in lessons and rehearsals and progress as a marimba
musician.
Prerequisites: No musical prerequisites for the beginning section. Musical ability is a prerequisite for the advanced section. For the beginning section, the student
statement of interest will be used to select student. Students in the advanced section should have a high level of performance expertise on any instrument. All
students should email Prof. Brown, indicating in one or two paragraphs, the level of their musical skills, their interest in the course, and their class year.
Enrollment limit: 14-7 in the advanced section and 7 in the beginning section. If over-enrolled: for the beginning section, the student statement of interest is the
criteria. There are no musical prerequisites. For the advanced section, musical ability and the student statement of interest are the criteria. All else being equal,
students who are earlier rather than later in their college career are preferred.
Cost: approximately $50.
Preferred meeting times: For the beginning section: Mondays-Fridays 10 a.m. to 12 p.m. Advanced section: Mondays-Fridays, 4-6 p.m. Possible weekend re-
hearsals January 21 and/or January 22, 2012. Evening concert in the last week of WSP.
E. D. BROWN
MUS 13 I/O Fest '12
Students enrolled in the I/O Fest '12 Winter Study will direct, manage, perform in, and compose for the student run Iota Ensemble. Members of the ensemble will
take part in every aspect of planning for the final concert, including choosing the program, organizing rehearsals, and producing the concert. Student performers
330
will have the opportunity to rehearse and perform in an ensemble comprised completely of other students and explore the vast terrain of new music and contem-
porary performance practice. Composers will write for the ensemble and be able to work with it directly in a laboratory setting. Students will also work with the
I/O Ensemble in presenting a professional concert, and will travel to New York to hear a concert and meet other musicians and composers. Meetings will include
regular rehearsals and workshops, as well as several concerts.
Evaluation will be based on participation, preparation for performances, and a final written critical exercise on a relevant class topic.
Prerequisites: this course is open to composers, instrumentalists, singers, and others interested in contemporary music, at the discretion of the instructor. Enroll-
ment limit: 20. If overenrolled selection will be based on experience and appropriate skills.
Cost: $0.
Meeting times will include rehearsals and concerts, and will be primarily in the afternoons and evenings.
MATTHEW GOLD (Instructor)
BLOXAM (Sponsor)
Matthew Gold is studio instructor of percussion at Williams, where he directs the Williams Percussion ensemble and I/O New Music. He is one of the leading
contemporary percussionists in NYC, leading TimeTable Percussion and touring with many major New York based ensembles.
MUS 14 Classic American and European Musical Theatre
This Winter Study will give participants an opportunity to study and perform numbers for one or more singers in great American musicals and European light
operas. You have sung a solo, you have sung in chorus--now practice the exacting art of singing in an ensemble on stage. Selections from Stephen Sondheim's
Sweeney Todd will be a special focus. The course will culminate with a performance of ensembles, solos, and duets from a variety of musical theater shows.
Other ensembles from European models may also be included. Singers, actors, and pianists are all welcome to participate. The course is intended especially for
singers who wish to have some stage time, and for actors who wish to work on their singing. Evaluation: A student may fulfill the requirements of the course by
performing, writing a 5-page discursive paper, or some combination of the two approved by the teacher.
A student may fulfill the requirements of the course by performing, writing a 5-page discursive paper, or some combination of the two approved by the teacher.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15. If over-enrolled students will be accepted based on a discussion with the instructor.
Cost: $0.
Meeting time: afternoons.
KEITH KIBLER (Instructor)
BLOXAM (Sponsor)
Keith Kibler is an adjunct teacher of voice at Williams College, and has performed under some of the finest directors currently working including David Alden,
Peter Sellars, and Galina Vishnevskaya.
MUS 15 Contemporary American Songwriting (Same as American Studies 15 and Special 15)
(See under SPEC 15 for full description.)
MUS 25 Choral Singing and South Africa
During the first two weeks of Winter Study, students will live on campus, rehearsing music South African and North American works, including a commissioned
work by Prof. David Kechley. Readings on South African history and its musical traditions will be assigned. During the final two weeks the students will travel to
South Africa where they will perform with and for South African choirs and singing communities. The trip will involve performing for and with Sinikithemba, a
Durban choir--affiliated with a local hospita--in which all members are HIV positive. We also intend to perform with and for a choir of inmates at Polsmoor
prison in Cape Town.
Students will be assessed on their level of proficiency in the music to be performed.
Prerequisties: Membership in Williams Concert Choir during the fall of 2011. Enrollment limit: 45 (preference based on seniority)
Meetings: four hours each day.
WELLS
MUS 31 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Music 493, 494.
NEUROSCIENCE
NSCI 31 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Neuroscience 493-494.
PHILOSOPHY
PHIL 10 Above Us Only Sky: Atheist Understandings of Reason, Morality and the Meaning of Life
Atheists are often defined by "that which they are not": they do not believe in God, they do not think that the universe was created by a powerful being for a good
reason, the question about the purpose of human life makes no sense to them, and they live their lives without hope of eternal salvation or fear of eternal damna-
tion. To enrich and deepen such a negative understanding of atheism, this course will explore the vibrant and diverse tradition of positive atheist thought in both
theoretical and practical domains.
We will not consider arguments for and against atheism in this course; rather, taking the atheist position as our starting point, we will explore some aspects of
atheist epistemology, metaphysics and moral philosophy, thus sketching a positive philosophical characterization of atheism. Specifically, we will consider the
following questions: What is the relationship between skepticism and atheism? Must an atheist have a higher standard for justified belief than a theist? Should an
atheist try to prove her position, should she try to recommend it to theists, or should she treat her religious stance as a private matter? Since, for an atheist, the
universe is all there is, how does she ever experience wonder at the beauty of nature, the feeling of the numinous, the sense of reverence for the natural world?
What is the source of atheists' morality? Must an atheist be a moral relativist or a moral nihilist? Finally, how can an atheist find meaning in her life, contingent
and short as it is? How can she find joy in it despite what she must perceive as pointless suffering?
The readings for this course will mainly be drawn from the history of Western philosophy, starting with ancient Greek philosophers and ending with our contem-
poraries.
Requirements: Class attendance, preparedness, and participation; three short papers (2-3 pages each); and a final paper (4-5 pages).
Prerequisites: none. Open to first year students. Enrollment limit: 15. Priority will be given to philosophy majors, intended philosophy majors, and students
seriously committed to the course.
Meeting times: three times a week, in the afternoons.
MLADENOVIC
PHIL 12 Bioethics According to The Simpsons
Active Euthanasia? Okely Dokely! Human cloning? Don't have a cow, man! Over the past twenty years The Simpsons has included a healthy dose of stinging and
sometimes surprisingly illuminating critique of numerous bioethical issues. In this winter study course we will use clips and episodes from the classic animated
series as a launch pad for investigating the deeper philosophical concepts and ethical questions involved in a variety of bioethical topics. Good comedy has a way
of driving straight to the core of contested issues and painful circumstances, providing a point of entry for students in the class to more serious, academic material.
Along the way, the course will also investigate what makes The Simpsons's treatment of these bioethical issues *funny*--how its satire plays on common misun-
derstandings, contradictions and inconsistencies in social policy and individual decisions, and how serious issues drive the comedic effect. During the first portion
of the course, the instructor will present selections from The Simpsons that take up several core bioethical issues, paired with related readings from the bioethics
literature and possibly from the philosophical literature on humor and on The Simpsons. In the second portion of the course, the students themselves will identify
and present clips pertaining to bioethical issues. The final project for the course will be collaborative in nature: small groups of students will be asked to develop
and pitch (to the other class members) a storyline for a Simpsons episode (or portion thereof) that centers on a bioethical topic. Classes will meet two or three
afternoons each week, and students will be expected to read a substantial amount of philosophical material in preparation for these meetings. In addition, students
will need to spend significant amounts of time outside of class viewing videos and developing their final projects.
Evaluation will be based on class participation, one in-class presentation, and the final collaborative project.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 12. Preference will be given to students who indicate intellectual seriousness about philosophical bioethics.
Cost: $20-$30 for reading packet; students may also wish to obtain their own copies of relevant video material, although one copy of all episodes should be
available on library reserve or freely available on the internet.
Meeting time: ?
J. PEDRONI
PHIL 14 Plato's Symposium and Its Afterlife (Same as Classics 14, Comparative Literature 14, and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies
14)
(See under CLAS 14 for full description.) WILCOX
331
PHIL 15 Film and/as Philosophy (Same as English 15)
(See under ENGL 15 for full description.) RHIE
PHIL 16 Chekhov, An Unlikely Revolutionary (Same as Comparative Literature 16, Russian 16, and Theatre 16)
"The Anglo-American theater finds it possible to get along without the services of most of the best playwrights. Aeschylus, Lope de Vega, Racine, Moliere,
Schiller, Strindberg--one could prolong indefinitely the list of great dramatists who are practically unknown in England and America except to scholars But
why is Chekhov preserved from the general oblivion? Why is it that scarcely a year passes without a major Broadway or West End production of a Chekhov play?
Chekhov's plays--at least by reputation, which in commercial theater is the important thing--are plotless, monotonous, drab, and intellectual: find the opposites
of these four adjectives and you have a recipe for a smash hit." --Eric Bentley, Craftsmanship in Uncle Vanya
In this course, we will try to find an answer to Bentley's question through close readings of Chekhov's four major plays: Uncle Vanya, The Sea Gull, Three Sisters
and The Cherry Orchard. We will trace the development of the revolution that Chekhov's plays have provoked in the practice of acting, directing and playwriting
by reading excerpts from Stanislavski's works, Chekhov's correspondence with him, researching production history of Chekhov's major works and watching
some major productions of his plays available on film.
Requirements: class attendance, preparedness and participation; one class presentation on production history; and a final paper (7-10 pages).
Prerequisites: none; open to first year students. Enrollment limit: 15. In case of overenrollment, priority will be given to students with some background in Chek-
hov, and to those students who demonstrate a serious commitment to the course.
Cost: about $40 for books and Course Packet.
Class meetings: Afternoons. The class will meet three times a week in three hour sessions. Two weekly meetings will be devoted to lecture and discussion, while
the third will involve a screening, followed by discussion.
MILOS MLADENOVIC (Instructor)
GERRARD (Sponsor)
Milos Mladenovic is a theatre director (MFA, Yale School of Drama; National Endowment for the Arts Award) with extensive experience in European theatre.
PHIL 20 Tavern of Crossed Destinies: The Video (Same as English 20)
Italo Calvino's The Tavern of Crossed Destinies is a novella in which characters who are unable to speak tell their life stories by placing Tarot cards on a table.
There are small, black-and-white reproductions of the cards printed in the margins of the book; as one reads, one must glance back and forth between the text and
the images. In this course, we will make videos so that, as viewers hear the stories, they will see high-resolution color images of the cards, as the cards become
relevant. The instructor, who has never before undertaken a project of this sort, hopes that imaginative and enthusiastic students will join him in bringing the
project to at least partial completion.
Evaluation will be based on contributions to production of videos.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20. Selection will be based on letter explaining interest.
Cost: $50.
Meeting time: afternoons.
WHITE
PHIL 25 Morocco (Same as English 25 and International Studies 25)
Students in this course will spend winter study in Morocco. Morocco presents a compelling blend of historical influences and modern world currents. Threads of
Islam, Arab traditions, and the heritage of the native Berber people are woven into a distinctive cultural tapestry, while traces of French colonialism can still be
seen in the political and social structure. Morocco is at the intersection of the West, the Middle East, and Africa. Travel there is therefore a powerful way to
introduce intellectual themes that require and reward a subtle blending of insight from history, political science, religion, and philosophy.
We will take the first steps in engaging some of these challenging topics in order to enable independent study facilitated by serious and multifaceted exposure to
the country. For the first two weeks, students will study at the Center for Cross Cultural Learning (CCCL) in Rabat, taking Arabic lessons (classical or Moroccan
dialect) each morning and then gathering for lectures by local university faculty in the afternoon. During this span students will live with Moroccan families in the
Rabat medina. In the third week of the course students will travel in the interior of Morocco, exploring Fez and Marrakech, riding camels in the desert, and hiking
through Berber villages in the Atlas Mountains.
Students will be expected to attend all seminars, lead a group presentation, and complete a substantial research paper (10-15 pages). The presentation and research
paper will be occasions to explore a special topic in depth including, for instance, justice and gender, art, literature, colonial studies, or Islam.
No prerequisites. Arabic is the official spoken language of Morocco, and French is spoken widely. While desirable, neither is required. Enrollment limit: 11.
Preference: Student interest is more important than class year or academic major. Final participants will be chosen on the basis of interviews regarding student
goals and intellectual interests.
Estimated cost: $4000.
BARRY and KNOPP
PHIL 31 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Philosophy 493-494.
PHYSICS
PHYS 10 Light and Holography
This course will examine the art and science of holography. It will introduce modern optics at a level appropriate for a non-science major, giving the necessary
theoretical background in lectures and discussion. Demonstrations will be presented and students will make several kinds of holograms in the lab. Thanks to a
grant from the National Science Foundation, we have 7 well-equipped holography darkrooms available for student use. At the beginning of WSP, the class will
meet for lecture and discussion three mornings a week and for lab 2 afternoons a week. Later classes will be mainly laboratory.
Students will be evaluated on the basis of regular attendance, completion of 4 laboratory exercises, and a holography laboratory project or a 10-page paper.
Attendance at all classes and labs is required for a passing grade.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 30. Preference will be given to students with no previous college course in physics more advanced than Physics 109.
Cost: about $50 for holographic film, chemicals, and photocopies.
Meeting time: lectures for all students will be in the morning; labs will be in the afternoon.
JONES
PHYS 12 Drawing as a Learnable Skill
Representational drawing is not merely a gift of birth, but a learnable skill. If you wanted to draw, but have never had the time to learn; or you enjoy drawing and
wish to deepen your understanding and abilities, then this course is for you. This intensive course utilizes discoveries in brain research along with traditional
drawing exercises to teach representational drawing. By using simple techniques and extensive exercises you will develop the perceptual shift from your symbol
based left hemisphere to your visually based right hemisphere. This cognitive shift enables you to accurately see and realistically represent the physical world.
You will learn to draw a convincing portrait, interior, and still life. This course is designed to develop your powers of observation and enhance your innate creative
problem solving abilities, which are applicable in any field. Students need no previous artistic experience, just the willingness and desire to learn a new skill.
Students will be expected to attend and participate in all sessions. They will also be required to keep a sketchbook recording their progress and complete a final
project.
Evaluations will be based on participation, effort, and development.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 18. If overenrolled, selection will be based on seniority.
Cost: textbook and $5 for materials.
Meeting time: Tuesday and Thursday mornings from 10:00 until 12:45, with substantial additional independent student work. There will be an exhibition of
coursework on the final day of Winter Study.
STELLA EHRICH (Instructor)
AALBERTS (Sponsor)
Stella Ehrich lived in Italy for sixteen years, where she spent seven years studying figurative realism in the atelier of Nera Simi in Florence. She holds an
MFA in painting from Bennington College. Stella is a professional painter whose work includes portraits, landscapes and still life subjects.
PHYS 13 Media Immersion: Creativity through multimedia animation and video production
This course is designed to introduce concepts and workflows associated with multiple formats of video production, ranging from still image and 2D animation to
live footage mixed with animation.
Class time will consist of lecture mixed with hands-on instruction/participation in concepts of project management, scriptwriting, storyboarding, copyright and
fair use considerations, content research and creation, multimedia editing and digital publishing. We will frontload the course with critical analysis and decon-
struction of examples of the various media formats we will be producing and allow students to explore the technical workflow, equipment and software required
to produce each format. Midway, we will form groups to undertake production of a five-minute piece in the format of their choosing. We will meet for 3, two-hour
sessions each week (lecture and workshop) with an additional required lab/production time (minimum of 6 hours/week, additional during final project weeks)
332
Weekly assignments will be completed during (and outside of, as needed) three 2-hour lab sessions each week. There will also be a short 4 page paper on a select
list of topics. Software introduced includes: iMovie, Final Cut Pro, Motion, Flash, Soundtrack, Photoshop.
Evaluation will be based on weekly assignments, short paper and final project.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15. If overenrolled, selection will be based on student interest.
Cost : $25 for blank media.
TREVOR MURPHY and TAMRA HJERMSTAD (Instructors)
AALBERTS (Sponsor)
Trevor Murphy has been an Instructional Technology Specialist at Williams College for 9 years. He has taught two winter study courses in the past that focused
on video and animation. Tamra Hjermstad has been an Instructional Technologist and media production consultant for more than 14 years at both Williams
and Mount Holyoke colleges. She has created and delivered course integrated workshops and multi-part learning modules on digital media production and
animation.
PHYS 22 Research Participation
Several members of the department will have student projects available dealing with their own research or that of current senior thesis students. Approximately 35
hours per week of study and actual research participation will be expected from each student.
Students will be required to keep a notebook and write a five-page paper summarizing their work. Those interested should consult with members of the depart-
ment as early as possible in the registration period or before to determine details of projects then expected to be available.
Prerequisites: permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: 1 or 2 per project.
Cost: $0.
Meeting time: to be arranged with instructor.
TUCKER-SMITH and members of the department
PHYS 31 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Physics 493, 494.
POLITICAL ECONOMY
POEC 21 Fieldwork in Public Affairs and Private Non-Profits (Same as Political Science 21)
(See under PSCI 21 for full description.)
POEC 22 Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (Same as Economics 22)
(See under ECON 22 for full description.)
POEC 23 Institutional Investment
This course is an internship with the Williams College Investment Office in Boston. This unique opportunity is a structured program designed to give students an
overview of endowment and investment management. Through formal training and project work, students will gain a better understanding of how an institutional
investment portfolio is managed and how investment managers are selected and monitored. Students will learn about global equities, hedge funds, venture capi-
tal, buyouts, commodities, real estate and fixed income. Students are integral members of the Investment Office team and will assist on projects that influence
investment and operational decisions. Students will sharpen their professional skills and have the opportunity to meet investment professionals from across the
investment industry. The instructors are investment professionals in the Williams College Investment Office.
The work will be based in Boston and will run for four weeks during Winter Study (January 3-January 26). Students are expected to work at the office for a
minimum of 32 hours a week (four days/week), complete a set of relevant readings, keep a journal, and write an analytic essay. No prerequisites are required.
To apply for enrollment, please select this course (WS POEC 23) as your first choice when registering for Winter Study. Additionally, please send an email with
your resume and a cover letter discussing why you are interested in this course and what you hope to gain from it to: investmentoffice@williams.edu by 11:59 PM
ET on Thursday, October 13, 2011. Enrollment limit: 2. If oversubscribed, students will be selected via interviews.
Students are responsible for the cost of housing, food, and incidentals. The Investment Office will provide help in locating low-cost/no-cost housing in the Boston
area if needed.
COLLETTE CHILTON, Chief Investment Officer (Co-instructor)
ABIGAIL WATTLEY, Investment Associate (Co-instructor)
ANNA SOYBEL, Investment Analyst (Co-instructor)
POEC 31 Honors Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Political Economy 493.
POLITICAL SCIENCE
PSCI 10 Opening Up the Corporate World: Research on Corporate Ethics
With the downsizing of government at all levels, large corporations have more than ever become the dominant institutions of American culture and politics,
recently granted the rights of citizenship by the Supreme Court. Whether you are considering a career in corporations or wish to understand their dynamics and
policy making, they remain relatively opaque compared to other major institutions. This course will explore the issue of corporate ethics from various perspec-
tives and develop your skills in corporate research. You will conduct extensive research on the structure, policies, operations, and ethics of one large U.S. corpora-
tion, possibly collaborating with another student. The instructor, a social historian, coordinates community engagement at Williams.
Requirements: research findings on one large U.S. corporation, 10-page paper or equivalent, plus data appendix.
No prerequisites, however, research skills preferred. Enrollment limit: 15. If overenrolled, admission will be based on an interview with the instructor.
Cost: $100 for research guides.
Meeting time: afternoons.
STEWART BURNS (Instructor)
MAHON (Sponsor)
Stewart Burns, Williams Coordinator of Community Engagement and Professor of Community Leadership at Antioch University (Ph.D. Program in Leader-
ship and Change), is a social historian specializing in the U.S. civil rights movement and an award-winning biographer of Martin Luther King Jr. He was an
editor of the MLK Papers at Stanford and previously taught leadership studies at Williams.
PSCI 11 Editorial Cartooning and the Art of Propaganda (Same as ArtH 11)
(See under ARTH 11 for full description.) CHAN LOWE AND E.J. JOHNSON
PSCI 13 States, Foreigners and Famine in Africa
The Ethiopian famine of 1984 left two enduring images. First, it reinforced the conventional wisdom that African governments lack the technical capacity and
political will to respond to famine. Secondly, because of the success of the Band Aid and Live Aid campaigns, it suggested that international humanitarian inter-
vention and aid can (and should) make up for the inadequacies of domestic governments. This course considers the prescriptions to address the underlying
problems with the African state, democratizing it and building its administrative capacity, on the one hand, and growing a robust international disaster relief
industry, on the other hand. Have these prescriptions been successful in arresting famine across Africa?
Evaluation will be based on a final 10-page paper; class attendance and participation in discussion will also be taken into consideration.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 30. Preference to seniors, juniors, sophomores and then first-year students.
Cost: $80 for books.
Meeting time: mornings.
MUNEMO
PSCI 14 Making Sense of the CIA (Same as Leadership Studies 14)
MCALLISTER and DONALD GREGG '51 (Instructors)
PSCI 16 Political Aikido, Embodied Leadership, and the State of the Union
Aikido is a Japanese martial tradition that combines the samurai arts of sword and grappling with the philosophical desire to forge a path of harmony in the midst
of chaos. As such, it addresses situations of conflict that manifest themselves physically, but also offers insight into how to redirect the energies--social, psycho-
logical, or political that might otherwise become conflict in one or another aspect of our lives. As a martial art, Aikido teaches more than simply how to survive; it
also teaches us how to physically express our noblest intentions--our compassion--in movements that protect not only ourselves but the attacker as well. Put
another way, Aikido is ethical persuasion made physical.
By integrating physical and intellectual components, the course seeks to forge in each student a more coherent perspective not on how to avoid conflict, but how
333
to actually eliminate it. The course also seeks to provide an opportunity for students to imagine and articulate what full commitment to an integrated and conflict-
free life would be like, and for one intensive month, to live it.
The physical training (two hours each morning on mats in Currier Ballroom) will improve each student's strength, balance, posture, and flexibility. Everyone will
also learn how to throw their friends across the room. About 25% of training time will be devoted to sword, staff, and dagger techniques.
The academic component of the course will engage with how the physical training resonates with the tactical practices of successful social change movements
(Gandhi in India, King in the US, and 2011's events in Tunisia and Egypt). It will also investigate embodied leadership (the idea that much of what we find
compelling in a leader is how they exist and communicate physically) and inspired rhetoric (language that moves hearts as well as minds, that reframes problem-
atic issues, and that conveys a speaker's authentic conviction). All of this academic work will be undertaken mindful of the upcoming State of the Union address
in late January. The 2012 SOTU will entail not just an articulation of priorities for the coming legislative calendar, but will also be given in the midst of a heated
re-election campaign and as such will be subject to strategic considerations worth our time to examine.
Students will each be responsible for investigating a policy area likely to be discussed in the SOTU and then writing sections on those policy areas for the address
consistent with the tactical insights of aikido they've been studying. Students of a more conservative bent are welcome to craft equivalent text suitable for the
Republican response.
Additional relevant experiences, such as meditation practice, outdoor misogi, and Samurai films will be an integral part of the course.
Students will be evaluated on the quality of their participation in both physical and intellectual course components, and on the quality of the proposed policy text
they generate, and present, for the
upcoming State of the Union address.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20. If overenrolled, selection will be based on a questionnaire.
Cost: $135 (100 for uniform and wooden training weapons; 35 for books).
Meeting time: daily, 10 a.m.-noon.
ROBERT KENT '84 (Instructor)
MAHON (Sponsor)
Robert Kent '84 spent 3 years in Kyoto, Japan earning his Sho Dan (first degree black belt), directly after majoring in both Philosophy and Religion at Wil-
liams. He currently holds a Yon Dan rank (Fourth degree black belt), having studied since 1991 at Aikido West in Redwood City under Frank Doran Shihan,
where he helped run the youth program for 18 years. He is currently President of Aiki Extensions, Inc, a nonprofit that supports programs that bring the strate-
gic insights and practical wisdom of Aikido into non-traditional settings. He is also founding coordinator for The PeaceCamp Initiative (a scholarship program
that seeks to use Aikido principles to heal the Israeli/Palestinian conflict a few kids at a time) for which he won Ben & Jerry's 2008 Peace Pioneer Prize. He
earned a Masters degree in Philosophy at Claremont Graduate School in 1993, writing his thesis on the Ethics of Authenticity. This will be the sixth time he
has offered an Aikido-based Winter Study course.
PSCI 21 Fieldwork in Public Affairs and Private Non-Profits (Same as Political Economy 21)
This course is a participant-observation experience in which students work full-time for a governmental agency, nongovernmental (including voluntary, activist,
and grassroots) organization, or for a political campaign. Students may find placements in government and nonprofit organizations in which their work involves
significant involvement with public issues. Examples include: town government offices; state or federal administrative offices (e.g., environmental agencies,
housing authorities); interest groups that lobby government (e.g., ACLU, NRA); nonprofit organizations such as service providers or think tanks (e.g., Habitat for
Humanity; Cato Institute); and grassroots, activist or community development organizations (e.g., Greenpeace or neighborhood association). The instructors will
work with each student to arrange a placement; such arrangements must be made in advance of the Winter Term. Students should first make their own contacts
with an institution or agency. The instructors and members of the Political Science department are available to help students find placements, if necessary. Each
student's fieldwork mentor shall send a confirmation letter to the instructors verifying the placement and describing the nature of the work to be performed by the
student. Students will read a few short articles distributed at the beginning of Winter Term and must agree to keep a journal, maintain weekly contact with the
instructors, and write a final paper summarizing and reflecting upon the experience. A group meeting of all students will occur after winter study to discuss the
experiences.
Requirements: 90 hours of fieldwork; satisfactory evaluation from the institutional sponsor; 10-page final paper or equivalent; participation in final meeting. At
the time of registration, interested students should send a resume and letter of interest to Paula Consolini.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 30.
Cost: approximately $15 for readings, student covers transportation costs to and from internship site.
CATHY JOHNSON and PAULA CONSOLINI
PSCI 24 Politics and History in Cuba (Same as Africana Studies 24 and History 24)
A brief overview of recent Cuban history and politics, based mainly in Havana. After several days of reading, classes, and preparation in Williamstown, the class
moves to Havana and engages in two weeks of course work with instructors from the Univerisidad de la Habana. We then travel to historically significant destina-
tions in western Cuba before returning to the capital. We will also interview representatives of the Cuban revolutionary regime and civil-society leaders, visit
museums and monuments to the Revolution, experience Cuban culture, and talk to Cubans.
Requirements: demonstrated interest in the subject; fluency in Spanish; an oral presentation (in Spanish); a journal; and a 10-page paper.
Not open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 12.
Cost: approximately $2000.
BENSON and MAHON
PSCI 25 Eye Care and Culture on the Atlantic Coast of Nicaragua
In cooperation with Ray Hooker, President and founder of FADCANIC (the Foundation for the Autonomy and Development of the Caribbean Coast of Nicara-
gua) and optometrists from the New England College of Optometry, we prescribe and dispense reading and distance glasses to people in remote and often impov-
erished communities. In this, the tenth iteration of the course, we will return to a number of small villages on the rim of Pearl Lagoon where we have not visited for
6 or 7 years, then head north to Wawashan, the experimental school and from where students spend time in regular demanding high school classes and also learn
how to tend their own farm when they graduate. If time and weather permits we may spend the last day of our stay on a trip to the Pearl Keys for a day of
relaxation and recuperation after 10 solid days of clinics and travel to widely dispersed and seldom visited communities.
Evaluation will be based on a journal and final 10-page paper.
No prerequisites; not open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 12. Selection will be based on enthusiasm and preparation.
Cost: approximately $2700.
Meeting time: mornings.
ROBERT PECK (Instructor)
MAHON (Sponsor)
Former Athletic Director of the College, Robert Peck has been doing this trip for ten years.
PSCI 26 Catholic Social Teaching and Practice in Jamaica
The Catholic Church has from its beginning thought and taught on social, political and economic relations, and counted works of `charity' (caritas, i.e., `love') as
the foundation of Christian obligation and the highest virtue. Over the last century or so, however, the Catholic Church has devoted particular attention to the
problems of modern economies - poverty, inequality, class conflict, private property, globalization and human freedom to name just a few - and wrestled with
many foundational questions of modern economic life: What do the rich owe the poor? How do national boundaries affect our moral obligations? What are the
merits and flaws of capitalism? Of socialism? Is love a relevant concept in political and economic analysis? What is an economy for?
This course involves both an experiential and intellectual engagement with one portion of the larger body of thought known as `Catholic Social Teaching,' name-
ly the theme of poverty and inequality within a globalized economy. Students will have an opportunity to work for a week with a Catholic missionary group,
Mustard Seed Communities, at their facility in Kingston, Jamaica dedicated to educating and assisting the country's most physically, mentally and financially
vulnerable children. The rest of the term will be spent in Williamstown reading and discussing key papal and episcopal encyclicals as well as reflecting upon the
relationship between the intellectual and charitable traditions and practices of the Church. Tentative schedule: January 3-6: introduction to Catholic Social Teach-
ing; to academic debates and practical struggles both inside and outside the Catholic Church regarding poverty and development; and to the social/economic/
political background of Jamaica; January 7-14: with Mustard Seed Community, Kingston, Jamaica; January 16-26: reading the most prominent Catholic Church
encyclicals on the subject of poverty and development, as well as critical commentary.
Evaluation will be based on a final 10-page paper.
No prerequisites; not open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 10. Selection will be based on an interview.
Cost: $1500. (Funding for the trip to Jamaica with Mustard Seed Community is being provided by Williams Catholic Alumni.)
DAREL PAUL and Fr. GARY CASTER, Catholic Chaplain at Williams
PSCI 31 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Political Science 493-494.
PSCI 32 Individual Project
To be taken by students registered for Political Science 495 or 496.
334
PSYCHOLOGY
PSYC 10 Group Dynamics and Leadership
This course will immerse students in group dynamics through experiential and didactic material. Readings will range from popular culture, group psychotherapy
and organizational development. Students will learn group leadership and facilitation skills and explore group roles. Class structure will include 3 hour classes that
will meet twice a week. In addition to readings, student may view video and internet based media for out-of-class assignments. This course will involve a level of
self exploration and participation in role play and experiential exercises.
Evaluation will occur with process logs at the close of each class period an initial 3 page paper at the beginning of the course and a 5 page paper for the final
assignment.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 20. Selection criteria: seniority.
Cost: $10 for course packet.
Meeting time: afternoons.
PAUL GITTERMAN (Instructor)
ZIMMERBERG (Sponsor)
Paul Gitterman holds a Masters Degree from the Smith College School for Social Work and a Masters Degree in Psychoanalytic Developmental Psychology
from the University College London and the Anna Freud Center. He is a Certified Group Psychotherapist, an adjunct assistant professor for the Smith College
School for Social Work, and has facilitated groups in a variety of human services settings. In addition, Paul provides psychotherapy services for Bennington
College Psychological Services and has a private practice in Pittsfield, MA and Bennington, VT.
PSYC 12 Alternative Birth Choices (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies)
This course will consider the range of women's experiences surrounding pregnancy and childbirth. Among the topics we will cover are: alternative birthing
choices (midwifery, homebirth, water-birth), the medicalization of childbirth, and attitudes regarding breastfeeding. We will view documentaries about pregnancy
and childbirth, including films of labor and delivery; hear from a number of local professionals, such as a midwife, a doula, a childbirth educator, and a lactation
consultant; and take a tour of a birthing center.
Method of Evaluation: Class presentation and participation in class discussions
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10. Student selection criteria: seniority.
Cost: $30 for photocopying expenses.
Meeting time: mornings.
KRISTEN SAVITSKY(Instructor)
ZIMMERBERG (Sponsor)
Kristen Savitsky holds a Bachelor's of Science degree in nursing and has worked as a labor and delivery nurse.
PSYC 13 Coming Down from the High: 12 Step Recovery and Counseling
This course will explore the history and culture of the 12 Step Recovery Movement as well as diagnosis rubrics and methods of counseling/interventions that are
commonly used at clinics and Employee Assistance Programs throughout the world. Students will read the text Slaying the Dragon, a variety of texts published
by different 12 Step groups and watch movies such as Days of Wine and Roses, My Name is Bill, Clean and Sober, and When Love is not Enough: The Lois
Wilson Story. Students will be expected to attend and report on their impressions on two different 12 Step meetings that they attend per week. This class is
designed to help familiarize students with the disease model of addiction and help act proactively and with understanding with addicts, be it personally, socially, or
professionally.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 25.
Cost: approximately $50 for books and course packet.
Meeting time: Monday and Wednesday 7:00-9:40 p.m.
RICK BERGER (Instructor)
DEAN OF FACULTY (Sponsor)
Rick Berger earned his M.A. in 2009 from Hazelden Graduate School of Addiction Studies.
PSYC 14 Beyond Hooking Up: Creating Meaningful Relationships (Same as Chemistry 14 and Special 14)
(See under CHEM 14 for full description.)
PSYC 15 Ephquilts: An Introduction to Traditional Quiltmaking
This studio course will lead the student through various piecing, appliqu and quilting styles and techniques, with some non-traditional methods included. Sam-
ples will be made of techniques learned, culminating in the completion of a sizeable project of the student's choosing (wall quilt or lap-size quilt). There will be an
exhibit of all work (ephquilts), at the end of winter study. "Woven" into the classes will be discussions of the history of quilting, the controversy of "art" quilts vs.
"traditional" quilts, machine vs. hand-quilting and the growing quilting market. Reading list: Pieces of the Past by Nancy J. Martin; Stitching Memories: African-
American Story Quilts by Eva Ungar Grudin; Sunshine and Shadow: The Amish and Their Quilts by Phyllis Haders; A People and Their Quilts by John Rice
Irwin; Treasury of American Quilts by Cyril Nelson and Carter Houck; The Quilt: New Directions for an American Tradition, Nancy Roe, Editor.
Requirements: attendance of all classes (two field trips inc), a love of fabric, design and color, an enthusiasm for handwork, participation in exhibit. Extensive
time will be spent outside of class working on assigned projects.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15.
Cost: $200 for materials and supplies.
Meeting times: 1-3 p.m., MWF.
DEBRA ROGERS-GILLIG (Instructor)
ZIMMERBERG (Sponsor)
Debra Rogers-Gillig, one of the top quilters in New England, has been quilting for 32 years, and teaching classes and coordinating shows and exhibits for
27 years. She has received numerous prizes and awards from quilt shows in New York and New England and been published in quilt magazines.
PSYC 19 Psychology Internships
Would you like to explore applications of psychology in the "real world?" This course gives students an opportunity to work full time during winter study in a
mental health, business, education, law or other setting in which psychological theories and methods are applied to solve problems. Students are responsible for
locating their own potential internships whether in the local area, their hometowns, or elsewhere, and are welcome to contact the course instructor for suggestions
on how to do this. In any case, all students considering this course must consult with the instructor about the suitability of the internship being considered before
the winter study registration period. Please prepare a brief description of the proposed placement, noting its relevance to psychology, and the name and contact
information of the agency supervisor. Before Thanksgiving break, the student will provide a letter from the agency supervisor which describes the agency, and the
student's role and responsibilities during Winter Study. Enrolled students will meet the instructor before Winter Study to discuss matters relating to ethics and their
goals for the course, and after Winter Study to discuss their experiences and reflections.
Evaluation will be based on a 10-page minimum final paper summarizing the student's experiences and reflections, a journal kept throughout the experience, and
the supervisor's evaluation.
Prerequisite: approval of Professor Kavanaugh is required. Enrollment limit: 20.
Cost: Travel expenses in some cases.
KAVANAUGH
PSYC 22 Introduction to Research in Psychology
This course provides a research opportunity for students who want to understand how psychologists ask compelling questions and find answers about behavior.
Several faculty members, whose subfields include behavioral neuroscience, cognitive psychology, social psychology clinical psychology, developmental
psychology, and the psychology of education, will have student projects available. Since projects involve faculty research, interested students must consult with
members of the Psychology Department before electing this course.
Evaluation will be based on the quality of research participation, student's lab journal and either an oral presentation or a written 10 page report of the research
project.
Required Activities: A minimum of 20 hours per week of research participation will be expected of each student.
Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Enrollment limit: space available in faculty research labs.
Student selection criteria: Decision will be based on evaluation of departmental application and number of faculty available as mentors.
Cost: $0.
Meeting time: mornings.
P. SOLOMON
PSYC 31 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Psychology 493-494.
HANE
335
RELIGION
REL 10 Kierkegaard and Religion
This course will examine the works of the 19th century philosopher and proto-existentialist, Soren Kierkegaard, focusing on his importance to existentialism in
the study of religion, identity, and meta-ethics. In addition to Fear and Trembling/Repetition, a course packet will contain samplings of works from the mid
1840's, his most productive period. Class will meet eight hours weekly, two hours daily in the afternoons except Monday, with a brief 10-page paper to conclude,
along with active participation throughout.
Evaluation will be based on a final 10-page paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 12. If overenrolled, preference will be based on strength of interest.
Cost: $50.
Meeting time: afternoons.
SHUCK
REL 12 Wellness, Yoga, and the Art of Fully Thriving
The art and science of yoga invites us into an ongoing conversation of who we are, why we are here and how we manage our energy of mind, body, and heart.
Inquire into the rich fabric of your life as you explore:
*The stress reductive effects of breath, yoga, attention, and meditation.
*The power of healthy food and non-dogmatic conscious nutrition.
*Practical tools to align what you think, feel, say and do to live the life you have always wanted.
*The potency of re-inhabiting your physical body with ease and grace.
*The way yoga poses have direct impact on the primary systems of the body including our nerves, heart, lungs, hormones, digestive organs and lymph.
This course meets M-W-Th 10am-1pm and includes yoga in every session (no prior experience needed), breath work, meditation, an optional discounted field trip
to Kripalu Center for Yoga & Health, multimedia presentations, reflection papers, and two mandatory reading texts (Nourishing Wisdom by Marc David and
Nourishing the Teacher: Inquiries, Contemplations, & Insights on the Path of Yoga by Danny Arguetty).
Evaluation will be based on the final project/presentation and a 5- to 10-page research paper on a topic related to the course.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 30. If overenrolled, students will be selected based on an essay explaining why they want to take the course.
Cost: $30 for book, $65 for field trip cost.
Meeting time: MWR 10 a.m.-1 p.m.
DANNY ARGUETTY (Instructor)
BUELL (Sponsor)
Danny Arguetty, M.A., E-RYT, has studied and practiced extensively in the Anusara and Kripalu approach to yoga. He blends a mix of skillful alignment cues,
playful postures, and creative vinyasa flows to facilitate a heart-opening journey of conscious inquiry. Danny links the potency of posture practice and nature
to the possibility of living in the world with mindfulness, skillfulness, and heartfelt intent. He is a faculty member at Kripalu Center for Yoga & Health and has
been involved in Kripalu School of Yoga 200-hr and 500-hr teacher trainings over the last six years.
REL 13 Write a Novel
How many of you have always wanted to write a novel, but nevcr managed to find the time? This course will give you the chance to do just that. Inspired by
National Novel Writing Month, participants in this class will be challenged to complete a significant portion of a novel over the course of Winter Study. We will
gather four days a week for three-hour intervals to blitz write text for our respective projects. Over the course of these meetings, we will likely spend some time
informally discussing the craft of creative writing, but our primary focus will simply be putting words down on the page every day. Although no formal experi-
ence with creative writing is required, students should come into the class prepared to begin writing and with at least some vague idea of the work they wish to
produce. Students interested in using the class to complete other equivalent length writing projects (such as screenplays, memoires, etc) will be considered on a
case-by-case basis.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 8. If overenrolled, selection will be based on the submission of a short letter describing the proposed novel (or other project).
Cost: $0.
Meeting time: afternoons.
JOSEPHSON
REL 14 Yoga as Integration of Knowledge and Practice
Many have encountered yoga. as a popular form of exercise. In this class we approach yoga as an interconnected system of embodied knowledge and intellectual
knowledge. We will provide an overview of the traditional and contemporary dimensions of yoga. The yoga we will practice in the class is Anusara Yoga, a form
of Hatha yoga which combines lite-affirming Tantric philosophy with universal principles of alignment and community. We shall investigate two classic Indian
texts to elucidate yoga's context alongside some Western texts that resonate with yogic ideas. Class discussions will consider key issues such as the relationship of
bodies to selves and of organic to inorganic existences, as well as the ethical implications of yoga. The overarching orientation will be to emphasize the synergy of
practice and study of yoga for a life in the world. Required Texts: The Yoga Sutras of Patanjali, Bhagavad Gita.
Evaluation is based on attendance and participation in all classes and sessions, a personal practice journal, one short reflection paper (2 pgs.), and a ten page final
paper focusing on the relationship between textual study and yoga practice. To earn a passing grade, students must complete a1l practice hours and assignments.
Enrollment limit: 12. Apply by email explaining your experience and interest in the class to Natasha. Judson@gmail.com and Denise.K.Buell@williams.edu.
Cost: $70 for books and yoga mat.
Meeting time: MWF 11 a.m.-1 p.m.
NATASHA JUDSON and BUELL (Instructors)
Tasha Judson began practicing Hatha Yoga in 1980. She returned to yoga practice as an adult to heal from chronic low back and neck pain. In 1999 she met
John Friend and in 2007 became a Certified Anusara Yoga teacher. Since 2008 she has held her classes at her studio Tasha Yoga in Williamstown, MA. As
well as offering her own classes and workshops, she practices with John several times a year and has assisted Anusara Teachers as Kripalu Center. In addition
to Hatha Yoga practice, Tasha loves meditation and contributes yoga instruction at two meditation retreats for young people annually at Insight Meditation
Society. Currently also she is a meditation student of Paul Muller Ortega, founder of Blue Throat Yoga.
REL 25 Jerusalem
Jerusalem excites the imagination, the emotions, and the spiritual aspirations for many people. An ancient city that was the locus of holiness and conflict for one
hundred generations still retains that description today. Through the first half of Winter Study, we will engage readings, (primarily Karen Armstrong's JERUSA-
LEM), class discussions, and additional study, to prepare for travel to Jerusalem. We will leave Williamstown on January 11, taking up residence in Jerusalem on
Monday morning, the 12th, through Thursday the 22nd. Our study in Jerusalem will feature many walking tours to various neighborhoods and historic sites, and
will bring Christian, Jewish, and Muslim teachers to present the complicated series of narratives that describe the mosaic of Jerusalem's three thousand year
history. Our educational program in Jerusalem will be led by Ophir Yarden, education director for the Interreligious Coordinating Council of Israel. When this
course was offered in 2007, many students agreed that it was "the most amazing experience of my life!"
Students will submit a 10-12 page reflection paper discussing the meaning of Jerusalem. Further information available from the instructor, Cantor Bob Scherr,
Jewish Chaplain for the College: rscherr@williams.edu, x 2483.
No prerequisites; not open to first-year students. Enrollment limit: 10. Each will submit essay to determine level of interest and social compatibility; we hope for a
multi-faith group of participants.
Cost: approximately $3300.
ROBERT SCHERR, Jewish Chaplain for the College (Instructor)
WINTER STUDY COMMITTEE (Sponsor)
REL 26 Explorations in Solidarity: A Meeting of Minds and Hearts in Nicaragua
This course will explore the lived realities of the hemisphere's second most impoverished nation, and the relevance of faith and religious community to the
continuing struggle for social justice. Students will reflect on these realities in the company of subsistence farmers, urban factory laborers, and leaders of grass-
roots organizations working for social change. The effects of free trade policies (CAFTA and FTAA) in an increasingly globalized economy, natural disasters, and
the changeable attentions of the developed world will be explored, along with other influences--Christian, Marxist and neo-Liberal--on the material and spiritu-
al well-being of Nicaraguan people. In particular, the course will explore ways in which the paradigms of liberation theology and the base Christian community
movement have shaped some Nicaraguans' views of the economic system and the natural environment in which they live, and some of their traditional folkloric
and contemporary artistic responses to it.
Nicaragua offers a unique lens through which to view the culture and influence of the U.S., as well as the daily struggles, the dignity, and the hope of some of the
hemisphere's most marginalized citizens. The experience of the course will include approximately ten days of living (with minimal amenities) with families in a
subsistence farming community. Students will also attend a number of Christian religious services, and take part in dialogues with communities in which libera-
tion theology shapes perspectives and daily choices. (The course is open to students of any religious background or no affiliation.) And for a portion of the course
we will be joined by Nicaraguan peers who are involved in youth empowerment movements or in the midst of university education, who will fully share in the
336
experience of the course. Travels in Nicaragua will be organized by the staff of the Escuela Asociacin Kairos para la Formacin, an NGO that facilitates educa-
tional programs and fosters faith-based partnerships for communities in North America and Nicaragua. Throughout, students will be invited to accompany our
Nicaraguan hosts as they live their daily lives, and to reflect on their own identities and assumptions as North Americans. The goal is to explore the relevance of
religious community to the possibilities for restorative justice, and to discover what it would mean to shape a relationship with the people of Nicaragua according
to a paradigm of solidarity--in contrast to the more familiar paradigms of charity and national self-interest.
The course will begin in Williamstown with several days of background reading (Nicaraguan history, liberation theology and current political and economic
reporting), writing, and orientation. Once in Nicaragua there will be daily reflection sessions, in preparation for which students will keep a detailed personal
journal. Other requirements include attendance at several orientation sessions during the latter weeks of the fall semester; participation in a group oral presentation
to the Williams community upon return; and a final 10-page paper. As in years past, in order to get the maximum benefit from the opportunity to live among the
Nicaraguans, the course will continue into the first 2 or 3 days of "Dead Week"; students will return to Williamstown on Saturday, January 28.
Conversational knowledge of Spanish is, of course, helpful; but we will be accompanied by several translators who will help to to make the experience accessible
to non-Spanish speakers as well. Willingness to live in physically demanding situations is essential. Enrollment limit: 12.
By present estimates, the cost of the trip to each student (including all food, lodging, round-trip travel between Williamstown and Managua, all in-country trans-
portation and fees) will be approximately $3,400. Students are individually responsible for the cost of travel to Williamstown at the beginning of WSP.
RICHARD SPALDING (Instructor)
BUELL (Sponsor)
REL 31 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Religion 493 or 494.
ROMANCE LANGUAGES
FRENCH
RLFR S.P. Sustaining Program for French 101-102
Students registered for 101-102 are required to attend and pass the sustaining program during the Winter Study period. There are five 50-minute meetings per
week.
Meeting time: mornings; 9-9:50 a.m.
TBA (Teaching Associates)
RLFR 10 Fictions of Domesticity (Same as English 10)
We visit an author's home in search of a connection to the origin of their writing: here's the site from which a novel or poem sprang. Museums dedicated to
authors' homes feed this fantasy, that in looking at Melville's desk (complete with glasses) or at the room where Dickinson dwelt we are even closer to them than
in their words. However, as we will explore in the course, far from an unmediated visit to the source of genius, museums of author's homes construct narratives of
their own about authorship, art, even about the value of daily life. Moreover, the writers themselves shaped conceptions of domestic space in ways that do not
always correspond to the tales told by the museums made of their homes. We will visit the homes of, and read works by, Herman Melville, Emily Dickinson,
Mark Twain, and Harriet Beecher Stowe.
Students will write a 5-page final paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10.
Cost: $97 (for transportation and museum admission).
PIEPRZAK and DAVIS
RLFR 16 Contemporary Queer Cinema in France (Same as Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 16)
From the streets of "Gay Paris" to the cinematic premieres of the Cannes Film Festival, France has long been a beacon of queer representation. French writers
from Gide and Proust to Colette and Genet have celebrated gay and lesbian identities in their novels. American expatriates Gertrude Stein and Natalie Barney
have mentored new generations of queer writers and artists in their Parisian salons. And openly gay couturiers Jean-Paul Gaultier and Yves Saint-Laurent have
projected fabulous French fashion out into the world. In the past few decades, queer political activism in France has led to the creation of the national "PACS" or
domestic partnership law, as well as greater rights and protections for queer men, women, and people living with HIV/AIDS. This course will examine represen-
tations of gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender identity in French cinema from 1968 to 2005. We will discuss a wide variety of issues on queer cinematic
representation, including the closet and coming-out, race and ethnicity, lesbian (in)visibility, bisexuality, transgender identity, butch-femme and drag performativ-
ity, queer political engagement, and HIV/AIDS. Our film discussions will be complemented by readings from contemporary French and American queer theory.
Films to include works by Balasko, Berliner, Chabrol, Collard, Denis, Ducastel, Epstein, Fassbinder, Friedman, Guibert, Lifshitz, Martineau, Molinaro, Ozon,
Veber, and Valle. Readings to include texts by Aaron, Butler, Castle, Garber, Halberstam, Martel, Russo, and Sedgwick.
Films in French with English subtitles. Discussions in English.
Requirements: active class participation and a 10-page paper in English.
No prerequisistes. Enrollment limit: 15. If overenrolled, preference given to majors in Romance Languages, Comparative Literature, and Women's, Gender and
Sexuality Studies.
Cost: approximately $35 for readings.
Meeting time: 2-3 mornings per week.
MARTIN
RLFR 30 Honors Essay
To be taken by candidates for honors other than by thesis route.
RLFR 31 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for French 493-494.
ITALIAN
RLIT S.P. Sustaining Program for Italian 101-102
Students registered for 101-102 are required to attend and pass the sustaining program during the Winter Study Period. Three 50-minute meetings per week.
Meeting time: mornings; 9-9:50 a.m.
NICASTRO
SPANISH
RLSP S.P. Sustaining Program for Spanish 101-102
Students registered for 101-102 are required to attend and pass the sustaining program during the Winter Study Period. Three 50-minute meetings per week.
Meeting time: mornings; 9-9:50 a.m.
TEACHING ASSOCIATES
RLSP 25 US-Mexico Border Issues (Same as Latina/o Studies 25)
This course takes a close look at life and issues along the US-Mexico border, specifically the border with Arizona. The first week will be on campus and devoted
to investigating the political-economy of global immigration, cultural flows and identities in both a social science and literary context, social transformations and
domestic political coalitions, security concerns in the wake of 9/11, and US immigration policy and practice, all with specific reference to US-Mexican immigra-
tion. The objective is to provide students with background and references in preparation of their experiential learning in Arizona and Mexico. The two-week
travel portion of the course will be organized through the Borderlinks program, a non-profit that specializes in academic programs on the Arizona/Mexico border-
lands (www.borderlinks.org). Students will extend their understanding of the immigration issues on-site with the Borderlinks delegation and profit from an in-
tense experiential learning component where they have exchanges with migrants, youth groups, humanitarian activists, and community organizations in Arizona
and neighboring Mexico. There will also be a service component in Arizona and/or Mexico with non-profit groups involved in border issues. Upon their return to
campus, students will meet with the instructors to evaluate their experience in light of the reading they did before departing.
Each student will complete a 10-page paper on some facet of US-Mexico immigration and the borderlands.
No prerequisites; not open to first-year students.. Enrollment limit: 10.
Cost: approximately $2595.
JANE CANOVA and NICHOLAS GOODBODY (Instructors)
FOX (Sponsor)
Jane Canova is the Administrative Director of Center for Foreign Languages Literatures and Cultures at Williams College. Nicholas Goodbody is Visiting
Assistant Professor of Spanish.
337
RLSP 30 Honors Essay
To be taken by candidates for honors other than by thesis route.
RLSP 31 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Spanish 493-494.
RUSSIAN
RUSS S.P. Sustaining Program for Russian 101-102
Required of all students enrolled in Russian 101-102. Three meetings per week, 50 minutes per session. Practice in speaking and comprehension based on materi-
al already covered as well as some new vocabulary and constructions. Designed to maintain and enhance what was acquired during fall semester, using new
approaches in a relaxed atmosphere. No homework.
Regular attendance and active participation required to earn a "Pass." Open to all.
Meeting time: mornings; 9-9:50 a.m.
INYASHKIN
RUSS 16 Chekhov, An Unlikely Revolutionary (Same as Comparative Literature 16, Philosophy 16, and Theatre 16)
(See under PHIL 16 for full description.) MILOS MLADENOVIC
RUSS 25 Williams in Georgia (Same as Special 25)
Williams has a unique program in the Republic of Georgia, which offers students the opportunity to engage in three-week-long internships in any field. Our
students have worked in the Georgian Parliament, helped in humanitarian relief organizations like Save the Children, interned in journalism at The Georgian
Times, taught unemployed women computer skills at The Rustavi Project, documented wildlife, studied with a Georgian sculptor, done rounds at the Institute of
Cardiology, and learned about transitional economies at the Georgian National Bank. In addition to working in their chosen fields, students experience Georgian
culture through museum visits, concerts, lectures, meetings with Georgian students, and excursions. Visit the sacred eleventh-century Cathedral of Sveti-tskhoveli
and the twentieth-century Stalin Museum, take the ancient Georgian Military Highway to ski in the Caucasus Range, see the birthplace of the wine grape in
Kakheti and the region where Jason sought the Golden Fleece. Participants are housed in pairs with English-speaking families in Tbilisi, Georgia's capital city.
At the end of the course students will write a 10-page paper assessing their internship experience.
Knowledge of Russian or Georgian is not required.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 8. Not open to first-year students.
Cost: approximately $2000.
SECKLER
RUSS 30 Honors Project
May be taken by candidates for honors other than by thesis route.
RUSS 31 Senior Thesis
To be taken by students registered for Russian 493-494.
SOCIOLOGY--See under ANTHROPOLOGY AND SOCIOLOGY
THEATRE
THEA 10 Playwriting Studio: Art of the Everyday
This is a studio course designed for students interested in exploring what it means to write realism for today's theatre. Inspired by contemporary dramatists, like
Annie Baker and Elizabeth Meriwether, as well as photographers, like Alec Soth and Stephen Shore, the class will focus on gaining an appreciation for the "art of
the everyday." Participants will be asked to examine the daily, perhaps mundane, aspects of their own "realities" and form them into something meaningful for the
stage. This class will involve extensive in-class writing and revising.
Students will complete weekly exercises and work towards a larger 10- to 12-page one-act project.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 10. Preference given to Studio Art, Art History, Theatre, and English majors.
Cost: $0.
Meeting time: mornings.
HOLZAPFEL
THEA 15 CAMP IT UP! The Politics of Queer Performance (Same as History 15 and Theatre 15)
(See under WGSS 15 for full description.) FISHZON
THEA 16 Chekhov, An Unlikely Revolutionary (Same as Comparative Literature 16, Philosophy 16, and Russian 16)
(See under PHIL 16 for full description.) MILOS MLADENOVIC
THEA 17 Cabaret: Creation and Performance
This studio class will be dedicated to the creation and performance of original cabaret performance. Students will develop skills in song writing, staging, character
development, performance and the use of the emotional voice through the creation of their own short cabaret performances individually or in small groups. The
official class meetings (6 hours/week in the studio) will have to be supported by substantial commitment to collaborative work and rehearsal.
Evaluation will be based on the final performance.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 15. Preference given to Theatre and Music majors.
Cost: $0.
Meeting time: afternoons.
ABIGAIL and SHAUN BENGSON (Instructors)
BAKER-WHITE (Sponsor)
The Bengsons are internationally renowned performers, activists, and teachers, known for developing their own unique brand of performance dubbed Vaude-
villian Indie Folk.
THEA 32 Senior Honors Thesis
See description of Degree with Honors in Theatre.
WOMEN'S, GENDER AND SEXUALITY STUDIES
WGSS 12 Alternative Birth Choices (Same as Psychology 12)
(See under PSYC 12 for full description.)
WGST 13 Understanding Similarities, Bridging Differences (Same as Africana Studies 13 and Latina/o Studies 13)
(See under LEAD 13 for full description.) TAJ SMITH (Instructor)
KITTLESON (Sponsor)
WGSS 14 Plato's Symposium and Its Afterlife (Same as Classics 14, Comparative Literature 14, and Philosophy 14)
(See under CLAS 14 for full description.) WILCOX
WGSS 15 CAMP IT UP! The Politics of Queer Performance (Same as History 15 and Women's, Gender and Sexuality Studies 15)
(See under WGSS 15 for full description.) FISHZON
WGSS 16 Contemporary Queer Cinema in France (Same as French 16)
(See under RLFR 16 for full description.) MARTIN
338
WGSS 28 Sex and the First Amendment (Same as History 28)
(See under HIST 28 for full description.) JOAN BERTIN
WGSS 30 Honors Project
To be taken by candidates for honors other than by thesis route.
SPECIALS
SPEC 10 Quest for College: Early Awareness in Berkshire County Schools
Today's extremely competitive higher education market places significant pressure on students nationwide to start planning for college at an increasingly early
age while simultaneously demanding ever-higher standards of excellence for admission to top schools. "Early Awareness" initiatives aim to educate middle
school students as to what lies ahead on the college horizon, empowering them to make sound academic and extracurricular choices that will keep open a maxi-
mum of options. The first week of this course will be spent in the classroom, exploring and discussing problems and issues germane to the national trends towards
greater (and earlier) college-related pressures. Students will respond to a series of readings dealing with such issues as tracking, paid test preparation and untimed
testing, early decision, parental and peer pressures, special interests, misrepresentation of information, independent counseling, and others. Class time will also be
devoted to familiarizing students with both the nuances of the college admission process, visiting other higher educational institutions in Berkshire County, and
learning how to facilitate the early awareness game, Quest for College. Students will spend the next two weeks visiting 10-12 Berkshire County middle classes,
administering the game. If student and community interest is sufficient, the course may culminate in a public presentation and open forum regarding early college
awareness initiatives.
Evaluation will be based on completion of field work (school visits), organization and a final paper (approximately 10 pages) reflecting on a course-related issue
of the student's choosing.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 8. Preference given to a) students with prior experience working with middle school aged youth, b) students who can be
approved to operate college vehicles c) juniors and seniors. Interested students must consult with the instructor prior to registration.
Cost: reading packet and meals while off campus.
Meeting time: mornings.
GINA COLEMAN `90 (Instructor)
WSP COMMITTEE (Sponsor)
Gina Coleman `90 is Associate Dean of Students and Head Women's Rugby Coach. Coleman, who holds a Ph.D. in Educational Leadership and Policy from
the University of Nebraska, designed the early college awareness board game used in the course, Quest for College.
SPEC 11 Science for Kids (Same as Chemistry 11)
(See under CHEM 11 for full description.)
SPEC 12 The Amber Room and Hidden Treasures: Impressionist Art Held Hostage? (Same as Astronomy 11 and History 11)
(See under ASTR 11 for full description.) MARGO R. BOWDEN
SPEC 14 Beyond Hooking Up: Creating Meaningful Relationships (Same as Chemistry 14 and Psychology 14)
(See under CHEM 14 for full description.)
SPEC 15 Contemporary American Songwriter (Same as American Studies 15 and Music 15)
This course will focus on learning how to write and perform songs in a contemporary style. Topics addressed will include song structure, how to create a lyric that
communicates, vocal and instrument presentation, recording and performing techniques, publicity for events, and today's music industry. This class will culmi-
nate in a public performance of material written during the course. To successfully pass this course, students are required to create, edit, perform, and possibly
record two original songs. These songs must be conceived during the course period (previously written material in not usable). Students will be guided to create
both music and lyrics. They may also be required to participate in a co-write session. One of these songs will be presented during the final performance, preferably
by the student. Attendance at classes, feedback sessions, and final presentation is mandatory. Please note: this class meets every day. A short writing assignment
will be passed in on the last day of class.
No prerequisites. Students with a musical background and the ability to play an instrument may be given preference, but anyone interested is encouraged to
register. (Bernice.Lewis@wililams.edu). Enrollment limit: 15.
Cost: books plus $35 lab fee for recording and xeroxing costs.
Meeting time: M, Tu, W, Th, F 10 a.m.-noon.
BERNICE LEWIS (Instructor)
WINTER STUDY COMMITTEE (Sponsor)
Bernice Lewis is an accomplished singer, songwriter, producer and educator. She has been a national touring artist for over twenty years and has performed
at the Kerrville Folk Festival, PBS's Mountain Stage, and the Kennedy Center in Washington, D.C. She was recently chosen by the National Park Service
to be an Artist in Residence. She has released six recordings of original material.
SPEC 17 Learning Intervention For Troubled Teens (LIFTT) (Same as ANSO 17 and Legal Studies 17)
(See under LGST 17 for full description.)
SPEC 19 Medical Apprenticeship
Firsthand experience is a critical component of the decision to enter the health professions. Through this apprenticeship, students can clarify their understanding
of the rewards and challenges that accompany the practice of all types of medicine. Apprenticeships are arranged in two distinct ways: some students live on
campus and are matched with a local practitioner, while others make independent arrangements to shadow a distant professional. The expectation is that each
student will observe some aspect of medicine for the better part of the day, five days per week. In recent years, students have shadowed physicians, veterinarians,
dentists, nurses, and public health experts.
A 5-page reflective paper is required, as is attendance (for those shadowing near campus) at three Tuesday evening programs. Students will meet from 6:30-8:30
p.m. over dinner to hear from invited speakers from the medical community as a stimulus to discussion about their apprenticeship experiences.
Prerequisites: Interested students must attend an information meeting in early October. Local enrollment is limited by the number of available practitioners.
Preference for placements will be given on the basis of seniority and demonstrated interest in the health professions.
Cost: local apprenticeships: required vaccinations, local transportation and possibly lunches. Distant apprenticeships: costs will vary based upon location.
TEACHING ASSOCIATES (Instructors): STEVEN ANISMAN, M.D.; DAVID ARMET. P.T.; CHILDSY ART, M.D.; DEBORAH AUGUST, M.D.; VICTO-
RIA CAVALLI, M.D.; JONATHAN CLUETT, M.D.; LEE DELANEY, D.V.M.; MARIANNE DEMARCO, M.D.; MICHAEL DISIENA. D.O..; PAUL DO-
NOVAN, D.O.; SIMON DREW, M.D.; STUART DUBUFF, M.D.; WILLIAM DUKE, M.D.; ROBERT FANELLI, M.D.; WADE GEBERA, M.D.; DAVID
GORSON, M.D.; ALISON HASTINGS, D.O..; DEBORAH HENLEY, M.D.; ERIC HOLMGREN, D..D.S./M.D.; JUDITH HOLMGREN, M.D.; ORION
HOWARD, M.D.; LAURA JONES, D.V.M.; JOSHUA KLEEDERMAN, D.M.D.; WILLIAM KOBER, M.D.; JONATHAN KRANT, M.D.; WILLIAM
LEVY, M.D.; REBECCA MATTSON, D.V.M.; MARK MCDERMOTT, M.D.; RONALD MENSH, M.D.; GRAHAM MOORE, M.D.; BORIS MURILLO,
M.D.; CHARLES O'NEILL, M.D.; JUDY ORTON, M.D.; DANIEL PERREGAUX, M.D.; FERNANDO PONCE, M.D.; RICHARD PROVENZANO,
M.D.; DANIEL ROBBINS, M.D.; OSCAR RODRIGUEZ, M.D.; SCOTT ROGGE, M.D.; PAUL ROSENTHAL, M.D.; ROBERT SILLS, M.D.; THE-
MARGE SMALL, M.D.; ANTHONY SMEGLIN, M.D.; ANNE MARIE SWANN, M.D.; ELIZABETH TOOMAJIAN, N.P.; SPYRIDON TRIANTOS,
M.D.; ELIZABETH WARNER, M.D.; ELIZABETH WHATLEY, M.D.; JAMES WHITTUM, M.D.; KATIE WOLFGANG, D.V.M.; NICHOLAS WRIGHT,
M.D.; JEFFREY YUCHT, M.D.; MARK ZIMPFER, M.D.; and others.
JANE CARY Health Professions Advisor
SPEC 21 Experience the Workplace: an Internship with Williams Alumni/Parents
Field experience is a critical element in the decision to enter a profession. Through this internship, students can clarify their understanding of the rewards and
challenges that accompany the practice of many different aspects within a profession, and understand the psychology of the workplace. Internship placements are
arranged through the Office of Career Counseling, with selected alumni and parent acting as on-site teaching associates. The expectation is that each student will
observe some aspect of the profession for the better part of the day, five days per week. It is also expected that the teaching associate will assign a specific project
to be completed within the three-to-four week duration of the course depending upon appropriateness.
It is expected that students will complete assigned readings, keep a daily journal, and write a 5- to 10-page expository review and evaluation that will become
public record as a resource for other students. The expectation is that each student will be in the field to observe some aspect of the profession for the better part of
the day, five days per week. In addition to observation there may be an opportunity to
Prerequisites: interested students must attend an information meeting in early October, and meet individually with John Noble to go over the details of their
339
placements. Preference for placements will be given on the basis of seniority and demonstrated interest in the profession of interest.
Enrollment is limited by the number of available teaching associates (instructors). Preference for placements will be given on the basis of seniority and demon-
strated interest in the profession of interest. Teaching associates will make the final selections.
Meeting Times: each student will be in the field to observe some aspect of the profession five days per week, at least 6 hours per day.
Cost: Local apprenticeships--local transportation. Distant apprenticeships--costs will vary based upon location, BUT ARE THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE
STUDENT. The college has no extraordinary funding to support the internship.
Teaching Associates (instructors): Williams College alumni and parents of current Williams students will be recruited to become instructors for this course. A
broad range of professions will be represented as the course develops. Alumni and parents will receive individual orientations with the course director in person or
via telephone conference.
JOHN NOBLE, Director of the Office of Career Counseling
SPEC 25 Williams in Georgia (Same as Russian 25)
(See under RUSS 25 for full description.)
SPEC 26 Travel Course: Resettling Refugees in Maine (Same as History 26)
Sponsored by the Gaudino Scholar and the Gaudino Fund in 2008, 2009, 2010 and 2011, this Winter Study travel course will allow a small group of students to
live in Portland, Maine for the month of January 2011, where they will experience and explore the impact of over thirty years of refugee resettlement in the
`whitest' of the United States. Each student will live with a refugee family from one of the dozens of countries represented by the refugee communities of Portland
and work with a service provider, and will encounter first-hand the issues confronting recent immigrants to the United States from Southeast Asia, Africa, Eastern
Europe or Latin America. While only 4 hours from Williams, Portland students speak almost 60 languages in the school system. WSP students will learn a great
deal not only about others, but also about their own assumptions and values. Students will be exposed to such issues as race, ethnicity, and national identity; the
interplay of public and private values; and the wide variety of educational, health, governmental, and religious agencies and providers serving refugee families
Students meet weekly with the course instructor to discuss how their experiences are going; they will also attend arranged community meetings or events. Stu-
dents as a group will also have time in Maine at the beginning of the program for an orientation session, and at the conclusion to share experiences with each other
and write a short reflection paper.
No prerequisites. Enrollment limit: 6; not open to first year students. If student interest exceeds the enrollment limit, preference will be given to those students who
demonstrate, in a short conversation with and 1-page essay submitted to the instructor, their interest in experiential learning generally and the problems con-
fronting recent immigrants to the United States specifically.
Cost: here will be a small per diem paid to each host family for room and board. For financial aid students, costs for this WSP travel course will be paid by the
Gaudino Fund.
JEFF THALER '74 (Instructor)
BERNHARDSSON (Sponsor)
Jeff Thaler '74 participated in Williams-at-Home with Professor Robert Gaudino in 1971-72. After Professor Gaudino's death in 1974, Jeff and some other
alumni developed an initiative that eventually became the Gaudino Memorial Fund. Jeff served on the Board of the Fund for many years, including as its
Chair; in 2010 he was elected to come back onto the Board,and now is Vice-Chair. Jeff graduated from Yale Law School in 1977, worked as a public defender
in New York City from 1977-79, and has lived in Maine since 1979, where he has works as a trial and environmental attorney. He taught a course on refugee
issues as an adjunct professor at the University of Southern Maine, as well as courses at Maine Law School and Bowdoin College. Jeff has volunteered with
many refugee groups in Portland; was elected in 2009 to the Williams College Tyng Scholarship Committee; and has worked as a group facilitator for the
past ten years at the Center for Grieving Children.
SPEC 28 Teaching Practica in New York City Schools
Students in this course learn about the front-line challenges of urban public education by working in one of New York City's public schools. Participants will be
expected to pursue a full day's program of observing, teaching, tutoring and mentoring in their choice of more than 20 different school situations from elementary
through high school. Each of the participating schools will have a resident supervisor who will meet with the January interns to arrange individual schedules and
provide mentoring during the month. There will be weekly seminar meetings of all the interns who are expected to participate in group discussions, keep a journal
and write a 5 page paper reflecting upon their experience. The course will conduct orientation meetings with students prior to January, matching each student's
interest with appropriate teaching subject areas and a host school. Dormitory-style housing will be provided along with some assistance with transportation and
food costs-estimated at $400 for the term. Further assistance is available for financial aid students.
Evaluation will be based on a journal and a 5-page paper.
Prerequisites: sophomore, junior or senior standing. Enrollment limit: 12.
Cost: $400.
Meeting time: off-campus fieldwork: daily 8:30 a.m.-3 p.m. and weekly seminar dinners.
TRACY FINNEGAN (Instructor)
WINTER STUDY COMMITTEE (Sponsor)
Tracy Finnegan is a master's level teacher with training and teaching experience in a variety of approaches and settings.
SPEC 35 Making Pottery on the Potter's Wheel
Each class will begin with a lecture-demonstration, followed by practice on the potter's wheel. Each student will have the use of a potter's wheel for each class.
We will work on mugs, bowls, pitchers, plates, jars, lids, vases, and bottles, and will finish these shapes as required by trimming and adding handles, lugs, lids,
spouts, and knobs. We will also work on several different handbuilding projects. After the tenth class session, all class work will be biscuit-fired. The eleventh
class will be devoted to glazing the biscuited pieces. Glazing techniques will include pouring, dipping, layering, brushing, and stamping, and using wax resist and
other masking techniques to develop pattern and design. The completed work will then be glaze-fired. The last meeting will be devoted to a "final project" gallery
show of your best work. Woven into lecture-demonstrations will be presentations on various topics relating to the science and history of pottery making.
Requirements: attendance at all class sessions and enthusiasm for learning the craft of pottery making.
No prerequisites or potterymaking experience necessary. Enrollment limit: 9.
Cost: $300 lab fee, plus makeup class fees ($45.00 per class) if applicable.
Meeting time: mornings.
RAY BUB (Instructor)
WINTER STUDY COMMITTEE (Sponsor)
Ray Bub is a ceramic artist and teacher at Oak Bluffs Cottage Pottery in Pownal, Vermont, 10 minutes north of the Williams College campus. All classes except
the slide show and final project exhibition take place at Oak Bluffs Cottage Pottery.
SPEC 39 "Composing a Life:" Finding Success and Balance in Life After Williams
To be at Williams you have learned to be a successful student, but how do you learn to be successful in life? How will you define success in both your career and
in your personal life? How will you achieve balance between the two? In short, what will constitute the "good life" for you? We borrow the concept of "compos-
ing a life" from Mary Catherine Bateson, as an apt metaphor for the ongoing process of defining success and balance in life. This course is designed: (1) To offer
college students an opportunity to examine and define their beliefs, values, and assumptions about their future personal and professional lives before entering the
"real" world; (2) To encourage students to gain a better understanding of how culture, ideology, and opportunity affect their life choices; (3) To provide an oppor-
tunity for students to consider different models of success and balance through "living cases" (in the form of guests from various professions and lifestyles); and
(4) To aid students in contemplating their life/career options through individual advising and introducing various career and life planning resources. Using se-
lected readings, cases, and guest speakers, we will explore both the public context of the workplace as well as the private context of individuals and their personal
relationships in determining life choices.
Requirements: regular attendance, class participation, field interview, and a 10-page final paper
Weekly assignments include cases and readings from a variety of related fields, and some self-reflection exercises
No prerequisites. Questions about the course: please contact Michele Moeller Chandler at (413) 458-8106 or michele.chandler2@verizon.net Enrollment limit:
15.
Cost: approximately $30-$35 for cases/reading materials
Meeting time: mornings, two-hour classes three times a week
MICHELE MOELLER CHANDLER and CHIP CHANDLER (Instructors)
TOOMAJIAN (Sponsor)
Michele Moeller Chandler ('73) and Chip Chandler ('72) have taught this Winter Study course for the past fifteen years. They have been both personally and
professionally engaged in the course topic. Michele, a former college administrator, has an M.A. from Columbia, and a Ph.D. from Northwestern. Chip, a
retired McKinsey senior partner, has an M.B.A. from Harvard, and currently teaches in the Leadership Studies Program.
340
WILLIAMS PROGRAM IN TEACHING
Students interested in exploring one or more of the following courses related to teaching and/or working with children and adolescents should con-
tact Susan Engel, Director of Education Programs, who will be able to help you choose one that best suits your educational goals.
ANSO 12 Children and the Courts: Internship in the Crisis in Child Abuse
(See under ANSO 12 for full description.)
BIOL 11 Project BioEyes: Zebrafish Genetics and Development in the K-12 Classroom
(See under BIOL 11 for full description.)
CHEM 11 Science for Kids (Same as Special 11)
(See under CHEM 11 for full description.)
ENVI 14 Environmental Ed--What, Why, and How
(See under ENVI 14 for full description.)
LGST 17 Learning Intervention For Troubled Teens (LIFTT) (Same as Special 17)
(See under LGST 17 for full description.)
SPEC 28 Teaching Practica in New York City Schools
(See under SPEC 28 for full description.)
WILLIAMS-MYSTIC PROGRAM IN AMERICAN MARITIME STUDIES
An interdisciplinary one-semester program co-sponsored by Williams College and Mystic Seaport which includes credit for one winter study.
Classes in maritime history, literature of the sea, marine ecology, oceanography, and marine policy are supplemented by field seminars: offshore sailing,
Pacific Coast and Louisiana. For details, see "Williams-Mystic Maritime Studies Program" or our website: www.williams.edu/williamsmystic.
341
PRESIDENTS OF WILLIAMS
Ebenezer Fitch, D.D., 1793-1815
Zephaniah Swift Moore, D.D., 1815-1821
Edward Dorr Griffin, D.D., 1821-1836
Mark Hopkins, M.D., D.D., LL.D., 1836-1872
Paul Ansel Chadbourne, D.D., LL.D., 1872-1881
Franklin Carter, Ph.D., LL.D., 1881-1901
John Haskell Hewitt, LL.D., Acting President, 1901-1902
Henry Hopkins, D.D., LL.D., 1902-1908
Harry Augustus Garfield, L.H.D., LL.D., 1908-1934
Tyler Dennett, Ph.D., Litt.D., LL.D., 1934-1937
James Phinney Baxter, 3rd, Ph.D., Litt.D., L.H.D., D.Sc., LL.D., 1937-1961
John Edward Sawyer, M.A., LL.D., Litt.D., L.H.D., 1961-1973
John Wesley Chandler, Ph.D., LL.D., L.H.D., 1973-1985
Francis Christopher Oakley, Ph.D., L.H.D., Litt.D., LL.D., 1985-1993
Harry Charles Payne, Ph.D., Litt.D., LL.D., 1994-1999
Carl William Vogt, LL.B., LL.D., 1999-2000
Morton Owen Schapiro, M.A., Ph.D., LL.D., L.H.D., 2000-2009
William Gilson Wagner, B.Phil., D.Phil., Interim President, 2009-2010
Adam F. Falk, Ph.D., 2010-
TRUSTEES 2010-2011
Adam F. Falk, Ph.D., L.L.D., President
Gregory M. Avis '80, M.B.A., Palo Alto, California, Chairman of the Board of Trustees
William E. Simon, Jr. '73, J.D., A.M.P., Los Angeles, California
Michael B. Keating '62, LL.B., Boston, Massachusetts
Laurie J. Thomsen '79, M.B.A., Concord, Massachusetts
A. Clayton Spencer '77, M.A., J.D., Cambridge, Massachusetts
Jonathan A. Kraft '86, M.B.A., Foxboro, Massachusetts
Stephen Harty '73, M.P.P.M., Irvington, New York
Robert G. Scott '68, M.B.A., New York, New York
Barbara A. Austell '75, B.A., Villanova, Pennsylvania
Yvonne Hao '95, M.A., New York, New York
Valda Clark Christian '92, J.D., Miami, Florida
David C. Bowen '83, M.B.A., Brooklyn, New York
Michael R. Eisenson '77, M.B.A., J.D., Boston, Massachusetts
Glenn D. Lowry '76, M.A., Ph.D., New York, New York
Frederick M. Lawrence '77, J.D., Washington, D.C.
Fred Nathan, Jr. '83, J.D., Sante Fe, New Mexico
Sarah Keohane Williamson '84, M.B.A., Boston, Massachusetts
Kate L. Queeney '92, Ph.D., Amherst, Massachusetts
Joey Shaista Horn '87, M.B.A., Oslo, Norway
Patrick F. Bassett '70, M.A., Washington, D.C.
Eric L. Cochran '82, M.S., J.D., New York, New York
Robin Powell Mandjes '82, M.B.A., Cambridge, Massachusetts
342
TRUSTEE COMMITTEES 2010-2011
Reported below are the committee appointments for 2010-2011. Changes in the 2011-2012 assignments will be posted in
the fall.
Executive Committee: The President*, Gregory M. Avis, Chair; Michael R. Eisenson, Yvonne Hao, Stephen Harty, Mi-
chael B. Keating, Robert G. Scott, William E. Simon, Jr., A. Clayton Spencer.
Investment Committee: Michael R. Eisenson, Chair; Gregory M. Avis, Jonathan A. Kraft, William E. Simon, Jr., Laurie J.
Thomsen, Sarah K. Williamson.
Faculty and Instruction Committee: Stephen Harty, Chair; Thomas M. Balderston, Patrick F. Bassett, Michael R. Eisen-
son, Yvonne Hao, Robin Powell Mandjes, Kate L. Queeney, A. Clayton Spencer.
Committee on Alumni Relations, Development and Public Affairs: Valda Clark Christian, Chair; Thomas M. Balderston,
David C. Bowen, Christopher F. Giglio, Robin Powell Mandjes, Kate L. Queeney, Laurie J. Thomsen.
Student Experience Committee: Robert G. Scott, Chair; David C. Bowen, Valda Clark Christian, Eric L. Cochran, Michael
R. Eisenson, Stephen Harty, Kate L. Queeney, Laurie J. Thomsen, Sarah K. Williamson.
Audit Committee: Barbara A. Austell, Chair; Thomas M. Balderston, Yvonne Hao, Jonathan A. Kraft, Robin Powell
Mandjes, Fred Nathan, Jr.
Operations and Planning Committee: Jonathan A. Kraft, Chair; David C. Bowen, Eric L. Cochran, Joey S. Horn, Glenn D.
Lowry, William E. Simon, Jr., Sarah K. Williamson.
Committee on Degrees: A. Clayton Spencer, Chair, Joey S. Horn, ViceChair; Patrick F. Bassett, Christopher F. Giglio,
Michael B. Keating, Glenn D. Lowry, William E. Simon, Jr.
Budget and Financial Planning Committee: William E. Simon, Jr., Chair; Michael R. Eisenson, Joey S. Horn, Jonathan A.
Kraft, Glenn D. Lowry, Fred Nathan, Jr., Robert G. Scott, Sarah K. Williamson.
Governance Committee: Michael B. Keating, Chair, A. Clayton Spencer, ViceChair; Barbara A. Austell, Patrick F. Bas-
sett, Eric L. Cochran, Yvonne Hao, Stephen Harty.
Nominating Committee: Laurie J. Thomsen, Chair; Barbara A. Austell, Valda Clark Christian, Christopher F. Giglio, Mi-
chael B. Keating, Fred Nathan, Jr., Robert G. Scott.
____________
*The President is an exofficio member of all Trustee committees.
343
FACULTY EMERITI
Roger E. Bolton William Brough Professor of Economics, Emeritus 30 Grandview Drive
David A. Booth Vice Provost and Lecturer in Political Science, Emeritus 44 Willshire Drive
James R. Briggs Assistant Professor of Physical Education, Emeritus 350 Stratton Road
Eleanor Brown Lecturer in Biology, Emerita Westwood, Massachusetts
Fielding Brown Charles L. MacMillan Professor of Physics, Emeritus Westwood, Massachusetts
Kim B. Bruce Frederick Latimer Wells Professor of Computer Science, Emeritus Claremont, California
Henry J. Bruton John J. Gibson Professor of Economics, Emeritus 300 Syndicate Road
James MacGregor Burns Woodrow Wilson Professor of Government, Emeritus 604 Bee Hill Road
John W. Chandler President of the College, Emeritus 416 N Hemlock Lane
Raymond Chang Halford R. Clark Professor of Natural Sciences, Emeritus 146 Forest Road
Phebe Cramer Professor of Psychology, Emerita 20 Forest Road
Stuart J. B. Crampton Barclay Jermain Professor of Natural Philosophy, Emeritus 54 Grandview Drive
Andrew B. Crider Mary A. & William Wirt Warren Professor of Psychology, Emeritus 770 Hancock Road
Phyllis L. Cutler College Librarian, Emerita Milton, Massachusetts
Samuel Y. Edgerton Jr. Amos Lawrence Professor of Art, Emeritus 940 Hancock Road
John D. Eusden Nathan Jackson Professor of Christian Theology, Emeritus Brunswick, Maine
William T. Fox Edward Brust Professor of Geology and Mineralogy, Emeritus 51 Moorland Street
Robert W. Friedrichs Professor of Sociology, Emeritus Exeter, New Hampshire
Peter K. Frost Frederich L. Schuman Professor of International Relations, Emeritus Oxford, Mississippi
Charles Fuqua Garfield Professor of Ancient Languages, Emeritus 96 Grandview Drive
Antonio Gimenez Professor of Romance Languages, Emeritus Madrid, Spain
William C. Grant Jr. Samuel Fessenden Clarke Professor of Biology, Emeritus 155 Sweetbrook Road
Suzanne L. Graver John Hawley Roberts Professor of English, Emerita 117 Forest Road
Fred Greene A. Barton Hepburn Professor of Government, Emeritus 135 South Street
Philip K. Hastings Professor of Psychology and Political Science,Emeritus 156 Bulkley Street
Victor E. Hill IV Thomas T. Read Professor of Mathematics, Emeritus North Adams, Massachusetts
John M. Hyde Brown Professor of History, Emeritus 20 Jerome Drive
Robert M. Kozelka Professor of Mathematics, Emeritus Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Benjamin W. Labaree Professor of History and Environmental Studies, Emeritus Amesbury, Massachusetts
Renzie W. Lamb Assistant Professor of Physical Education, Emeritus 34 Jerome Drive
Kai N. Lee Rosenburg Professor of Environmental Studies, Emeritus Piedmont, California
H. Ganse Little Jr. Cluett Professor of Religion, Emeritus Amherst, Massachusetts
John A. MacFadyen Jr. Edna McConnell Clark Professor of Geology, Emeritus Stonington, Connecticut
William E. McCormick Assistant Professor of Physical Education, Emeritus Springhill, Florida
Thomas E. McGill Hales Professor of Psychology, Emeritus Tiverton, Rhode Island
Douglas B. Moore Mary A. and William Wirt Warren Professor of Music, Emeritus 108 S Hemlock Brook
Francis Oakley Edward Dorr Griffin Professor of the History of Ideas, Emeritus; President,
Emeritus; and Senior Oakley Fellow 54 Scott Hill Road
Daniel D. O'Connor Mark Hopkins Professor of Intellectual and Moral Philosophy, Emeritus 36 Hawthorne Road
Robert H. Odell Assistant Professor of Physical Education, Emeritus Westchester, Pennsylvania
David A. Park Webster Atwell Class of 1921 Professor of Physics, Emeritus 29 Hoxsey Street
Robert R. Peck Director of Athletics, Emeritus Pownal, Vermont
344
Norman R. Petersen Jr. Washington Gladden 1859 Professor of Religion, Emeritus Bristol, Rhode Island
C. Ballard Pierce Professor of Physics, Emeritus Los Alamos, New Mexico
George Pistorius Gagliardi Professor of Romance Languages, Emeritus 54 Cluett Drive
Kenneth C. Roberts Jr. A. Barton Hepburn Professor of Music, Emeritus Bennington, Vermont
Richard O. Rouse Mary A. & William Wirt Warren Professor of Psychology, Emeritus 85 Harmon Pond Road
Frederick Rudolph Mark Hopkins Professor of History, Emeritus 234 Ide Road
Carl R. Samuelson Assistant Professor of Physical Education, Emeritus 575 Water Street
Irwin Shainman Class of 1955 Memorial Professor of Music, Emeritus 88 Baxter Road
John B. Sheahan William Brough Professor of Economics, Emeritus 320 Syndicate Road
Guilford L. Spencer II Frederic Latimer Wells Professor of Mathematics, Emeritus Lenox, Massachusetts
Richard H. Stamelman Professor of Comparative Literature, Emeritus Norwich, Vermont
Robert C. Suderburg Class of 1924 Professor of Music, Emeritus 41 Manning Street
Kurt P. Tauber Class of 1924 Professor of Political Science, Emeritus 94 Southworth Street
Mark C. Taylor Cluett Professor of Humanities, Emeritus 235 Stone Hill Road
Gordon C. Winston Professor of Economics and Orrin Sage Professor of Political Economy, Emeritus
4 Windflower Way
 345 
FACULTY 2011-2012
*On leave 2011-2012
* *On leave first semester
* **On leave second semester
** **On leave calendar year (January-December 2011)
Sayaka Abe, Visiting Assistant Professor of Japanese--B.A. (1997) State University of New York, Buffalo; Ph.D. (2007) State University of New York, Buffalo
Colin C. Adams, Thomas T. Read Professor of Mathematics--B.S. (1978) M.I.T.; Ph.D. (1983) University of Wisconsin
Jason Adams, Visiting Assistant Professor of Political Science--B.A. (2002) Evergreen State College; Ph.D. (2010) University of Hawaii, Honolulu
**Jeannie R Albrecht, Assistant Professor of Computer Science--B.S. (2001) Gettysburg College; Ph.D. (2007) University of California, San Diego
Laylah Ali, Professor of Art--B.A. (1991) Williams; M.F.A. (1994) Washington University
Marsha I. Altschuler, Professor of Biology--B.S. (1972) University of Rochester; Ph.D. (1979) Indiana University
*Henry W. Art, Rosenburg Professor of Environmental Studies and Biology--A.B. (1966) Dartmouth; Ph.D. (1971) Yale
Jillian M. Baez, Visiting Assistant Professor of Latina/o Studies, First Semester and Winter Study Period--B.A. (2003) Hunter College,
City University of New York; Ph.D. (2009) University of Illinois
Duane A. Bailey, Professor of Computer Science--B.A. (1982) Amherst College; Ph.D. (1988) University of Massachusetts
Robert Baker-White, Professor of Theatre--B.A. (1980) Williams; Ph.D (1990) Stanford
***Jon M. Bakija, Professor of Economics--B.A. (1990) Wesleyan; Ph.D. (1999) University of Michigan
Lois M. Banta, Associate Professor of Biology--B.A. (1983) Johns Hopkins; Ph.D. (1990) California Institute of Technology
Bill Barrale, Assistant Professor of Physical Education--B.A. (1994) Northeastern; M.A. (2004) Rowan University
Andrea Barrett, Lecturer in English--B.S. (1974) Union College
**Melissa J. Barry, Associate Professor of Philosophy--B.A. (1988) Wheaton; Ph.D. (1998) Notre Dame
Donald deB Beaver, Professor of History of Science--A.B. (1958) Harvard; Ph.D. (1966) Yale
**Olga R. Beaver, Professor of Mathematics--B.A. (1968) University of Missouri; Ph.D. (1979) University of Massachusett
Ilona D. Bell, Samuel Fessenden Clarke Professor of English--B.A. (1969) Radcliffe; Ph.D. (1977) Boston College
Robert H. Bell, Frederick Latimer Wells Professor of English --B.A. (1967) Dartmouth; Ph.D. (1972) Harvard
Gene H. Bell-Villada, Professor of Romance Languages--B.A. (1963) University of Arizona; Ph.D. (1974) Harvard
Ben Benedict, Lecturer in Art--B.A. (1973) Yale; M.Arch. (1976) Yale School of Architecture
Devyn Spence Benson, Assistant Professor of Africana Studies and History--B.A. (2001) University of North Carolina;
Ph.D. (2009) University of North Carolina
Magnus T. Bernhardsson, Associate Professor of History--B.A. (1990) University of Iceland, Ph.D. (1999) Yale
Dieter Bingemann, Associate Professor of Chemistry--Ph.D. (1994) University Gottengen, Germany
M. Jennifer Bloxam, Professor of Music--B.M. (1979) University of Illinois; Ph.D. (1987) Yale
Christopher A. Bolton, Assistant Professor of Comparative Literature--A.B. (1989) Harvard; Ph.D. (1998) Stanford
Sarah R. Bolton, Professor of Physics--B.S. (1988) Brown; Ph.D. (1995) University of California, Berkeley
Carsten Botts, Assistant Professor of Statistics--B.S. (1998) Georgetown; Ph.D. (2005) Iowa State University
**Ralph M. Bradburd, David A. Wells Professor of Political Economy--B.A. (1970) Columbia; Ph.D. (1976) Columbia
Rashida K. Braggs, Assistant Professor of Africana Studies--B.A. (2002) Yale; Ph.D. (2006) Northwestern University
Donald Brooks, Assistant Professor of Physical Education and Assistant Football Coach--B.A. (2002) Springfield College; M.S. (2006) Springfield College
Fletcher Brooks, Assistant Professor of Physical Education and Head Coach of Men s and Women s Track and Field--B.A. (1993) Allegheny College;
M.A. (1998) Springfield College
Celine Brossillon, Visiting Assistant Professor of French Language--B.A. (1997) Francois Rabelais; M.A. (2004) StendhalGrenoble II University
**Deborah A. Brothers, Costume Director and Lecturer in Theatre--B.A. (1976) University of New Orleans; M.F.A. (1979) California Institute ofthe Arts
**Ernest D. Brown, Professor of Music--B.A. (1969) Harvard; Ph.D. (1984) University of Washington
*Leslie Brown, Associate Professor of History--B.A. (1977) Tufts University; Ph.D. (1997) Duke University
*Michael F. Brown, James N. Lambert 39 Professor of Latin American Studies--A.B. (1972) Princeton; Ph.D. (1981) University of Michigan
Henry J. Bruton, Visiting Professor of Economics--B.A. (1943) Texas; Ph.D. (1952) Harvard
Jean-Bernard Bucky, William Dwight Whitney Professor of Arts--B.S. (1958) Queens, C.U.N.Y.; M.F.A. (1966) Carnegie-Mellon
Denise Kimber Buell, Professor of Religion--A.B. (1987) Princeton; Ph.D. (1995) Harvard
Lynda K. Bundtzen, Herbert H. Lehman Professor of English--B.A. (1968) University of Minnesota; Ph.D. (1972) University of Chicago
*Edward B. Burger, Lissack Professor of Social Responsibility and Personal Ethics--B.A. (1985) Connecticut College; Ph.D. (1990) University of Texas, Austin
Sandra L. Burton, Lipp Family Director of Dance--B.A. (1976) C.U.N.Y.; M.F.A. (1987) Bennington College
Gerard Caprio, Jr., William Brough Professor of Economics--B.A. (1972) Williams; Ph.D. (1976) University of Michigan
James T. Carlton, Director of Williams-Mystic Program and Professor of Marine Science and Adjunct Professor of Biology--B.A. (1971) University of California,
Berkeley; Ph.D. (1979) University of California, Davis
346
Alison A. Case, Professor of English--B.A. (1984) Oberlin; Ph.D. (1991) Cornell
Julie A. Cassiday, Professor of Russian--B.A. (1986) Grinnell; Ph.D. (1995) Stanford
David N. Cassuto, Class of 1948 Distinguished Visiting Professor in Environmental Studies, First Semester--B.A. (1985) Wesleyan; Ph.D. (1994) Indiana Univ.
Cosmo A. Catalano, Jr., Theatre Production Manager, Technical Supervisor for the 62 Center for Theatre and Dance, and Lecturer in Theatre--B.A. (1976)
University of Iowa; M.F.A. (1979) Yale
Maria Elena Cepeda, Associate Professor of Latina/o Studies--B.A. (1995) Kenyon College; Ph.D. (2003) University of Michigan
G. Donald Chandler, Class of 1948 Distinguished Visiting Professor of Leadership Studies--B.A. (1972) Williams; M.B.A. (1978) Harvard Business School
Cecilia Chang, Associate Professor of Chinese--B.A. (1981) Fu-Jen University; Ph.D. (2004) University of Massachusetts, Amherst
*Jessica M. Chapman, Assistant Professor of History and Fellow of the Oakley Center for Humanities and Social Sciences--B.A. (1999) Valparaiso University;
Ph.D. (2006) University of California, Santa Barbara
Ondine Chavoya, Associate Professor of Art--B.A. (1992) University of California, Santa Cruz; Ph.D. (2002) University of Rochester
Kerry A. Christensen, Garfield Professorship of Ancient Languages --B.A. (1981) Swarthmore; Ph.D. (1993) Princeton
Jay Clarke, Lecturer in the Graduate Program in Art History, Second Semester--B.A. (1990) Holy Cross; Ph.D. (1999) Brown University
Cassandra J. Cleghorn, Senior Lecturer in English and American Studies--B.A. (1983) University of California, Santa Cruz; Ph.D. (1995) Yale
Carrie Collenberg, Visiting Assistant Professor of German--M.A. (2003) California State Universrity, Long Beach; Ph.D. (2011) University of Minnesota
Michael P. Conforti, Lecturer in the Graduate Art Program in Art History--B.A. (1968) Trinity College; Ph.D. (1977) Harvard
Mea S. Cook, Assistant Professor of Geosciences--B.A. (1999) Princeton University; Ph.D. (2006) Massachusetts Institute of Technology
**Ronadh Cox, Associate Professor of Geosciences--B.S. (1985) University College Dublin; Ph.D. (1993) Stanford
George T. Crane, Professor of Political Science--B.A. (1979) S.U.N.Y., Purchase; Ph.D. (1986) University of Wisconsin, Madison
Marshall K. Creighton, Lecturer in Physical Education--B.A. (2002) Williams
*Jennifer Randall Crosby, Assistant Professor of Psychology and Fellow of the Oakley Center for Humanities and Social Sciences--B.A. (1994) Stanford University;
Ph.D. (2006) Stanford University
Justin Crowe, Assistant Professor of Political Science--B.A. (2003) Williams; Ph.D. (2007) Princeton
**Joseph L. Cruz, Associate Professor of Philosophy --B.A. (1991) Williams; Ph.D. (1999) University of Arizona
Robert F. Dalzell, Jr., Frederick Rudolph 1942 Professor of American Culture--B.A. (1959) Amherst; Ph.D. (1966) Yale
Erica Dankmeyer, Visiting Lecturer in Dance--B.A. (1991) Williams College
Andrea Danyluk, Professor of Computer Science --A.B. (1984) Vassar; Ph.D. (1992) Columbia
William R. Darrow, Cluett Professor of Religion --B.A. (1970) University of California, Santa Barbara; Ph.D. (1981) Harvard
**Theo Davis, Associate Professor of English--B.A. (1994) Brown; Ph.D. (2002) Johns Hopkins University
Derek Dean, Instructor in Biology--B.A. (1994) Oberlin; Ph.D. (2004) Cornell
Alan W. de Gooyer, Lecturer in English--B.A. (1991) Colorado State; Ph.D. (1994) University of Virginia
Edan Dekel, Associate Professor of Classics--B.A. (1996) Brown; Ph.D. (2005) University of California, Berkeley
Nicole S. Desrosiers, Lecturer in Romance Languages--C.A.P.E.S. (1970) Clermont-Ferrand; Ph.D. (1980) University of Massachusetts
David P. Dethier, Edward Brust Professor of Geology and Mineralogy--B.A. (1972) Dartmouth; Ph.D. (1977) University of Washington
Satyan L. Devadoss, Associate Professor of Mathematics--B.S. (1993) North Central College; Ph.D. (1999) Johns Hopkins University
Richard D. De Veaux, Professor of Statistics--A.B. (1973) Princeton; Ph.D. (1986) Stanford
***Charles B. Dew, Ephraim Williams Professor of American History--B.A. (1958) Williams; Ph.D. (1964) Johns Hopkins
William DeWitt, C. Carlisle and Margaret Tippit Professor of Biology--B.A. (1961) Williams; Ph.D. (1966) Princeton
Michael Ditthey, Visiting Instructor in Music
Georges B. Dreyfus, Jackson Professor of Religion--Bachelors (1969) La Chaux-de-Fonds; Ph.D. (1991) University of Virginia
**Helga Druxes, Professor of German--A.M. (1985) Brown; Ph.D. (1987) Brown
Sara L. Dubow, Assistant Professor of History--B.A. (1991) Williams; Ph.D. (2003) Rutgers
William C. Dudley, Associate Professor of Philosophy and Provost--B.A. (1989) Williams; Ph.D. (1998) Northwestern
Susan Dunn, Preston S. Parish 41 Third Century Professor in the Arts and Humanities--A.B. (1966) Smith; Ph.D. (1973) Harvard
David B. Edwards, W. Van Alan Clark 41 Third Century Professor of Social Sciences--B.A. (1975) Princeton; Ph.D. (1986) University of Michigan
Holly Edwards, Senior Lecturer in Art--B.A. (1975) Princeton; Ph.D. (1990) New York University Institute of Fine Arts
Joan Edwards, Washington Gladden 1859 Professor of Biology--B.A. (1971) University of Michigan; Ph.D. (1978) University of Michigan
James Elkins, Robert Sterling Clark Visiting Professor in Art History--B.A. (1977) Cornell University; Ph.D. (1989) University of Chicago
Susan L. Engel, Senior Lecturer in Psychology and Director of Teaching Program--B.A. (1980) Sarah Lawrence; Ph.D. (1986) City University of New York
David Eppel, Professor of Theatre--B.A. (1971) University of Cape Town; M.F.A. (1986) Columbia
*Edward A. Epping, Alexander D. Falck Class of 1899 Professor of Art--B.A. (1970) Western Illinois University; M.F.A. (1973) University of Wisconsin
Peter Erickson, Visiting Professor of Humanities--B.A. (1967) Amherst; Ph.D. (1975) University of California, Santa Cruz
347
Richard J. Farley, Assistant Professor of Physical Education--B.S. (1968) Boston University; M.Ed. (1974) Boston University
***Peter K. Farwell, Assistant Professor of Physical Education--B.A. (1973) Williams; M.A. (1990) Central Michigan
Steven Fein, Professor of Psychology--A.B. (1986) Princeton; Ph.D. (1991) University of Michigan
Ronald L. Feldman, Artist-in-Residence in Orchestral/Instrumental Performance--B.M. (1971) Boston University
Christina Ferando, Visiting Lecturer in Art History
**Zirka Z. Filipczak, J. Kirk T. Varnedoe '67 Professor of Art--B.A. (1964) Barnard; Ph.D. (1973) Harvard
Peter Filkins, Margaret Bundy Scott Visiting Professor of English, First Semester--B.A. (1980) Williams College; M.F.A. Columbia University
Robert L. Fisher, Jr., Assistant Professor of Physical Education and Associate Director of Athletics--B.A. (1970) St. Lawrence; M.Ed. (1974) St. Lawrence
Anna Fishzon, Assistant Professor of Russian History--B.A. (1994) Duke University; Ph.D. (2005) Columbia University
Stephen E. Fix, Robert G. Scott 68 Professor of English and Coordinator of the Tutorial Program--A.B. (1974) Boston College; Ph.D. (1980) Cornell
Nikki Floyd, Gaius Charles Bolin Fellow in Asian Studies--B.A. (1999) Ohio UniversityAthens; M.A. (2004) University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Antonia E. Foias, Associate Professor of Anthropology--B.A. (1987) Harvard/Radcliffe; Ph.D. (1996) Vanderbilt University
Kevin R. Forkey, Lecturer in Physics--B.A. (1981) Cornell
Aminatta Forna, Sterling Brown 22 Visiting Professor of Africana Studies, First Semester--Laws LLB (Hon) (1985) University of London
Michael Fortunato, Visiting Professor of Economics, Second Semester--B.A. (1976) Columbia; Ph.D. (1984) Harvard
Soledad Fox, Associate Professor of Romance Languages--B.A. (1990) Sarah Lawrence College; Ph.D. (2001) City University of New York
Jennifer L. French, Associate Professor in Latin-American Literature and Spanish Language and Director of the Center for Environmental Studies--B.A. (1995)
College of William & Mary; Ph.D. (2001) Rutgers
Stephen N. Freund, Associate Professor of Computer Science--B.S. (1995) Stanford; Ph.D. (2000) Stanford
Alexandra Garbarini, Associate Professor of History--B.A. (1994) Williams; Ph.D. (2003) UCLA
Sarah Gardner, Lecturer in Environmental Studies--B.A. (1985) Smith; Ph.D. (2000) C.U.N.Y.
Thomas A. Garrity, William R. Kenan, Jr. Professor of Mathematics--B.S. (1981) University of Texas; Ph.D. (1986) Brown
Robert Gazzale, Assistant Professor of Economics--B.S. (1990) Georgetown; Ph.D. (2004) University of Michigan
Amy Gehring, Associate Professor of Chemistry--B.A. (1994) Williams; Ph.D. (1998) Harvard
William Gentry, Professor of Economics--S.B. (1986) MIT; Ph.D. (1991) Princeton
Steven B. Gerrard, Professor of Philosophy--B.A. (1978) Amherst; Ph.D. (1987) University of Chicago
Lisa Gilbert, Assistant Professor of Marine Science and Assistant Professor of Geosciences at Williams-Mystic--B.A. (1997) Dartmouth; Ph.D. (2004) University of
Washington
Meghan Gillis, Assistant Professor of Physical Education and Head Coach Women's Ice Hockey
*Michael A. Glier, Professor of Art--B.A. (1976) Williams; M.A. (1979) Hunter
Andrey Glubokov, Visiting Assistant Professor of Statistics--M.S. (2000) University of New Mexico; Ph.D. (2000) University of New Mexico
*Christopher Goh, Assistant Professor of Chemistry--B.S. (1989) University of Durham; Ph.D. (1996) Harvard
*Sarah Goh, Associate Professor of Chemistry--B.S. (1996) University of Michigan; Ph.D. (2004) University of California, Berkeley
Darra J. Goldstein, Francis Christopher Oakley Third Century Professor of Russian--B.A. (1973) Vassar; Ph.D. (1983) Stanford
***Douglas Gollin, Professor of Economics--A.B. (1983) Harvard; Ph.D. (1990) University of Minnesota
Edward Gollin, Associate Professor of Music--B.A. (1992) MIT; Ph.D. (2000) Harvard
Nicholas Goodbody, Visiting Assistant Professor of Spanish--B.A. (2003) Williams; Ph.D. (2010) Yale
**Marc Gotlieb, Director of the Graduate Program in Art History and Class of 1955 Memorial Professor of Art--B.A. (1980) University of Toronto;
Ph.D. (1990) Johns Hopkins
Brendan Greene, Stanley Kaplan Postdoctoral Fellow in the Department of Political Science and the Leadership Studies Program--A.B. (2003) University of
Chicago
Daniel Greenberg, Assistant Professor of Physical Education and Head Men s Tennis Coach--B.A. (2008) Williams
Edward S. Grees, Assistant Professor of Physical Education--B.A. (1975) Windham; M.S. (1982) University of Massachusetts
Eva U. Grudin, Senior Lecturer in Art--B.A. (1969) Boston University
Kim I. Gutschow, Lecturer in Religion and Anthropology/Sociology--B.A. (1988) Harvard; Ph.D. (1998) Harvard
*Sarah Hammerschlag, Associate Professor of Religion--B.A. (1996) Wesleyan; Ph.D. (2005) University of Chicago
Amie Hane, Assistant Professor of Psychology--B.A. (1996) University of Maryland; Ph.D. (2002) University of Maryland
Richard Hasenfus, Assistant Professor of Physical Education and Head Coach of Wrestling--B.S. (1989) Springfield College
**Charles W. Haxthausen, Robert Sterling Clark Professor of Art History--B.A. (1966) University of St. Thomas, Houston; Ph.D. (1976) Columbia
Laurie Heatherington, Edward Dorr Griffin Professor of Psychology--B.A. (1976) Miami University, Ohio; Ph.D. (1981) University of Connecticut
Guy M. Hedreen, Professor of Art--B.A. (1981) Pomona; Ph.D. (1988) Bryn Mawr
Brent Heeringa, Assistant Professor of Computer Science--B.A. (1999) University of Minnesota; Ph.D. (2006) University of Massachusetts, Amherst
348
Kris Herman, Assistant Professor of Physical Education and Head Coach of Softball--B.A. (1986) Tufts University; M.A. (1989) Tufts University
Jacqueline Hidalgo, Assistant Professor of Latina/o Studies and Religion--B.A. (2000) Columbia University; Ph.D. (2010) Clarement Graduate
Alan Hirsch, Visiting Assistant Professor of Legal Studies--B.A. (1981) Amherst; J.D. (1985) Yale
Marjorie W. Hirsch, Associate Professor of Music--B.A. (1982) Yale; Ph.D. (1989) Yale
Michael Ann Holly, Lecturer in the Graduate Program in Art History--Ph.D. (1983) Cornell University
**Amy S. Holzapfel, Assistant Professor of Theatre and Fellow of the Oakley Center for Humanities and Social Sciences, First Semester--B.A. (1996) Brown;
D.F.A. (2006) Yale School of Drama
Kiaran Honderich, Visiting Associate Professor of Economics--B.A. (1983) Oxford; Ph.D. (1991) University of Massachusetts
Meredith C. Hoppin, Frank M. Gagliardi Professor of Classics--B.A. (1972) Carleton; Ph.D. (1976) University of Michigan
Nicholas Howe, Assistant Professor ofEnvironmental Studies--B.A. (1998) Columbia; Ph.D. (2009) University of California, Los Angeles
James Huffman, Bennett Boskey Visiting Professor of History, Second Semester
G. Robert Jackall, Willmott Family Third Century Professor of Sociology and Public Affairs--B.A. (1963) Fordham; Ph.D. (1976) New School of Social Research
Frank Jackson, Visiting Lecturer in Art, Second Semester
Sarah Jacobson, Assistant Professor of Economics--B.S. (1998) Harvey Mudd; Ph.D. (2010) Georgia State University
Andrew W. Jaffe, Lyell B. Clay Artist-in-Residence in Jazz, Senior Lecturer in Music and Director of Jazz Performance--B.A. (1973) Saint Lawrence;
M.M. (1977) University of Massachusetts
Joy A. James, Professor of Humanities--B.A. (1980) St. Mary s University; Ph.D. (1987) Fordham; Ph.D. (1987) Fordham University
Ju-Yu Scarlett Jang, Professor of Art--B.A. (1969) National Cheng-Chih University, Taipei; Ph.D. (1989) University of California, Berkeley
Cathy M. Johnson, Professor of Political Science --B.A. (1979) Dartmouth; Ph.D. (1986) University of Michigan
Eugene J. Johnson III, Amos Lawrence Professor of Art--B.A. (1959) Williams; Ph.D. (1970) New York University Institute of Fine Arts
Sarah (Liza) Johnson, Professor of Art--B.A. (1992) Williams; M.F.A. (1995) University of California, San Diego
Markes E. Johnson, Charles L. MacMillan Professor of Natural Sciences--B.A. (1971) University of Iowa; Ph.D. (1977) University of Chicago
Stewart D. Johnson, Professor of Mathematics--B.A. (1979) Ft. Lewis College; Ph.D. (1985) Stanford
Kevin M. Jones, William Edward McElfresh Professor of Physics--B.A. (1977) Williams; Ph.D. (1983) Stanford
Julie Joosten, Visiting Assistant Professor of English--B.A. (2022) Williams; M.F.A. (2009) University of Iowa
**Jason A. Josephson, Assistant Professor of Religion--B.A. (1999) Hampshire College; Ph.D. (2006) Stanford
Peter Just, Professor of Anthropology--B.A. (1972) University of Chicago; Ph.D. (1986) University of Pennsylvania
*Shinko Kagaya, Associate Professor of Japanese--B.A. (1989) Aoyama Gakuin University; Ph.D. (1998) Ohio State University
William R. Kangas, Assistant Professor of Physical Education--B.A. (1982) University of Vermont; M.Ed. (1994) North Adams State College
Lawrence J. Kaplan, Halford R. Clark Professor of Natural Science --B.S. (1965) University of Pittsburgh; Ph.D. (1970) Purdue
Paul M. Karabinos, Professor of Geosciences--B.S. (1975) University of Connecticut; Ph.D. (1981) Johns Hopkins
*Saul M. Kassin, Massachusetts Professor of Psychology--B.A. (1974) Brooklyn College; Ph.D. (1978) University of Connecticut
***Robert D. Kavanaugh, Hales Professor of Psychology--B.A. (1967) Holy Cross; Ph.D. (1974) Boston University
*David S. Kechley, Professor of Music--B.Mus. (1970) University of Washington; D.M.A. (1979) Cleveland Institute of Music
Aaron Kelton, Assistant Professor of Physical Education and Head Coach of Football--B.S. (1991) Springfield College
Kathryn R. Kent, Associate Professor of English--B.A. (1988) Williams; Ph.D. (1996) Duke
Batool Samir Khattab, Visiting Assistant Professor of Arabic--B.A. (1993) Ain Shams University; Ph.D. (2004) Ain Shams University
Bruce Kieffer, Professor of German--B.A. (1973) Columbia; Ph.D. (1979) Princeton
Elizabeth A. Kieffer, Lecturer in German--B.A. (1977) Rutgers
Kris N. Kirby, Professor of Psychology--B.A. (1985) Marshall; Ph.D. (1991) Harvard
Roger A. Kittleson, Professor of History--B.A. (1985) Northwestern; Ph.D. (1997) University of Wisconsin, Madison
John E. Kleiner, Professor of English--B.A. (1983) Amherst; Ph.D. (1991) Stanford
*Bernhard Klingenberg, Associate Professor of Statistics--B.A. (1996) Technical University, Austria; Ph.D. (2004) University of Florida
Elizabeth Kolbert, W. Ford Schumann Visiting Professor in Democratic Studies, Second Semester
Sherron E. Knopp, John Hawley Roberts Professor of English--A.B. (1971) Loyola; Ph.D. (1975) U.C.L.A.
Pia M. Kohler, Assistant Professor of Environmental Studies--B.S. (1998) McGill University; Ph.D. (2006) Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Thomas A. Kohut, Sue and Edgar Wachenheim III Professor of--B.A. (1972) Oberlin; Ph.D. (1983) University of Minnesota
Cornelius C. Kubler, Stanfield Professor of Asian Studies--B.A. (1972) Cornell; M.A. (1978) National Taiwan University; Ph.D. (1981) Cornell
Steven Kuster, Assistant Professor of Physical Education--B.A. (1993) University of Pennsylvania; M.A. (1999) Harvard
Kenneth N. Kuttner, Robert F. White Class of 1952 Professor of Economics--B.A. (1982) University of California, Berkeley; Ph.D. (1989) Harvard University
Karen B. Kwitter, Ebenezer Fitch Professor of Astronomy--B.A. (1972) Wellesley; Ph.D. (1979) U.C.L.A.
349
Aida Laleian, Professor of Art--B.F.A. (1978) Art Institute of Chicago; M.F.A. (1980) University of California, Davis
Sara LaLumia, Assistant Professor of Economics--B.A. (2000) Youngstown State University; Ph.D. (2006) University of Michigan
Mark Atwood Lawrence, Stanley Kaplan Visiting Professor of American Foreign Policy--B.A. (1987) Stanford; Ph.D. (1999) Yale
Tim Lebestky, Assistant Professor of Biology--B.S. (1995) University of Kansas; Ph.D. (2002) University of California, Los Angeles
*William J. Lenhart, A. Barton Hepburn Professor of Computer Science--B.A. (1977) St. Joseph s; Ph.D. (1983) Dartmouth
Steven P. Levin, Professor of Art--B.A. (1976) Reed; M.F.A. (1980) University of California, Davis
Zafrir Levy, Assistant Professor of Physical Education and Head Coach of Men's & Woman's Squash--B.A. (2001) Williams
Michael J. Lewis, Faison-Pierson-Stoddard Professor of Art History--B.A. (1979) Haverford; Ph.D. (1989) University of Pennsylvania
Scott A. Lewis, Assistant Professor of Physical Education--B.S. (1980) Springfield College; M.Ed. (1995) Springfield College
John K. Limon, John J. Gibson Professor of English--B.A. (1974) Harvard; Ph.D. (1981) University of California, Berkeley
*Susan R. Loepp, Professor of Mathematics--B.A. (1989) Bethel College; Ph.D. (1994) University of Texas, Austin
Margaret G. Long, Associate Professor of History--B.A. (1989) Wesleyan, Ph.D. (2003) University of Chicago
*Ward Lopes, Assistant Professor of Physics--B.A. (1992) Swarthmore; Ph.D. (2001) University of Chicago
***David Love, Associate Professor of Economics--B.A. (1996) University of Michigan; Ph.D. (2003) Yale
Charles M. Lovett, Jr., Philip and Dorothy Schein Professor of Chemistry--B.S. (1979) California State Poly.; Ph.D. (1985) Cornell
Peter D. Low, Assistant Professor of Art--B.A. (1994) University of Toronto; Ph.D. (2001) Johns Hopkins
**Daniel V. Lynch, Professor of Biology--B.S. (1979) University of Lowell; Ph.D. (1983) University of Texas, Austin
William Lynn, Visiting Assistant Professor of Environmental Studies--B.A. (1989) Univ. of Minnesota; Ph.D. (2000) Univ. of Minnesota
***Michael D. MacDonald, Frederick L. Schuman Professor in International Relations--A.B. (1972) University of California, Berkeley;
Ph.D. (1983) University of California, Berkeley
*Paul K. MacDonald, Assistant Professor of Political Science--B.A. (1998) University of California, Berkeley; Ph.D. (2007) Columbia University
Jenna L. MacIntire, Instructor in Chemistry and in Biology --B.A. (1992) University of Vermont
Margaret MacNamidhe, Lecturer in the Graduate Program in Art History--B.A. (1987) University College, Dublin; Ph.D. (2002) Johns Hopkins University
James E. Mahon, Jr., Woodrow Wilson Professor of Political Science--A.B. (1977) Dartmouth; Ph.D. (1989) University of California, Berkeley
Protik Kumar Majumder, Professor of Physics and Director of the Science Center--B.S. (1982) Yale; Ph.D. (1989) Harvard
Michael Maker, Assistant Professor of Physical Education and Head Coach of Men s Basketball
Katherine Maloney, Assistant Professor of Physical Education
James ManigaultBryant, Assistant Professor of Africana Studies--B.A. (1995) Tulane; Ph.D. (2002) Brown
Rhon ManigaultBryant, Assistant Professor of Africana Studies--B.A. (1999) Duke; M. Div. (2002) Emory University
Patricia M. Manning, Assistant Professor of Physical Education--B.S. (1977) Cortland; M.S. (1988) Smith
George E. Marcus, Professor of Political Science --A.B. (1964) Columbia; Ph.D. (1968) Northwestern
Luana Santoro Maroja, Assistant Professor of Biology--B.S. (1999) Univ Federal do Rio de Jane; Ph.D. (2008) Cornell
Brian Martin, Associate Professor of French and Comparative Literature--A.B. (1993) Harvard; M.A. (1996) University of California, Los Angeles;
A.M. (1999) Harvard; Ph.D. (2003) Harvard
Martha Marvin, Senior Essel Fellow in Neuroscience--B.A. (1984) University of California, Berkeley; Ph.D. (1995) MIT
*Eiko Maruko Siniawar, Associate Professor of History--B.A. (1997) Williams; Ph.D. (2003) Harvard
Christine L. Mason, Assistant Professor of Physical Education--B.S. (1978) Penn State University; Ed.M. (1986) Boston University
James McAllister, Professor of Political Science--B.A. (1986) S.U.N.Y., Buffalo; Ph.D. (1999) Columbia
Ann K. McCallum, Lecturer in Art--B.A. (1974) McGill University; M.Arch. (1980) Yale
George M. McCormack, Assistant Professor of Physical Education--B.S. (1987) Ithaca College; M.Ed. (2007) Boston University
Elizabeth P. McGowan, Professor of ArtB.A. (1979) Princeton; Ph.D. (1993) New York University Institute of Fine Arts
Morgan McGuire, Assistant Professor of Computer Science--B.S. (2000) Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Ph.D. (2006) Brown
**Keith E. McPartland, Assistant Professor of Philosophy--B.A. (1994) Rutgers; Ph.D. (2007) Cornell
Gage C. McWeeny, Associate Professor of English--B.A. (1993) Columbia; Ph.D. (2003) Princeton
Lisa M. Melendy, Assistant Professor of Physical Education, Senior Women s Administrator for Athletics, and Athletic Director--A.B. (1982) Smith;
M.S. (1985) University of Massachusetts
Nicole Mellow, Associate Professor of Political Science--B.A. (1992) Vassar; Ph.D. (2003) University of Texas
Karen R. Merrill, Professor of History--B.A. (1986) Oberlin; Ph.D. (1994) University of Michigan
*Steven J. Miller, Assistant Professor of Mathematics--B.S. (1996) Yale University; Ph.D. (2002) Princeton University
Bojana Mladenovic, Associate Professor of Philosophy--B.A. (1984) University of Belgrade; Ph.D. (1995) University of California, Berkeley
Peter J. Montiel, Farleigh S. Dickinson Jr. 41 Professor of Economics--B.A. (1973) Yale; Ph.D. (1978) M.I.T.
Justin Moore, Assistant Professor of Physical Education--B.A. (1990) Rollins College; M.A. (2004) University of Central Michigan
350
**Manuel A. Morales, Associate Professor of Biology--Ph.D. (1999) University of Connecticut
Frank Morgan, Webster Atwell Class of 1921 Professor of Mathematics--S.B. (1974) M.I.T.; Ph.D. (1977) Princeton
David E. Morris, Assistant Professor of Theatre--B.A. (1996) Williams; M.F.A. (2001) University of Washington
Ngonidzashe Munemo, Assistant Professor of Political Science--B.A. (2000) Bard College; Ph.D. (2003) Columbia
Peter T. Murphy, Professor of English--B.A. (1981) Yale; Ph.D. (1986) Johns Hopkins
Thomas P. Murtagh, Professor of Computer Science--A.B. (1974) Princeton; Ph.D. (1983) Cornell
***Kenda B. Mutongi, Professor of History--B.A. (1989) Coe College; Ph.D. (1996) University of Virginia
Mara Naaman, Assistant Professor of Arabic--B.A. (1996) Wesleyan; Ph.D. (2007) Columbia
Steven E. Nafziger, Assistant Professor of Economics--B.A. (2000) Northwestern; Ph.D. (2003) Yale
***Gail M. Newman, Harold J. Henry Professor of German, Academic Director of the Multicultural Center, and Fellow of the Oakley Center for Humanities and
Social Sciences, Second Semester--B.A. (1976) Northwestern; Ph.D. (1985) University of Minnesota
Anthony J. Nicastro, Visiting Professor of Romance Languages--B.A. (1962) New York University; Ph.D. (1971) Columbia
James L. Nolan, Jr., Professor of Sociology--B.A. (1984) University of California; Ph.D. (1995) University of Virginia
*Glyn P. Norton, Willcox B. and Harriet M. Adsit Professor of International Studies and Professor of Romance Languages--A.B. (1963) University of Michigan;
Ph.D. (1968) University of Michigan
Warimu Njoya, Visiting Assistant Professor of Political Science
Christopher M. B. Nugent, Associate Professor of Chinese--B.A. (1991) Brown; Ph.D. (2004) Harvard
*Carol J. Ockman, Dennis A. Meenan 54 Third Century Professor of Art--B.A. (1972) Stanford; Ph.D. (1982) Yale
Austin Okigbo, Visiting Assistant Professor of Music, First Semester and Winter Study Period
William Olney, Assistant Professor of Economics--B.A. (2002) Wesleyan; Ph.D. (2007) University of Colorado
Stephanie Osbakken, Visiting Assistant Professor of Sociolgoy, Second Semester--B.A. (1994) University of Texas, Austin; M.A. (2008) University of Michgan
Allison Pacelli, Associate Professor of Mathematics--B.S. (1997) Union College; Ph.D. (2003) Brown
Lee Y. Park, Professor of Chemistry--B.A. (1986) Wellesley; Ph.D. (1991) M.I.T.
Paul Park, Lecturer in English and the Graduate Program in Art History--B.A. (1975) Hampshire College
Lata Parwani, Gaius Charles Bolin Fellow in History--B.A. (1986) University of Karachi
Jay M. Pasachoff, Field Memorial Professor of Astronomy and Director of the Hopkins Observatory--A.B. (1963) Harvard; Ph.D. (1969) Harvard
Darel E. Paul, Associate Professor of Political Science--B.A. (1990) University of Minnesota; Ph.D. (2001) University of Minnesota
Enrique Peacock-Lpez, Professor of Chemistry--B.S. (1974) University Nac. Autonoma, Mexico; Ph.D. (1982) University of California, San Diego
Lori Pedersen, Visiting Lecturer in Mathematics and Statistics--B.A. (1982) College of Wooster; M.A. (1985) Brown University
Julia A. Pedroni, Visiting Assistant Professor of Philosophy--B.A. (1986) Wells College; Ph.D. (1999) Georgetown
**Peter L. Pedroni, Professor of Economics--B.A. (1986) Miami University; Ph.D. (1993) Columbia
Ileana Perez Velazquez, Associate Professor of Music--B.M. Higher Institute of Arts-Havana, Cuba; D.M.A. (1999) Indiana University
Carin Perilloux, Visiting Assistant Professor of Psychology--B.A. (2003) Knox College
James L. Pethica, Senior Lecturer in English--B.A. (1980) Oxford; Ph.D (1987) Oxford
Katarzyna Pieprzak, Associate Professor of Francophone, Literature and French Language--B.A. (1995) Rice; Ph.D. (2001) University of Michigan
David M. Pilachowski, College Librarian--B.A. (1971) University of Vermont; M.L.S. (1973) University of Illinois
Michelyne Pinard, Assistant Professor of Physical Education and Head Women s Soccer Coach--B.A. (1998) Dartmouth; M.S. (2002) University of Pennsylvania
Jonathan Pitcher, Visiting Associate Professor of Romance Languages--M.A. (1994) King s College; Ph.D. (2003) University College
**Amy D. Podmore, Professor of Art--B.S. (1982) State University College of Buffalo; M.F.A. (1987) University of California, Davis
Daniel Prindle, Visiting Instructor in Music--B.M. (2003) Berklee College of Music; M.M. (2011) University of Massachusetts, Amherst
***Christopher L. Pye, Class of 1924 Professor of English--B.A. (1975) Oberlin; Ph.D. (1985) Cornell
**Lawrence E. Raab, Morris Professor of Rhetoric--B.A. (1968) Middlebury; M.A. (1972) Syracuse
*Ashok S. Rai, Associate Professor of Economics--A.B. (1992) Stanford; Ph.D. (1997) University of Chicago
Wendy E. Raymond, Professor of Biology--A.B. (1982) Cornell; Ph.D. (1990) Harvard
Bruce Redford, Clark/Oakley Fellow
Anne Reinhardt, Assistant Professor of History--B.A. (1990) Harvard; Ph.D. (2002) Princeton
***Mark T. Reinhardt, Professor of Political Science and Class of 1956 Professor of American Civilization--B.A. (1983) Wesleyan;
Ph.D. (1991) University of California, Santa Cruz
Bernard J. Rhie, Associate Professor of English--B.A. (1997) University of California, Berkeley; Ph.D. (2005) University of Pennsylvania
**David P. Richardson, William R. Kenan, Jr. Professor of Chemistry--B.A. (1979) University of Michigan; Ph.D. (1984) University of California, Berkeley
Jeff Roberts, Visiting Assistant Professor of Music--B.M. (1996) New England Conservatory; M.M. (1999) Boston University
*Neil Roberts, Assistant Professor of Africana Studies and Fellow of the Oakley Center for Humanities and Social Sciences--B.A. (1998) Brown University;
351
Ph.D. (2007) University of Chicago
J. Griffith Rollefson, Visiting Assistant Professor of Music (ACLS Fellow)--
Michael Rolleigh, Visiting Assistant Professor of Economics--B.A. (1998) Hendrix College; Ph.D. (2004) University of Minnesota
Alix H. Rorke, Assistant Professor of Physical Education and Head Field Hockey Coach--B.A. (1993) Williams; M.S. (1996) Smith
Nancy A. Roseman, Professor of Biology and Director of the Williams Exeter Program at Exeter University--A.B. (1980) Smith; Ph.D. (1987) Oregon State
Cecilia Rosengren, STINT Fellow in History, First Semester
Shawn J. Rosenheim, Professor of English--B.A. (1983) Oberlin; Ph.D. (1992) Yale
Leyla Rouhi, John B. McCoy and John T. McCoy Professor of Romance Languages and Director of the Oakley Center for Humanities and Social Sciences--
B.A. (1987) Oxford; Ph.D. (1995) Harvard
**Merida Ra, Associate Professor of Latina/o Studies and American Studies--B.A. (1993) University of Illinois; Ph.D. (2003) University of Michigan
Marketa Rulikova, Visiting Assistant Professor of Sociology--B.A. (1996) University of Pardubice; Ph.D. (2001) Polish Academy
T. Michael Russo, Assistant Professor of Physical Education and Coordinator of Physical Education--B.A. (1967) University of Massachusetts;
M.S. (1970) University of Massachusetts
Michael Samson, Senior Lecturer in Economics--B.A. (1983) Yale; Ph.D. (1994) Stanford
Marlene J. Sandstrom, Professor of Psychology --B.A. (1991) Yale; Ph.D. (1996) Duke
Noah J. Sandstrom, Associate Professor of Psychology--B.A. (1994) Knox College; Ph.D. (1999) Duke
Omar Sangare, Assistant Professor of Theatre--M.F.A. (1993) The Theatre Academy; Ph.D. (2006) The Theatre Academy
Sheafe Satterthwaite, Lecturer in Art--B.A. (1962) University of Virginia
***Robert M. Savage, Associate Professor of Biology--B.A. (1987) Bowdoin; Ph.D. (1993) Wesleyan
Tanseli Savaser, Assistant Professor of Economics--B.A. (2000) Bogazici University; Ph.D. (2006) Brandeis University
**Kenneth K. Savitsky, Associate Professor of Psychology--B.A. (1993) Indiana University; Ph.D. (1997) Cornell
Jana L. Sawicki, Carl W. Vogt 58 Professor of Philosophy--B.A. (1974) Sweet Briar; Ph.D. (1983) Columbia
*Vincent J. Schleitwiler, Assistant Professor of English and Fellow of the Oakley Center for Humanities and Social Sciences--B.A. (1996) Oberlin;
Ph.D. (2008) University of Washington
*Lucie Schmidt, Associate Professor of Economics--A.B. (1992) Smith; Ph.D. (2002) University of Michigan
Dawn Seckler, Visiting Assistant Professor of Russian--B.A. (1998) Colby; Ph.D. (2009) Univ. of Pittsburgh
Michael Seifert, Visiting Assistant Professor of Physics--B.A. (2001) Swarthmore College; Ph.D. (2008) University of Chicago
Cheryl L. Shanks, Professor of Political Science--B.A. (1983) University of California, Santa Cruz; Ph.D. (1994) University of Michigan
James R. Shepard, J. Leland Miller Professor of American History, Literature, and Eloquence--B.A. (1978) Trinity; M.F.A. (1980) Brown
Karen L. Shepard, Lecturer in English--B.A. (1987) Williams; M.F.A. (1992) University of Houston
Stephen C. Sheppard, Class of 2012 Professor of Economics--B.S. (1977) University of Utah; Ph.D. (1984) Washington University
*W. Anthony Sheppard, Professor of Music--B.A. (1991) Amherst; Ph.D. (1996) Princeton
*Lara Shore-Sheppard, Professor of Economics--B.A. (1991) Amherst; Ph.D. (1996) Princeton
*Olga Shevchenko, Associate Professor of Sociology--B.A. (1996) Moscow State University; Ph.D. (2002) University of Pennsylvania
Glenn W. Shuck, Assistant Professor of Religion--B.A. (1994) Texas Lutheran University; Ph.D. (2004) Rice University
Cesar E. Silva, Hagey Family Professor of Mathematics--B.S. (1977) Catholic University, Peru; Ph.D. (1984) University of Rochester
Holly Silva, Lecturer in Physical Education--B.S. (1977) Connecticut State University; M.F.A. (1987) Smith
Marc A. Simpson, Lecturer in the Graduate Program in Art History and ActingDirector of the Graduate Program in Art History--B.A. (1975) Middlebury;
Ph.D. (1993) Yale
Shanti M. Singham, Professor of History--B.A. (1980) Swarthmore; Ph.D. (1991) Princeton
Kyle Smesko, Lecturer in AthleticsDavid C. Smith, Senior Lecturer in Biology--B.S. (1968) Yale; Ph.D. (1977) University of Michigan
David L. Smith, John W. Chandler Professor of English--B.A. (1974) New College; Ph.D. (1980) Univ. of Chicago
**Thomas E. Smith, Professor of Chemistry--B.A. (1988) Williams; Ph.D. (1996) Stanford
Jonathan Snow, Visiting Assistant Professor of Biology--B.A. (1996) Williams; Ph.D. (2003) Univ. of California, San Francisco
Anita R. Sokolsky, Professor of English--B.A. (1974) Oberlin; Ph.D. (1985) Cornell
Ari Solomon, Visiting Assistant Professor of Psychology, Second Semester--B.A. (1989) Brown University; Ph.D. (1997) American University
**Paul R. Solomon, Professor of Psychology--B.A. (1970) S.U.N.Y., New Paltz; Ph.D. (1975) University of Massachusetts
Stefanie Solum, Associate Professor of Art--B.A. (1991) University of Wisconsin, Madison; Ph.D. (2001) University of California, Berkeley
Jane South, Visiting Lecturer in Art, First Semester--B.A. (1987) Central School of Art; M.F.A. (1997) University of North Carolina
Steven P. Souza, Observatory Supervisor/Instructor of Astronomy--B.S. (1973) Cooper Union; Ph.D. (1979) S.U.N.Y., Stoney Brook
Patrick Spero, Assistant Professor of History and Leadership Studies--B.A. (2000) James Madison University; Ph.D. (2009) University of Pennsylvania
Mihai Stoiciu, Associate Professor of Mathematics--B.S. (1999) University of Bucharest; Ph.D. (2005) California Institute of Technology
352
***Jefferson Strait, Professor of Physics and College Marshal--A.B. (1975) Harvard; Ph.D. (1985) Brown
*Frederick W. Strauch, Assistant Professor of Physics--B.S. (1998) Loyola College; Ph.D. (2004) University of Maryland
Catherine B. Stroud, Assistant Professor of Psychology--B.A. (2002) University of Wisconsin, Madison; Ph.D. (2009) State University of New York, Storrs
Mecca Jamilah Sullivan, Gaius Charles Bolin Fellow in Women s and Gender Studies--B.A. (2003) Smith College; M.A. (2006) Temple University
Alison Swain, Assistant Professor of Physical Education--B.A. (2001) Williams; Ph.D. (2006) University of Washington, Seattle
Anand V. Swamy, Professor of Economics--B.A. (1983) University of Delhi, India; Ph.D. (1993) Northwestern
*Karen E. Swann, Professor of English--B.A. (1975) Oberlin; Ph.D. (1983) Cornell
Jane Swift, Class of 1948 Distinguished Visiting Lecturer in Leadership Studies--B.A. (1987) Trinity College
Steven J. Swoap, Professor of Biology--B.A. (1990) Trinity; Ph.D. (1994) University of California, Irving
Barbara E. Takenaga, Mary A. and William Wirt Warren Professor of Art--B.F.A. (1972) University of Colorado; M.F.A. (1978) University of Colorado
John W. Thoman, Jr., J. Hodge Markgraf Professor of Chemistry--B.A. (1982) Williams; Ph.D. (1987) M.I.T.
***Christian Thorne, Associate Professor of English--B.A. (1995) Wesleyan; Ph.D. (2001) Duke
Stephen J. Tifft, Professor of English--B.A. (1975) Harvard; Ph.D. (1984) Cornell
Claire S. Ting, Associate Professor of Biology--B.A. (1986) Yale; Ph.D. (1994) Cornell
Edwin M. Truman, Visiting Professor of Economics, Second Semester
David Tucker-Smith, Associate Professor of Physics--B.A. (1995) Amherst; Ph.D. (2001) University of California, Berkeley
Ji-Young Um, Visiting Assistant Professor of American Studies and English--B.A. (1996) Oberlin; M.A. (2000) University of London
Arafaat Valiani, Assistant Professor of Sociology--B.A. (1996) Concordia University; Ph.D. (2005) Columbia
Hana van der Kolk, Arthur Levitt, Jr. 52 ArtistinResidence in Dance--B.A. (2000) Skidmore College; M.F.A. (2008) University of California, Los Angeles
*Janneke van de Stadt, Associate Professor of Russian and Fellow of the Oakley Center for Humanities and Social Sciences--B.A. (1988) Amherst College;
Ph.D. (2000) University of Wisconsin, Madison
Armando Vargas, Assistant Professor of Comparative Literature--B.S. (1992) Georgetown; Ph.D. (2005) University of California, Berkeley
Kiara Vigil, Gaius Charles Bollin Fellow in American Studies--B.A. (1997) Tufts; M.A. (2006) Dartmouth
*William G. Wagner, Brown Professor of History--B.A. (1972) Haverford; D.Phil. (1981) Oxford
Dorothy J. Wang, Assistant Professor of American Studies--B.A. (1985) Duke; Ph.D. (1998) University of California, Berkeley
Christopher M. Waters, Hans W. Gatzke 38 Professor of Modern European History--B.A. (1977) California State, Long Beach; Ph.D. (1985) Harvard
Tara Watson, Associate Professor of Economics--B.A. (1996) Wesleyan; Ph.D. (2003) Harvard
Bradley Wells, Clay Artist-in-Residence, Director of Choral/Vocal Activities, and Lecturer in Music--B.A. (1984) Principia College; D.M.A. (2005) Yale
Peter S. Wells, Assistant Professor of Physical Education, Coordinator of Crew Programs, and Head Coach of Men s Crew--B.A. (1979) Williams
Carmen Whalen, Professor of History and Associate Dean for Institutional Diversity--B.A. (1985) Hampshire College; Ph.D. (1994) Rutgers
***Alan E. White, Mark Hopkins Professor of Philosophy--B.A. (1972) Tulane; Ph.D. (1980) Pennsylvania State
Gregory White, Class of 1948 Distinguished Visiting Professor in International Studies, First Semester
Amanda Wilcox, Assistant Professor of Classics--B.A. (1996) Reed College; Ph.D. (2002) University of Pennsylvania
Heather Williams, Professor of Biology--B.A. (1977) Bowdoin; Ph.D. (1985) Rockefeller
Alex W. Willingham, Professor of Political Science--B.A. (1963) Southern University, Baton Rouge; Ph.D. (1974) U.N.C., Chapel Hill
*Nicholas L. Wilson, Assistant Professor of Economics--B.A. (1999) Reed College; Ph.D. (2008) Brown University
Reinhard A. Wobus, Edna McConnell Clark Professor of Geology--A.B. (1962) Washington University; Ph.D. (1966) Stanford
K. Scott Wong, James Phinney Baxter, 3rd Professor of History--B.A. (1976) Rutgers; Ph.D. (1992) University of Michigan
James B. Wood, Charles R. Keller Professor of American History--B.A. (1968) Florida Presbyterian; Ph.D. (1973) Emory
William K. Wootters, Barclay Jermain Professor of Natural Philosophy--B.S. (1973) Stanford; Ph.D. (1980) University of Texas
Miki Yagi, Visiting Lecturer in Japanese--B.A. (2002) Kansai Gaidai Univ.; M.A. (2007) Ohio State Univ.
Reiko Yamada, Professor of Japanese--B.A. (1978) Portland State Univ.; Ph.D. (1988) Cornell
Kasumi Yamamoto, Professor of Japanese--B.A. (1985) Columbia; Ph.D. (1999) Cornell
Li Yu, Assistant Professor of Chinese--B.A. (1995) East China Normal University; Ph.D. (2003) Ohio State University
Safa R. Zaki, Professor of Psychology--B.A. (1989) American University, Cairo; Ph.D. (1996) Arizona State University
Betty Zimmerberg, Professor of Psychology--B.A. (1971) Harvard; Ph.D. (1976) C.U.N.Y.
**David J. Zimmerman, Orrin Sage Professor of Political Economy--B.Comm. (1985) University of Toronto; Ph.D. (1992) Princeton
***Steven J. Zottoli, Howard B. Schow 50 and Nan W. Schow Professor of Biology--B.A. (1969) Bowdoin; Ph.D. (1976) University of Massachusetts
353
LIBRARIES
David M. Pilachowski, College Librarian
B.A. (1971) University of Vermont; M.L.S. (1973) University of Illinois
Karen Gorss Benko, Catalog Librarian
B.A. (1994) Yale; M.L.S. (1999) S.U.N.Y., Albany
Christine W. Blackman, Catalog Librarian
B.A. (1989) Notre Dame; M.L.S. (1999) Simmons College
Sylvia B. Kennick Brown, College Archivist/Special Collections Librarian
A.B. (1977) Oberlin; M.S.L.S. (1981) Simmons College
David A. Chalifoux, Library Shelving Facility Supervisor
A.S. (2005) Berkshire Community College
Lori A. DuBois, Reference and Instruction Librarian
B.A. (1994) Colby College; M.S.L.S. (1997) University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Jessica Drmacich, Records Manager and Digital Resources Archivist
B.A. (1999) S.U.N.Y., Fredonia; M.A. (2003) C.U.N.Y. Graduate Center; M.A. (2006) New York University
Susan G. Galli, Library Administrator
A.S. (1975) Berkshire Community College
Wayne G. Hammond, Assistant Chapin Librarian
B.A. (1975) Baldwin-Wallace; A.M.L.S. (1976) University of Michigan
Jo-Ann Irace, Head of Access Services
Robin Kibler, Head of Collection Management
B.Mus. (1975) Southern Methodist; M.L.S. (1990) S.U.N.Y., Albany
Walter Komorowski, Head of Library Systems
B.A. (1979) North Adams State College; M.A. (1984) S.U.N.Y., Binghamton; M.L.S. (1988) S.U.N.Y., Albany
Christine Mnard, Head of Research and Reference Services
B.A. (1987) University of Tours, France; M.A. (1988) University of Tours, France; M.L.S. (1991) S.U.N.Y., Albany
Alison R. O'Grady, Interlibrary Loan Supervisor
B.A. (1982) Providence College
Rebecca Ohm, Reference and Government Documents Librarian
B.A. (1975) University of Illinois, Springfield; M.L.S. (1995) S.U.N.Y., Albany
Jodi Psoter, Science Librarian
B.S. (1995) Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University; M.L.S. (1999) Southern Connecticut State University
Mercedea E. Shriver, Reference and Web Development Librarian
B.A. (1999) University of Michigan; M.S.I. (2001) University of Michigan
Robert L. Volz, Custodian of the Chapin Library
B.A. (1962) Marquette; M.A.L.S. (1963) University of Wisconsin
Helena Warburg, Head of the Science Library
B.S. (1980) Indiana University; M.L.I.S. (1987) Indiana University
354
COMMITTEES 2011-2012
Academic Standing: Marlene Sandstrom, Chair, Gene Bell-Villada, Christopher Bolton, Amy Hopzapfel, Paul Karabinos, Allison Swain,
Dave Johnson*, Richard Nesbitt*, Sarah Bolton*, Charles Toomajian Jr.*
Appointments and Promotions: Denise Buell, Lee Park, D. L. Smith, Will Dudley*, Adam Falk*, Peter Murphy*.
Athletics: Noah Sandstrom, Chair, David Dethier, Bill Kangas, Christie Kelsey, Liz McGowan, Will Onley.
Book Store Advisory: Jim Shepard, Chair, Amy Gehring, E. J. Johnson.
Calendar and Schedule: Jon Bakija, Chair (fall), Cesar Silva, Chair (spring), Cesar Silva (fall), Tanselli Savadar (spring), Ed Gollin, Bud
Fisher*, Stephen Sneed*, Barbara Casey*, Tiffany Chang '14, two students to be announced.
Campus Environmental Advisory: Hank Art, Chair, Dieter Bingemann, Alison Case, Ken Savitsky, Tiffany Change '14, Zoe Grueskin '14,
Sarah Meyerhoff '14, Helen Song '14.
College and Community Advisory: Amie Hane, Ken Kuttner, Stevc Levin, Jacob Addelson '14, Holly Dwyer '12, Zoe Grueskin '14.
Compensation Committee: Bill Gentry, Chair, Cecilia Chang, Ronadh Cox, Edan Dekel, Susan Engel, Sara LaLumia, Luana Maroja, David
Morris, Michelyn Pinard, Ben Rubin.
Discipline: Cheryl Shanks, Chair, Liz Beazley, Kerry Christensen, Dave Edwards, Scarlett Jang, Zafi Levy, Gretchen Long, Anand Swamy,
Sarah Bolton*, students to be announced.
Diversity and Community: Claire Ting, Chair, faculty to be announced, Jennifer Chan '14, Veronique Hob-Hob '13, David Lee '14, Reema
Sharma '13, Monica Torres '13, Lily Wong '12.
Educational Policy: Guy Hedreen, Chair, Rob Baker-White, Brent Heeringa, Chip Lovett, Jim Mahon, Tara Watson, Amanda Wilcox, Sarah
Bolton*, Peter Murphy*, Charles Toomajian Jr.*, Adam Falk*, Michael Girouard '13, Student Chair, Nneka Dennie '13, Michael Gold
'14, Ahn Nguyen'13, Amy Nguyen '12, Krista Pickett '13.
Faculty Interview Panel: Julie Cassiday, Steve Fix, Antonia Foias, Tom Garrity, Dukes Love, Wendy Raymond.
Honorary Degrees: Daniel Aalberts, Karen Merrill, Jim Shepard, Jefferson Strait*, Keli Kaegi*, students to be annouced.]
Information Technology: Kevin Jones, Chair, Ken Kuttner, Shawn Rosenheim, Steve Souza, Will Dudley*, David Pilachowski*, Dinny
Taylor*, two administrators appointed by the Provost*, Margaret Richmond '12, two students to be announced.
Lecture: Christian Thorne, Chair, Cathy Johnson, Omar Sangare, David Tucker-Smith, Pat Megley, Student Chair, Katie Aldrin '12, Rose
Courteau '14, Robin Grimm '14.
Library: Marjorie Hirsch, Chair, Stewart Johnson, Steve Sheppard, Peter Murphy*, David Pilachowski*, Robert Volz*, David Michael '13,
Student Chair, Sharona Bollinger '14, Emily McTague '12, Margaret Moore '12.
Priorities and Resources: Andrea Danyluk, Chair, Ilona Bell, Morgan McGuire, Safa Zaki, Will Dudley*, Thomas Dwyer*, Steve Klass*,
John Malcolm*, Diana Prideaux-Brune*, Fred Puddester*, Chris Winters*, Andrea Lindsay '13, two students to be announced.
Steering: Laurie Heatherington, Chair, Colin Adams, Mea Cook, Sarah Dubow, Gage McWeeney, Bernie Rhie.
Undergraduate Life: Mihai Stoiciu, Chair, Lois Banta, Dan Greenberg, Sarah Jacobson, Glenn Shuck, Laure Berk '12, Student Chair,
Courtney Alexander '13, Kate Flanagan ' 14, James Mathenge '12, Peter Skipper '13, David Zackheim '12.]
Winter Study Program: Ollie Beaver, Chair, David Eppel, Nate Kornell, Darel Paul, Holly Silva, Barbara Casey*, Paula Consolini*,
Jonathan Morgan-Leamon*, Jodi Psoter*, Rebecca Fallon '14, Jalynne Figueroa '13, Veronique Hob-Hob '13, Ben Kane '12.]
________________
* Ex-officio
SPECIAL ADVISORS 2011-2012
Architecture: Ann K. McCallum
Business Schools and Business Opportunities: Robin Meyer
Divinity Schools: Richard E. Spalding
Engineering: Jefferson Strait
Faculty Fellowships: Peter T. Murphy
Federally Funded Faculty Fellowships (NSF, Fulbright, HHMI, etc.): Thomas Dwyer
Graduate Fellowships and Scholarships: Katerina King
Churchill Scholarship
Fulbright Predoctoral Grants
Luce Scholars Program
NSF Scholarships
Rhodes, Marshall, Mitchell Scholarships
Harry S. Truman Scholarship
Udall Scholarship
Watson Fellowship
355
Graduate Schools of Arts and Sciences: Department Heads
Health Professions Advisor: Jane D. Cary
International Student Advisor: Laura B. McKeon
Law Schools: Dawn Dellea
National Science Foundation: Department Chairs
Peace Corps: Dawn Dellea
Public and International Affairs Schools and Foreign Service: James McAllister, John Noble
Special Academic Programs: Molly L. Magavern
Student Writing Tutorial Program: Stephanie E. Dunson
Study Abroad Programs: Laura B. McKeon
Teaching, M.A.T. Programs: Susan L. Engel, John Noble
Williams College Fellowships: Katerina King
Winter Study Practice Teaching: Susan L. Engel
356
SEXUAL HARASSMENT/DISCRIMINATION ADVISORS
Advisors are available to all members of the College community for consultation concerning incidents that could be a form of discrimina-
tion. The advisor's role is described in the Discrimination Grievance Policy and Procedures, printed in the handbooks. Persons serving as
advisors are health staff and counselors, assistant and associate deans, Human Resources officers, the Chaplain, and the Affirmative Action
Officer. All advisors have received training in sexual harrassment and other discrimination advising.
Gina Coleman, Associate Dean, Hopkins
David Johnson, Associate Dean, Hopkins
Laura McKeon, Associate Dean, Hopkins
Charles Toomajian, Associate Dean of the College and Registrar, Hopkins
Justin Adkins, Queer Life Coordinator, MCC, Jenness
Marcela Peacock, Program Coordinator, MCC, Jenness
Liliana Rodriguez, Director, MCC, Jenness
Taj Smith, Assistant Director, MCC, Jenness
Michael Reed, Vice President for Strategic Planning and Institutional Diversity, Hopkins
Carmen Whalen, Associate Dean for Diversity, Hopkins
Martha Tetrault, Director, Human Resources, B&L Building
Robert Wright, Associate Director, Human Resources, B&L Building
Richard Spalding, Chaplain, Paresky Center
Donna Denelli-Hess, Health Educator, Thompson
Ruth Harrison, Director of Health Services, Thompson
Michael Semensi '13
Abigail Davies '13
Laurie Heatherington, Psychology, Bronfman
Enrique Peacock-Lopez, Chemistry, Bronfman
Paula Moore Tabor, Alumni Relations, Mears
Bruce Wheat, Information Technology, Jesup
STANDING PANELS FOR DISCRIMINATION
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES
The grievance committee that hears cases of alleged discrimination (see handbooks) is appointed from a standing panel consisting of thirty-
two persons, drawn from several College panels and from the College Council. Its membership also includes a minority faculty and staff
representative. Two panel members--one a member of the faculty, the other of the staff--stand ready to chair the grievance committee ap-
pointed to hear a particular case.
Faculty Review Panel: Devyn Benson, Justin Crowe, Edan Dekel, Steve Gerrard, Brent Herringa, Amy Holzapfel, Tiku Ma-
jumder, Christopher Nugent, Mihai Stoiciu, Claire Ting, Amanda Wilcox, Scott Wong.
Provost's Panel: Gary Guerin, Robin Kibler, Candace Marlow, Richard Nesbitt, Beth Reynolds, Charles Toomajian.
Vice President's Panel: Heather Clemow, Marc Field, Kelly Kervan, Jeanette Kopczynski, Beatrice Miles, Paula Moore Ta-
bor.
College Council Panel: Sharona Bollinger '14, Alexandra Corne '12, Alida Davis '14, Harry Gilbert '14, Jeremy Gold '14,
Sunny Velez '13.
Minority Faculty-Staff Representatives: Appointed by the President.
Faculty Chair: Appointed by President.
Staff Chair: Appointed by President.
357
OFFICES OF ADMINISTRATION 2011-2012
Office of the President
Adam F. Falk, President
B.S. (1987) University of North Carolina; Ph.D. (1991) Harvard
Keli A. Kaegi, Assistant to the President and Secretary of the College
B.A. (1988) Wellesley College; M.S. (1991) University of Rochester
James G. Kolesar, Assistant to the President for Public Affairs
B.A. (1972) Williams
Office of the Provost
William J. Lenhart, Provost and Treasurer
B.S. (1977) St. Joseph's College (Philadelphia); A.M. (1979) Dartmouth; Ph.D. (1983) Dartmouth
Keith C. Finan, Associate Provost
B.A. (1976) Miami University, Ohio; M.A. (1979) Binghamton University
Thomas J. Dwyer, Budget Director
B.A. (1995) Pomona College; M.B.A. (2001) Harvard Business School
Chris Winters, Director of Institutional Research
B.A. (1995) Williams; M.S./M.B.A. (1996) Northeastern University, GSPA
Kristan Renish, Budget and Planning Analyst
B.A. (1981) Bates College
Kathleen L. Therrien, Trust Adminiatrator
B.S. (1997) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
Anita Gutmann, Administrative Coordinator
A.S. (1976) Berkshire Community College
Office of the Dean of the Faculty
Peter T. Murphy, Dean of the Faculty
B.A. (1981) Yale University; D. Phil. (1986) Johns Hopkins University
John P. Gerry, Associate Dean of the Faculty
A.B. (1984) Grinnell College; Ph.D., A.M., A.L.M. (1993) Harvard University
Sally L. Bird, Administrative Coordinator of Faculty Affairs
Paula M. Consolini, Coordinator of Experiential Education
A.B. (1981) Lafayette College; Ph.D. (1992) University of California, Berkeley
Carolyn Greene, Academic Program Coordinator
B.A. (2002) Williams
Office of the Dean of the College
Sarah R. Bolton, Dean of the College
B.S. (1988) Brown; Ph.D. (1995) University of California, Berkeley
David C. Johnson, Associate Dean for First-Year Students
B.A. (1971) Williams; M.A. (1995) Williams
Stephen D. Sneed, Associate Dean
B.S. (1971) Western Michigan University; Ed.D. (1979) West Virginia University
Charles R. Toomajian, Jr., Associate Dean and Registrar
A.B. (1965) Bowdoin; Ph.D. (1974) Cornell
Gina Coleman, Associate Dean
B.A. (1990) Williams; M.Ed. (2000) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts; Ph.D. (2007) University of Nebraska
Laura B. McKeon, Associate Dean and Director of International Study
B.A. (1969) University of Chicago; Ph.D. (1980) University of Chicago
Katerina P. King, Director of Fellowships
B.A. (1988) McGill University; Ph.D. (1998) Harvard University
Cynthia G. Haley, Executive Assistant to the Dean
Office of the Vice President for Alumni Relations and Development
Michael E. Reed, Interim Vice President for Alumni Relations and Development
B.A. (1975) Williams; M.A. (1979) Howard University
Juan G. Baena, Assistant Director of Alumni Relations and Director of Technology/Affinity Programs
B.A. (2007) Williams College
Robert V. Behr, Alumni Travel Coordinator
B.A. (1955) Williams; Ed.M. (1962) Harvard
Pam Besnard, Director of Major Gifts
B.A. (1984) Williams
Crystal A. Brooks, Director of Research, Development Office
B.A. (1995) Skidmore College
Kimberly A. Brown, Manager of Mailing Services
B.S. (1982) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
Michael A. Burdick, Web Manager
Elizabeth B. Burnett, Senior Development Officer
B.A. (1994) Williams College; M.F.A. (1999) University of Montana
Patricia M. Burton, Assistant Director of Donor Relations
B.A. (1984) Hartwick College
Mary Ellen Czerniak, Director of Corporate and Foundation Relations
B.A. (1972) DePaul University; B.A. (1977) University of Wyoming
David B. Dewey, Senior Development Officer
B.A. (1982) Williams
Diana M. Elvin, Director of Donor Relations
B.A. (1971) Wheaton College; M.A. (1990) Assumption College
358
Patti J. Exster, Stewardship Officer
Lewis E. Fisher, Director of Major Reunion Giving Programs
B.A. (1989) Williams
Brooks L. Foehl, Director of Alumni Relations and Secretary of the Society of Alumni
B.A. (1988) Williams
Virginia N. Gaskill, Executive Assistant
Gillien Graye, Development Research Specialist
B.A. (1988) Bard College; M.S. (1991) S.U.N.Y., New Paltz; M.L.S. (1998) St. John's University
Jennifer E. Grow, Assistant Editor of Alumni Publications
B.A. (1994) Mt. Holyoke College
B. Thomas Henry, Senior Development Officer
B.A. (1976) Princeton; M.L.A. (1979) Harvard University
Angela E. Hillman, Development Research Assistant
B.S. (2001) Trinity College; M.A. (2005) Arizona State University
Elizabeth L. Howard, Development Officer, Alumni Fund
A.B. (1977) Earlham College
Cindy L. Kimball, Manager of Bio Administration
Peter R. Landry, Manager of Gift Administration
A.S. (1991) Berkshire Community College
Dalit Lederman, Events Mananger
B.S. (2002) Adelphi University
Amy T. Lovett, Editor of Alumni Publications
B.A. (1994) University of Richmond; M.A. (2000) S.U.N.Y., Albany
Rexford Lybrand, Assistant Director of Alumni Relations and Director of Classes and Reunions
B.S. (1999) Kennesaw State University
Sheila Mason, Assistant Director of Major Reunion Giving Programs
B.A. (1990) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
Margaret A. McComish, Associate Director of Planned Giving
B.A. (1991) University of Pennsylvania; M.A.R. (1993) Yale; J.D. (1998) University of Connecticut
Julie J. Menard, Assistant Director of Advancement Information Systems
B.S. (2000) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
Jane Nicholls, Director of Parents Fund
B.A. (1977) Pennsylvania State University; M.S. (1999) Oxford
Heather L. O'Brien, Development Officer, Alumni Fund
B.A. (1995) Trinity College, Burlington
Michael A. Reopell, Director of Advancement Information Systems
B.S. (1985) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts; M.B.A. (1994) Western New England College
Elizabeth W. Reynolds, Development Officer, Alumni Fund
B.A. (1995) Williams
Donna M. Richardson, Coordinator of Donor Relations Systems
A.S. (1988) Berkshire Community College
Christine A. Robare, Development Officer, Alumni Fund
B.S. (1994) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts; M.B.A. (1999) Western New England College
Rob P. Swann, Assistant Director of Alumni Relations and Director of Off Campus Programs
B.A. (1990) Williams; M.A. (1997) American University
Paula Moore Tabor, Associate Director of Alumni Relations and Director of Lifelong Learning
B.A. (1976) Williams; Ed.M. (1989) Harvard
Stephen M. Tomkowicz, Assistant Director of Advancement Information Systems
B.S. (1985) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
James H. Trapp, Director of Annual Giving
B.A. (1976) Williams
Christopher J. Vadnais, Programmer/Analyst
Teresa J. Waryjasz, Production Manager
A.S. (1980) Berkshire Community College
Robert H. White, Director of Communications
B.A. (1977) Colgate
Alice E. Wilson, Director of 25th Reunion Program
B.A. (1971) University of Iowa
Catherine M. Yamamoto, Senior Development Officer
B.B.A. (1973) University of Wisconsin
Office of the Vice President for Campus Life
Stephen P. Klass, Vice President for Campus Life
B.A. (1975) Hobart College; M.S. (1994) University of Rochester
Aaron B. Gordon, Deputy to the Vice President
B.A. (2001) Franklin & Marshall; M.B.A. (2005) Union
Susan A. Morin, Executive Assistant to the Vice President
Office of the Vice President for Strategic Planning and Institutional Diversity
Michael E. Reed, Vice President for Strategic Planning and Institutional Diversity
B.A. (1975) Williams; M.A. (1979) Howard University
Office of Admission
Richard L. Nesbitt, Director of Admission
B.A. (1974) Williams; M.S.Ed. (1985) University of Pennsylvania
Frances B. Lapidus, Associate Director of Admission
B.S. (1966) Maryland; M.Ed. (1978) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
359
Sean M. Logan, Acting Associate Director of Admission
B.A. (1988) Williams
Karen J. Parkinson, Associate Director of Admission
A.B. (1970) Mount Holyoke; M.Ed. (1976) University of Rochester
Liliana Rodriguez, Associate Director of Admission
B.A. (2001) Williams; M.S. (2004) University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Constance D. Sheehy, Associate Director of Admission for Operations
B.A. (1975) Williams; M.Ed. (1995) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
Robert Rivas, Assistant Director of Admission
B.A. (2001) Williams
Elizabeth Tilley, Assistant Director of Admission
B.A. (2001) Williams
Sergio N. Marte, Admission Intern
B.A. (2008) Williams
Sulgi Lim, Assistant Director of Admission
B.A. (2006) Williams
Derrick Robertson, Assistant Director of Admission
B.A. (2001) Southern University and A & M College
Office of Campus Safety and Security
David J. Boyer, Director of Campus Safety and Security
B.S. (1982) Westfield State College
Office of Career Counseling
John H. Noble, Director of Career Counseling
A.B. (1975) Harvard; M.S. (1980) Bank Street College of Education
Jane D. Cary, Associate Director of Career Counseling and
, Director of Science and Health Professions Advising
B.A. (1977) Bates College; M.A. (1981) Columbia University, Teachers College
Dawn M. Dellea, Assistant Director of Career Counseling
B.S. (1992) Northeastern University; M.Ed. (2003) Cambridge College
Ronald L. Gallagher, Assistant Director of Career Counseling
B.S. (1976) Springfield; A.S. (1974) Springfield Technical College
Kristen McCormack, Assistant Director of Recruiting
B.S. (1987) Ithaca College; M.S. (1992) Lesley College
Robin L. Meyer, Associate Director of Career Counseling
B.A. (1991) Gustavos Adolphus College; M.S. (1996) Mankato University
Office of the Chaplains
Richard E. Spalding, Chaplain to the College and Coordinator of Community Service
B.A. (1976) Yale; M. Div. (1981) Yale Divinity School; S.T.M. (1986) Union Theological Seminary (NY)
Gary C. Caster, Catholic Chaplain
B.A. (1988) Catholic University of America; Licentiate (1989) Catholic University of America; M.A. (1992) Mt. St. Mary's University; M.Div. (1992) Mt.
St. Mary's University
Robert S. Scherr, Jewish Chaplain
B.A. (1968) University of California, Berkeley; M.A. (1971) California State University (San Francisco); M.T.S. (2001) Harvard Divinity School
Bilal Ansari, Muslim Chaplain
B.S. (2002) Springfield College; M.A. (2011) Hartford Seminary (Hartford, CT)
Office of the Chief Investment Officer
Collette Chilton, Chief Investment Officer
B.S. (1981) University of California, Berkeley; M.B.A. (1986) Amos Tuck School of Business Administration at Dartmouth
Kristin Corrigan, Office Manager/EA
B.S. (1993) Bentley College
Timothy Joeng, Investment Officer, Non-Marketable Securities
B.E. (1997) Cooper Union; M.S. (1999) Columbia University
Thomas Mucha, Investment Analyst
A.B. (2003) Harvard College
Anna Soybel, Investment Analyst
B.A. (2011) Williams College
Abigail Wattley, Investment Associate
B.A. (2005) Williams College; M.B.A. (2010) Harvard Business School
Bradford Wakeman, Director, Investment Operations and Risk Management
B.S. (1986) Bentley College
Office of Communications
Angela P. Schaeffer, Director of Communications
B.A. (1993) Dickinson College; M.S. (1994) Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism
Kristian S. Dufour, Associate Director of Communications for Sports Information
B.A. (1990) S.U.N.Y., Old Westbury
Jennifer E. Grow, Assistant Director of Communications for Publications
B.A. (1994) Mt. Holyoke College
Noelle Lemoine, Communications Assistant
A.S. (1986) Berkshire Community College; B.A. (1989) North Adams State College
Amy T. Lovett, Associate Director of Communications for Publications
B.A. (1994) University of Richmond; M.A. (2000) S.U.N.Y., Albany
Dick Quinn, Associate Director of Communications for Sports Information
B.A. (1973) Holy Cross; M.S. (1989) Iona College
360
Suzanne Silitch, Associate Director of Communications for the Arts
B.A. (1995) Mary Washington College; M.F.A. (2000) S.U.N.Y., Stony Brook
Teresa J. Waryjasz, Production Manager
A.S. (1980) Berkshire Community College
Robert H. White, Deputy Director of Communications for Alumni Relations and Development
B.A. (1977) Colgate University
Office of the Controller
Susan S. Hogan, CPA, Controller
B.S. (1980) Syracuse
Karen P. Jolin, Director of Financial Information Systems
B.S. (1982) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
David W. Holland, Bursar
B.S. (1967) Suffolk University
Kelly F. Kervan, Assistant Controller
B.S. (1990) North Adams State College
Robert Seney, Investment Accountant
B.S. (1985) North Adams State College; M.B.A. (1989) University of Lowell
Lisa A. Gazaille, Accounting Systems Technical Coordinator
B.S. (1993) North Adams State College
Christina M. Gregory, Accountant
B.A. (2001) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
Office of Financial Aid
Paul J. Boyer, Director of Financial Aid
B.A. (1977) Williams
Betsy Hobson, Associate Director of Financial Aid
B.S. (1989) University of Colorado
Candace L. Marlow, Assistant Director of Financial Aid
B.A. (2002) Williams
Felicia C. Pharr, Financial Aid Counselor
B.A. (1975) Williams
Office of Health
Ruth G. Harrison, Director of Health Services
B.S. (1973) Hunter College; M.A. (1982) New York University
John A. Miner, M.D., Psychiatrist
B.S. (1973) University of South Dakota; M.D. (1975) University of Minnesota
Craig Piers, Ph.D., Psychotherapist
B.A. (1986) Salve Regina University; Ph.D. (1993) New School for Research
Karen Theiling, L.M.H.C., Psychotherapist
M.A. (2000) Antioch College
Judith Win, Ph.D., Psychotherapist,
B.A. (1966) Bates College; Ph.D. (1998) The Fielding Institute
Margaret H. Wood, L.I.C.S.W., Psychotherapist
B.A. (1968) Eckerd College; M.S.W. (1987) S.U.N.Y., Albany
Donna M. Denelli-Hess, Health Educator
B.A. (1975) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts; M.S.P.H. (1978) University of Massachusetts
Alyssa Sporbert, Health Educator
B.A. (1992) North Adams State College; M.Ed. (2000) Cambridge College
Deborah J. Flynn, F.N.P., Nurse Practitioner
B.S.N. (1983) University of Massachusetts, Amherst; M.S.N. as F.N.P. (1996) University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Deanna Traversa, PA-C, Physician Assistant
B.S. in Health Science/P.A. Ceritificate, Touro College of Health Science, Physician Assistant Program, Bayshore, NY
Maria Cruz, R.D., L.D.N., Nutritionist
B.S. (1990) University of Wisconsin, Madison
Office of Human Resources
Martha R. Tetrault, Director of Human Resources
B.A. (1977) Springfield College; M.A. (1985) S.U.N.Y., Albany
Robert F. Wright, Associate Director of Human Resources
Simone M. Anderson, HRIS Manager
B.A. (1988) University of Rochester; M.S. (2002) New School University
Christa A. Waryas, Payroll Manager
Kristine A. Maloney, Benefits Administrator
B.S. (2002) Business Administration, Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
Danielle Gonzalez, Employment Manager
Office for Information Technology
James F. Allison, Project Manager
B.S. (1972) Tufts; M.B.A. (1994) Clark
Matthew J. H. Baya, Network and Systems Administrator
B.S. (1992) Antioch College
Cheryl Brewer, Budget and Facilities Administrator
Michael Burdick, Web Developer
Peter Charbonneau, Senior Networks and Systems Administrator
B.S.E.E. (1984) University of Colorado
Heather Clemow, Web Content Developer
B.A. (1975) Stephens College; M.S. (1976) Nova University
361
Mark R. Connor, Senior Desktop Systems Specialist
B.A. (1983) Berkshire Community College
Gretchen Eliason, Database Administrator
B.A. (1990) Boston University; M.S. (1998) Boston University
Ashley W. Frost, Senior Networks and Systems Administrator
B.A. (1992) Williams
John B. Germanowski, Project Manager
B.A. (1986) Williams
Todd M. Gould, Networks and Systems Administrator
B.A. (1996) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
Tamra L. Hjermstad, Media Studios and Technologies Coordinator
B.A. (1990) Williams
Mika Hirai, Instructional Technology Specialist
B.A. (1989) Obirin University, Japan; M.A. (2001) University of Iowa
TerriLynn Hurley, Senior Desktop Systems Specialist
B.S. (1992) Westfield State College
Kenneth Konopka, Administrative Systems Analyst/Programmer
B.S. (1990) Central Connecticut State; M.S. (1998) Renselear
Maggie Koperniak, Project Manager
B.A. (1979) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts; M.B.A. (1999) University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Kate Krolicki, Web, Print and Training Specialist
B.A. (1995) Williams
Criss S. Laidlaw, Director of Administrative Information Systems
B.A. (1982) Carleton College
James Lillie, Media Services Assistant
Sharron J. Macklin, Instructional Technology Specialist
B.S. (1972) University of Massachusetts, Amherst; M.S. (1996) University of Maine, Orono
Gabriel McHale, Networks and Systems Administrator
Lynn M. Melchiori, Desktop Systems Specialist
B.A. (1978) University of Massachusetts, Amherst; M.Ed. (2001) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
Jacob Miller, Desktop Systems Specialist
B.S. (2008) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
Jonathan Morgan-Leamon, Director of Instructional Technology
B.A. (1989) Colgate, M.S. (2007) University of Massachusetts, Amherst,
Trevor Murphy, Instructional Technology Specialist
B.A. (1994) S.U.N.Y, Potsdam.; M.S. (1996) Oregon State University
Edward S. Nowlan, Director of Networks and Systems
B.S. (1985) Southern Connecticut State University
Todd Noyes, Desktop Systems Specialist
B.A. (2007) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
Scott Pittinsky, Director of Web Operations
B.A. (1990) Brandeis
Guy Randall, Desktop Systems Specialist
Philip F. Remillard, Media Services Specialist
B.A. (1978) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
Michael Richardson, Desktop Systems Specialist
Seth Rogers, Director of Desktop Systems
B.A. (1989) Reed College
Douglas A. Rydell, Project Manager
B.A. (1980) St. John's
Paul J. Smernoff, Networks and Systems Administrator
Carl Strolle, Web Developer
B.A. (1990) Bowdoin
Dinny S. Taylor, Chief Technology Officer
B.A. (1968) Connecticut College; M.Ed. (1970) Lesley
Courtney Wade, Academic Application Developer
B.A. (1997) Yale; M.P.A. (2000) New York University; M.S. (2005) University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Jianjun Wang, Senior Instructional Technology Specialist,
B.A. (1982) Shanghai International Studies University, China; M.A. (1994) University of Connecticut, Storrs
Christopher S. Warren, Database Integration Specialist
B.A. (1996) Williams
Bruce Wheat, Media Service Specialist
B.M. (1973) Eastman School of Music
Office of Physical Education, Athletics and Recreation
Lisa Melendy, Director of Athletics
M.S. (1985) University of Massachusetts
Judith L. Fraser, Assistant Director of Athletics/Finance
B.S. (1979) University of Vermont; M.B.A. (1983) Wharton, University of Pennsylvania
Michael J. Frawley, Director of Sports Medicine
B.S. (1987) Bridgewater State; M.S. (1988) Old Dominion
Gary J. Guerin, Associate Director for Operations, Athletics
B.S. (1975) Boston University
Office of the Registrar
Charles R. Toomajian, Jr., Associate Dean of the College and Registrar
A.B. (1965) Bowdoin; Ph.D. (1974) Cornell
362
Barbara A. Casey, Associate Registrar for Student and Faculty Services
B.A. (1983) Williams
Mary L. Morrison, Associate Registrar for Records and Registration
B.A. (1974) Mount Holyoke; M.B.A. (1989) S.U.N.Y., Albany
Office of Student Life
Douglas J. B. Schiazza, Director
B.A. (1993) Hope; M.A. (1997) Geneva
Benjamin J. Lamb, Interim Assistant Director for Student Involvement
B.A. (1997) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts; M.S.Ed. (2011) College of St. Rose
TBD, Assistant Director for Upperclass Residential Programs
Ellen D. Rougeau, Student Activities Coordinator
Schuyler A. Hall, Student Centers Coordinator
B.A. (2010) Williams
Gail A. Rondeau, Student Housing Coordinator
Special Academic Programs Office
Molly Magavern, Director of Special Academic Programs
B.A. (1983) Wesleyan University; Ed.M. (1996) North Adams State College
Academic Resources
Joyce P. Foster, Director of Academic Resources
B.A. (1973) Northeastern University; Ph.D. (1997) Brown
Center for Development Economics
Gerard Caprio, Jr., Chair, Executive Committee
B.A. (1972) Williams; Ph.D. (1976) University of Michigan
Thomas S. Powers, Director
B.A. (1981) Williams; M.B.A. (1987) Harvard University
Rachel J. Louis, Assistant Director
B.A. (1992) Kenyon College; M.A. and M.E.S. (1999) Yale University
Karima Barrow, Assistant Director
B.A. (1990) Princeton University; M.S. (2003) Georgetown University
Center for Environmental Studies
Jennifer L. French, Director
B.A. (1995) College of William and Mary; Ph.D. (2001) Rutgers
Sarah S. Gardner, Associate Director
B.A. (1985) Smith College; Ph.D. (2000) City University of New York
Andrew T. Jones, Hopkins Memorial Forest Manager
B.A. (1986) Macalester College; M.F. (1994) Duke
Jay Racela, Technical Assistant, CES and Morley Sciences Laboratories
B.A. (1986) Macalester College; M.F. (1994) Duke
Center for Foreign Languages, Literatures, and Cultures
Jane Canova, Administrative Director of the Center for Foreign Languages, Literatures and Cultures
B.S. (1976) Georgetown; M.S.W. (1980) New York University
Multicultural Center
Edward A. Epping, Faculty Director of the Multicultural Center
B.A. (1970) Western Illinois University; M.F.A. (1973) University of Wisconsin
Gail Bouknight-Davis, Director of the Multicultural Center
B.A. (1988) Brandeis; Ph.D. (1997) Brown
Arif Smith, Assistant Director of the Multicultural Center
B.A. (2002) Oklahoma State University
Marcela Villada Peacock, Multicultural Center Program Coordinator
Oakley Center for the Humanities and Social Sciences
Michael F. Brown, Director
A.B. (1972) Princeton; Ph.D. (1981) University of Michigan
Academic Support
Norman R. Bell, Coordinator of Science Facilities and College Safety Officer
B.S. (1990) Worcester State College; M.S. (1993) Miami University
Mary K. Bailey, Systems Support Specialist
B.S. (1983) University of New Hampshire; M.M. (1988) University of Massachusetts
Susan L. Engel, Director of Education Programs
B.A. (1980) Sarah Lawrence; Ph.D. (1986) C.U.N.Y.
Linda A. Reynolds, Visual Resources Curator
B.S. (1970) University of Connecticut; M.A. (1979) New York University; M.A. (1993) Williams
Anne R. Skinner, Safety Officer
B.A. (1961) Radcliffe; Ph.D. (1966) Yale
Dining Services
Robert Volpi, Director of Dining Services
A.S. (1973) Hudson Valley; A.S. (1974) Weber State University; B.S. (1976) Southern Vermont College
I. Chris Abayasinghe, Assistant Director, Student Dining
B.A. (2002) Eastern Connecticut State University
Jeanette Kopczynki, Assistant Director, Faculty House/Catering
A.S. (1992) Berkshire Community College; B.A. (2011) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
363
Mark Thompson, Executive Chef
Sharon Marceau, Assistant to the Director
A.S. (1984) Berkshire Community College
Molly O'Brien, Manager, Driscoll/Eco Caf
B.S. (2002) Johnson & Whales
Gayle L. Donohue, Manager Mission Park
B.S. Hotel and Restaurant Management (1984) University of Denver; M.S. Organizational Leadership (2011) Norwich University
Jerry D'Acchille, Jr., Manager, Paresky Center
A.O.S. (1983) Culinary Institute of America
Jerry Byers, Assistant Mananger, Pareksky Center
Facilities
Diana PrideauxBrune, Associate Vice President for Facilities
B.S. Arch. (1982) University of Virginia; M.S. (1989) Cornell University
Jose V. Fierro, Director of Facilities Operations
B.S. (1982) National University of Colombia; M.S.(1991) State University of New York at Binghamton
Beatrice M. Miles, Director of Facilities Services
Timothy J. Reisler, Assistant Director for Administrative Services
B.A. (1983) Wheaton College; M.B.A. (1992) Western New England College
Mary Kate Shea, Director of Conferences and Events
B.A. (1981) Williams College; M.S. (1983) University of Massachusetts
Thomas A. Bona, Architectural Maintenance Supervisor
B.S. (2000) Westfield State College
Edward Bourdon, Custodial Supervisor
B.A. (1974) North Adams State College
Michael R. Briggs, Senior Project Manager
Donald B. Clark, Utility Program Manager
B.S. (1971) St. Lawrence University
Bruce J. Decoteau, Senior Project Manager
David F. Fitzgerald, Horticulturist and Grounds Supervisor
B.S. (1980) University of Massachusetts; M.S. (1982) Washington State University
Kenneth L. Jensen, Mechanical Maintenance Supervisor,
David Lamarre, Custodial Supervisor
A.S. (1980) Berkshire Community College; (1991) New England Culinary Institute
Thomas R. Mahar, Project Manager
A.S. (1999) Berkshire Community College
Peter Mason, Custodial Supervisor
Jason Moran, Project Manager
B.S. (2001) Worcester Polytechnic Institute
Jean F. Richer, Conferences and Events Facilitator
A.S. (1967) St. Joseph College
Christopher Williams, Assistant Director for Architectural Services
B.F.A. (1978) Pratt Institute
'62 Center for Theatre and Dance
Cosmo A. Catalano, Jr., Production Manager for the Theatre Department, Lecturer and, Technical Supervisor for the '62 Center for Theatre and Dance
B.A. (1976) University of Iowa; M.F.A. (1979) Yale
Deborah A. Brothers, Costume Designer and Lecturer
B.A. (1976) University of New Orleans; M.F.A. (1979) California Institute of the Arts
Maia RobbinsZust, Technical Director, Department of Theatre
B.F.A. (2000) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
Nathanial T. Weissner, Technical Director, MainStage
B.A. (2004) Trinity College
Williams College Museum of Art
Katy Kline, Interim Director
B.A. (19??) Oberlin College; M.A. (19??) Oberlin
Elizabeth Gallerani, Manager of Mellon Academic Programs
B.A. (2003) Cornell University; M.A. (2005) University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Joann Harnden, Coordinator of Education Programs
B.A. (1998) Colby College
Diane Hart, Museum Registrar
B.A. (1977) Virginia Tech; M.A. (1986) Virginia Commonwealth University
Christine Naughton, Director of Museum Donor Relations
B.A. (1999) Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
Hideyo Okamura, Exhibition Designer and Chief Preparator
B.A. (1984) Eastern Oregon State College; Diploma, Studio Program (1986); Certificate, Traveling Scholars Program (1987) School of the Museum of Fine
Arts
Kathryn Price, Curator of Special Projects
B.A. (2000) The College of Wooster; M.A. (2002) Williams
Rachel Tassone, Associate Registrar
B.F.A. (1991) Colby-Sawyer College
Raymond Torrenti, Museum Membership and Special Events Manager
B.A. (1977) Barrington College; M.Div. (1984) Weston School of Theology; Ph.D. (1985) Boston University
Cynthia Way, Director of Education and Visitor Experience
B.A. Brown University; M.F.A Columbia University
364
Zilkha Center for Environmental Initiatives
Stephanie Boyd, Director
B.Eng. (1983) Dalhousie University; M.B.A. (1990) Memorial University of Newfoundland; LEED AP
365
DEGREES CONFERRED JUNE, 2011
Conferring of the Degree of Master of Arts
Margaret Claire Adler
Amy Nell Bridgeman
Emily Leisz Carr
Jhari DerrHill
Camran Julian Mani
Nancy L. O'Connor
Allison Wayland Pappas
Miriam Ashkin Stanton
Sarah Elizabeth Van Anden
Oliver Morgan Wunsch
Conferring of the Degree of Master of Arts in Policy Economics
Beknazar Amanov
Carlos Roberto Arias Muoz
Dawn Seanne Bailey
Amina Asif Bajwa
David Simon Banda
Daniel Ofoe Chachu
Welcome Cinisela Dlamini
Francis Saidy Dopoh II
Shahane Harutyunyan
Sokkea Hoy
Fayyaz Hussain
Godfrey Kabera
Constance Kabibi
Alassane Koulibaly
Bushra Khanam Luna
Mariam Machavariani
Abdoulaye Magassouba
Faisal Maqsood
Iris Metani
Rhoda Chilufya Kambikambi Mpembamoto
Welcome Ncobizwe Nxumalo
Katuwawala Arachchige Hemantha Chandani Pubudusiri
Roberto Carlos Ramrez Alvarenga
Ialy Mboahangy Rasoamanana
Phetsamone Sengchanh
Flix Fernando Simione
Tran Thanh Hoa
Tran Thi Thanh Hoa
Truong Quynh Bao
Kinley Wangmo
Bachelor of Arts
_________________________
* Phi Beta Kappa
+ Sigma Xi
_________________________
Bachelor of Arts, Summa Cum Laude
*Joseph Jacob Augenbraun, with highest honors in Environmental Studies
*Robert Wilson Cuthbert
*William Lee, with highest honors in History
*+Jake Andrew Levinson, with highest honors in Mathematics
*+Yuzhong Meng, with highest honors in Chemistry
*+Colin William Platt, with honors in Chemistry
*Jennifer Marie Rowe
*Gea Hyun Shin, with highest honors in Economics
*Andrew Kyle Victor, with honors in Political Economy
*+Zhaoning Wang, with highest honors in Economics and honors in Mathematics
Bachelor of Arts, Magna Cum Laude
*Brge Abiral, with honors in Anthropology
*Katherine Cichon Anderson
*+Nicholas Anton Arnosti, with highest honors in Computer Science
Ceyhun Ceylan Arslan, with honors in Comparative Literature
Alexander Milo Bain
Elizabeth Anne Barcay
+Aaron William Bauer
Corey Lane Benson, with honors in Political Science
Jonathan Francis Carroll
*Caroline Calvert Chiappetti
*Anna Penelope Coe
*Elizabeth Anne Danhakl
*Cecilia Diane DavisHayes
*Hilary Anne Smith Dolstad, with highest honors in Biology
*Peter George Drivas, with honors in Political Science
*James Robert Finley, with highest honors in Philosophy
*Diego Mariano Flores Benavides, with honors in Political Economy
*Christopher Joseph Fox, with honors in English
*Mary Tibbetts Freeman, with highest honors in History
*Kathryn Blair Friedman
Michael Barrett Geary
*+Peter Kirsh Gottlieb, with highest honors in Physics
*Madeleine Griswold Haff
*Nathaniel Kennedy Hewett, with honors in Political Economy
*Peter Armen Kassabian Hick, with highest honors in History
*+Kylie Anne Huckleberry, with honors in Neuroscience
*Hwa YueYi, with highest honors in Political Economy
*Madeleine Eve Jacobs, with honors in History
*Thelonious Samuel Jensen, with honors in Economics
*Elizabeth Mary Kalb, with honors in Chemistry
*Daniel Walker Kenefick, with highest honors in Economics
*Anne Elizabeth Kerth, with highest honors in History
366
*Marissa Allison Kimsey, with honors in Economics
*+Zebulon Gehrett Levine, with highest honors in Chemistry
*+Ang Li, with highest honors in Biology and honors in Chemistry
*Lisa Xiaoyue Li, with honors in Political Science
Muhammad Asad Liaqat, with honors in Political Economy
*Alexa Blaine Lutchen, with highest honors in Economics
*Andrew Ambrose LyonsBerg
*Briana Margaret Marshall
*Julia Elizabeth McGuinness
*+David Owen Smith Oakley, with highest honors in Geosciences
*+Sean Carlos Pegado, with honors in Mathematics
*Thuy Thanh Phung
*Mark Andrew Prins
Hari Narayan Ramesh, with honors in Political Science
*Alexander James Reeves, with honors in Political Science
*Geoffrey Harrison Rodriguez
*Charles Peter Gates Rousseau
*+Steven Surmacz Rubin, with honors in Computer Science
*Jacqueline Rose Russo
*Erdem Sahin, with highest honors in Computer Science
*Santiago De Jesus Sanchez Borboa, with highest honors in Philosophy
*+Ville Antton Satopaa, with highest honors in Mathematics
*Jasper P. Scheppe, with honors in Political Economy
Thomas Peter Sikes
*+Robert Allan Silversmith
*Ellen Marie Stuart, with honors in Economics
*David Arthur Thompson
*Laura AnYe Ting
*Akemi Mary Ueda, with highest honors in English
*Julia Erna van Hoogstraten
+Philip Van Vu, with highest honors in Mathematics
*Hillary Ann Walker
*Jacob Tyler Walls, with highest honors in Music
Dean James Weesner, with honors in Economics
*+Johannes Mosquera Wilson, with highest honors in Psychology
*+Joshua Mosquera Wilson, with highest honors in Psychology
*+Wentao Xiong, with highest honors in Economics and honors in Mathematics
Emily Yu
Sasha Yishu Zheng, with highest honors in Political Science
Mo Zhu
Bachelor of Arts, Cum Laude
Alison Morgan Agnew
*+Antoniya Aleksandrova Aleksandrova, with honors in Physics
Alena Lane Allegretti
Erin Marie Altenburger
Meredith Leigh Annex
Lauren Mary Anstey, with honors in Political Science
Benjamin Joseph Atkinson
Courtney Brooke Atkinson
Emily Ricketson Avis
Andrei Baiu
Brittany Anne BakerBrousseau
Nicole Christine BallonLanda
Sarah Anne Bender, with honors in Literary Studies
Ariel Joseph Binder
Irtefa Anwara BinteFarid, with honors in Anthropology
Christine Alyse Bowman
Josef Leland Brewster III, with honors in Economics
Lucas Baughn Bruton, with honors in Chemistry
Helen Jinsun Cha, with honors in Biology
Camille Mary Chicklis
Laura Winton Christianson
Laura Lynn Corona, with honors in Psychology
Shawn Patrick Curley
Bianca Joanna Czaderna, with honors in English
Adrienne Straub Darrow
+Mary Elisabeth Daub, with highest honors in Chemistry
+Evan Nylen Dethier, with honors in Geosciences
+Marian Mitchell Deuker, with honors in Chemistry
Allison Egger Deutsch
Marijke Julia DeVos, with highest honors in Biology
Alexandra DiAddezio
Andrew Russell Dominitz
Meghan Rose Donnelly, with highest honors in Theatre and honors in Anthropology
Julia Kingsley Drake, with highest honors in Spanish
Kara Jane Duggan, with honors in Political Science
Alexander Mark Elvin
+Matthew Hays Everhart, with honors in Chemistry
Noah Martin Fields
Aaron Joseph Flack
Andrew James Gaidus
Moyukh Ghosh, with honors in Chemistry
+Janna Robin Gordon, with honors in Psychology
+Jillian Elizabeth Hancock, with highest honors in Biology
Jessica Paige Harris
Jeremy Rubin Herrmann
Timothy Kevin HickeyLeClair
Maya Sylvia Hislop, with honors in English
Lisa Marie Holub
Laura Luona Huang
Michael Starbuck Ives
Alex Helge Johnson
Mark William Johnson, with honors in Chemistry
Benjamin Harris Kaplan, with honors in English
Faisal Ahmed Khan
Joseph Muir Kiernan
Madeline Stevenson King
+Patricia Jacobs Klein, with honors in Cognitive Science
Derek Matthew Lam
Adam Ben Lee, with honors in Political Science
Woo Chan Lee, with highest honors in Music
Kavitha Mannava
367
+Beryl Lauren ManningGeist, with highest honors in Biology
Daniel Jorge Marcet, with highest honors in Economics
Dale Elizabeth Markey
Tarra Nicole Martin
Geoffrey Flynn McCrossan
Kelsie Marie Meehan
+Lisa Marie Merkhofer, with honors in Geosciences
Caleb Asa Miaw
Ian Campbell Murphy
Yung Hsien Ng Tam
Jennifer Marie Oswald
Felix Yaw Owusu
Zachary James Padovani
Corey Nicholas Paulish
Jay William Petricone
+Thuy Vinh Pham, with honors in Mathematics
David Elliot Phillips
James William Piereson, with honors in Political Science
Gary Ross Roberson II
Katharine Pomeroy Rooney
Jack Steiner Rudolph
Melinda Isabel Salaman
Todd Robert Schnuck
+Charles Aaron Seipp, with honors in Chemistry
Max Nathaniel Shapiro
Chandler Elliott Sherman
Evan Alexander Skorpen, with honors in Economics
Ellen Eunae Song, with honors in English
Thammika Songkaeo, with highest honors in French
Laura Minkler Staugaitis
Andrea Gabrielle St. Cyr
Catalina Stoica
Emily Margaret Studenmund
Katherine Laxton Tandler, with honors in English
Carol Tsoi
+Jacob Gregory Wagner, with honors in Mathematics
Stephen Dyer Webster
Elizabeth Anne Weinberg
Elena Lee Wikner
Robert Michael Wilechansky
Jehanne Daunette Wyllie
Glenn Zong Zheng Yong
Katherine Grace Yosua
Elizabeth Yu Zhu
+Jonah Phillip Zuflacht, with highest honors in Biology
Bachelor of Arts
+Michael Jacob Abrams, with highest honors in Biology
Ayyaz Ahmad
Sara Unzila Ahmed
Colin Elgin Ainsworth
Bekzod Kamiljonovich Akramov
James Adams Allison
Athbi Ali AlSabah
Rebecca Elizabeth Alschuler
Roger Joseph Alvarez
Alexandra Kay Ambros
Carly Elizabeth Ameen
Steven T. Arenas
Salvatore Paul Asaro
Gordon Richard Atkins
Corey Shea Baldwin
Wilson Gregor Barr
Patrick Niden Barren
Nathaniel BaschGould
Alice Emerson Bearn
Katerina Belkin
James Bryce Bennett
Stephanie Michelle Berger
Jacqueline Blanche Berglass
Ran Bi
Elizabeth West Bingham
Matthew James Blake
+Joshua Aaron Blanco, with honors in Biology
Brian Francis Borah
Christopher Adrian Brauchli
David Charles Brett
Eli Miles Bronfman
Leo Edmond Brown
Kim Thien Bui
Anne Marie Burke
Heather Ashley Burrell
Kaitlin Margaret Butler
Deborah Caitlyn Cain
Carla Faith CainWalther, with honors in English
Quaneece Shanay Calhoun
Robert Henry Camp
Olivia Ann CardChilders
Elisa June Chang
Rooney Cabell Charest, with highest honors in Contract Major: Environmental Policy
Andrew Yueh Chen, with honors in English
Tasha Chu, with honors in Psychology
Christine Yujin Chung
Eric Woomin Chung
Yu Rim Chung
Nina Betty Cochran
Julia Cameron Cohan
Brian William Cole
Alexandra SarahMarjorie Coleman
Benjamin Caulfield Coleman
Jerusa Jean Miranda Contee
Ivan Contreras
Alicia Marie Cook
368
Daniel Sky Costanza, with honors in Economics
Reid Christopher Covington
Matthew Wylie Cranshaw
Alex Leonardo Cruz
Jia Cui
Bradley Ira Culley
Hannah Maureen Cunningham
Barbara Cymring
Lindsay Hazen Davies
Amanda Marie Davis
Leigh Toko Davis, with highest honors in Biology
Elizabeth Alexis Dawson
+Wilmer Alfredo Delcid, with honors in Neuroscience
Samantha Thel Demby
Erika Nikole Denslow
Brett FitzGerald Deware
Sarah Ovington Dewey
Andrew Timothy D'Ignazio
Michael Teshome Dinku
Danielle Hannah Diuguid
Harlan Kemper Dodson
Nancy Mylan Dong
Kathleen Therese Durante, with honors in Sociology
+Sara Mary Kathryn Dwyer, with honors in Astronomy
Susannah Talley Eckman
Christopher DeLoache Edmonds
Clair Embry
Matthew Kikel Farley
Tatiana Maria Fernandez
David Hugh Allen Fitzpatrick
Timothy Jackson Flanagan
Curtis Dwight Flournoy Jr.
Aaron James Ford
Jonathan Albert Foster
Daniel George Franck
Meghan Lynch Gaffney
William Edward Garza
Robert Edward Gearity
Candace Onita Gibson
Thaddeus Andrew Gibson
Lauren Ashley GlavesBarrett
David Ofotsu Gorleku
William Evans Gruner
Justin Victor Bruno Guttek
Noelia Samanta Guzmn
Iliyana Krassimirova Hadjistoyanova, with honors in History
Henry Nicholas Mullen Hall, with honors in Philosophy
Robert Thomas Hannigan Jr.
David Christian Hansen
Annie Elizabeth Hanson
Cadence Aniela Hardenbergh
Amy Lynn Harris
William Ambrose Harron III, with honors in History
Brian Robert Hartmann
Lisa Merry Hent
Gabriela Abigail Hernandez Estrada
Jessica Day Herzer
Thomas Channing Hester
Annelise Marie Hewitt
Rhassan Lamante Hill
Adam Chase Hines
Aras Spencer Holden
Christopher Brannan Holland
Megan Lusia Holmes, with honors in English
Peter Huang
+Yuxing Huang, with honors in Computer Science
Sakiera Tiarra Jolynn Hudson, with honors in Psychology
Katherine May HunterSmith
+Leah Liat Hurwich, with honors in Physics
Ifiok Clement Inyang
Francesca Claire Jackson
Corey Leon Jacobs
Joseph Raphael Jacobsohn
Jamal Malik Jefferson, with honors in Biology
Giselle Antonia Jimenez, with honors in Art
Gabrielle Martine Joffe
Daniel Jason Johnson
Jared Khalid Johnson
Kirsten Clare Johnson, with honors in Chinese
Patrick James Jones
Aspen Lee Jordan
Robert William Kalb
Victoria Nicole Kalman
Richard D. Kang
Keith McBride Kantack, with honors in Geosciences
Gaston Eugenio Kelly
Smriti Khanal
Rokimi Khawlhring
Tomomi Kikuchi
Thomas Karl Kildahl
John Joseph Killea
Gregory Jae Ho Kim
Robert Yeon Kim
Sophia Seohee Kim, with honors in Biology
Madeline Joy King, with honors in Psychology
Andrew Philip Knez
Leah Linden Lansdowne
Cindy Michalle La Rosa
Jeffrey Mathew Lauer
Matthew Scott Lea
Nicholas Julian Lee
Timothy Kean Lengel
Michael Patricio Leon
369
Eleanor Max Levine, with highest honors in Art
Rebecca Heideman Licht
+Nathaniel James Lim, with honors in Physics
Leanne Lin, with honors in Biology
SuMai Lin
Kelly Sara Lippman
Andrew TsuTse Liu
Christopher C. Liu
+Mari Marie Lliguicota, with honors in Biology
Antonio Jose Lopez
+Antonio Tomas Lorenzo, with honors in Physics
Mohammed Abdul Lotif
+Caleb Oliver Lucy, with honors in Geosciences
Ryan Andrew Lupo
Stephen Gerard Luther
Chelsea Anne Klarrissa Luttrell
Brianna Casey Lyons
Walter Hayworth Macdonald
Sasha Anne Macko
Brendan Joshua Majev
Brian Carl Malchoff
David Maldonado
Ryan John Malo
Evan Charney Maltby
Erin Kristen Mandigo
Lucy Emma Marchese
Timothy Neil Daniel Marrs
Justin Thomas Marsh
Abigail Tinsley Moncure Martin
Nicholas Matthew Maschinot
Matthew Ross Masucci
Joshua Abraham Mattana
+James Anderson McCarthy, with honors in Geosciences
Mary Ryan McChesney
Meredith Chase McClatchy
Graham James McCulloch
Alysha Monique McElroy
Teresa Skye McHugh
Nancy Megan McInerney
Christina Marie Meade, with honors in Chemistry
Alexander Benno Mendels
Semira Elen Menghes
Oliver Rutledge Merrill
Kimberly Ashley Marie Middleton
Henry Gordon Mills
John Patrick Moffitt
Mopati Monnawe Morake
Oscar Moreno
Christopher Louis Morgan
Jonathan Jay Morgenstern
Fiona Marie Moriarty, with highest honors in Art
Michael Robert Moss
Owen Bryant Moss
Brendan James Munzar
Laura Eileen Murphy
Andrew Thomas Murray
Thomas Ingersoll Murray
Faraidoon Nayebkhill
Anne Elizabeth Neil
Thomas Lawrence Nelson
Isaac Mateo Nicholson
Andrs Fernando Nino
Jared Bartley Nourse
Michelle Nicole NoyerGranacki, with highest honors in English
Cameron McLain Nutting
Katherine Patricia Nyholm
Caroline Hart O'Connell
Connor Kerr Olvany
Douglas Ochieng Onyango
Allison Constance Page
William Randolph Palmer
Andrew Taesup Park
Ashley Sarah Parsons
Robert Stern Pasternak, with highest honors in Music
Lorena F. Patlan
Lorenzo Lamarr Patrick
Cassandra Paul
Gershwin Joseph Penn
Natalia Emilia Perellon
+Alexandra Marie Peruta, with honors in Biology
Daniel James Pesquera
Laura McClellan Pickel
Marissa Lynell Kehaunani Pilger
Kwame Appeagyei Poku
Jennifer Katherine Potvin, with honors in History
Heath Aaron Wayne Pruitt
Jeffrey Eliot Putnam, with honors in Economics
Clare Eleanor Quinlan
+Veronica Caridad Rabelo, with honors in Psychology
Tyler Lauren Rainer
+Samyam Rajbandari, with honors in Physics
Ellen Sinclair Ramsey, with honors in Psychology
Jason Robert Rapaport
Cody Bryant Rasmussen
Bhuvaneswari Ettinamane Narendra Reddy
Nicole Ann Reich
Sabrina Marie Reid
Bryant Duggin Renaud, with honors in Political Economy
Joshua Kichae Rim
+Clint William Robins, with highest honors in Biology
+Shivon April Robinson, with highest honors in Neuroscience
Sophie Saltonstall Robinson
Gina Rene Rodriguez
370
Amber Electra Romero
Charles Matthew Romero
Kevin Edward Rose
David Milton Roth
Christopher Michael Rudnicki
Michael Patrick Ryan Jr.
Diane Sophia SaintVictor
David Parente Schoen
Julia Louise Schreiber
Todd Elliot Schrock
Christopher Ryan Serna
Ayesha Shahid
Mara Nadia Shapero, with honors in Chemistry
Meghan Elizabeth Shea
Taylor Joan Shea
SereneLoretta Yao Shen, with honors in History
Victoria Li Sheng
Cara Marie Sipprelle
William Langdon Slack
Kenneth William Dambach Sluis
Courtney Noelle Smith
Annelise Grace Snyder
Anna Hicks Soybel
Emily Sterling Spine
Haley Sargent Steggall
Taylor Jennings Stevens
Adam James Stoner
Julian Rawson Suhr, with honors in English
George Whitney Sullivan
Matthew Conor Sullivan
+Rebecca Clare Sullivan, with honors in Physics
Ashley Watkins Taylor
Rachel Marilyn Teitelbaum, with honors in Political Science
Charlene Nicole Thomas
Katherine Ross Thomas
Ryann Leona Tookes
Charles Richard Toomajian III
Sarah Elisabeth Rogers Tory
Andrew Maxwell Triska, with highest honors in English
Katrina Amanda Tulla
+Sara Ann Turner, with honors in Chemistry
Elizabeth Twaits
Rebecca Lindsay Tyson
Thomas Maxwell Tysse
Joseph Leo Vella
John Pierson Wadden
Rebecca Lynn Wagner
+Daniel Robert Walsh, with honors in Geosciences
Kevin Michael Wandrei
Lane Wang, with honors in Asian Studies
Lee Wang
Wei Wang
Stefan Pierre WardWheten
Josephine Trudie Warshauer
Daniel Leach Waters
Aimee Claire Weber, with honors in Biology
Sarah Reid Weber
Madeline Hagstrom Wendt
Katherine Lee Weyerhaeuser
Ariel Nicole White, with honors in Biology
Katherine Scott White
Laura Collette White
Brandon Troy Whittington
Sara Katherine Wild
Christopher James Willey
Nicholas Ryan Williams
Stephanie Elizabeth Wren
Emanuel Seth Yekutiel
Ruth Meejung Yoo
Ryan Risti Young
Jesse Daniel Youngmann
Chando Yun
Xin Zeng
Mingjian Zhang
Hai Zhou
+Fhatarah Alexandra Zinnamon, with honors in Neuroscience
Kathryn Elizabeth Zipps
Lauren Carol Zurek
CONFERRING OF HONORARY DEGREES
Marina Abramovic D.F.A.
Ann Escott Bancroft D.Sc.
Ken Burns D.F.A.
Bruce Martin Russett D.Litt.
Margarito "Gary" B. Teves LL.D.
Cory A. Booker LL.D.
371
PRIZES AND AWARDS--2010-2011
OLMSTED PRIZES--Awarded for excellence in teaching to four secondary school teachers nominated by the Williams Class of 2011. These prizes were
established in 1984 through the estate of George Olmsted, Jr., 1924. The recipients are: Thomas W. Dorman, an English teacher at Cascade Middle School
in SedroWoolley, Washington; Abigail B. Erdmann, an English teacher at Brookline High School in Brookline, Massachusetts; Andrew L. Lipps, a math
teacher at Georgetown Day School in Washington, D.C.; John P. O'Malley, a social studies teacher at South Kingston High School in Wakefield, Rhode Island;
and Gerald Zaffuts, a music teacher at Averill Park High School in Averill Park, New York.
Prizes Awarded in 2010-2011
John Sabin Adriance, Class of 1882, Prize in Chemistry, Yuzhong Meng '11
Charles R. Alberti, Class of 1919, Award, Jonathan F. Carroll '11
Robert G. Barrow Memorial Prize for Music Composition, Robert S. Pasternak '11
The Michael Davitt Bell Prize, Michelle N. NoyerGranacki '11
The Erastus C. Benedict, Class of 1821, Prize in Biology (Second Prize), Timothy K. HickeyLeClair '11
The Erastus C. Benedict, Class of 1821, Prize in Biology (First Prize), Beryl L. ManningGeist '11
The Erastus C. Benedict, Class of 1821, Prize in Classics (Greek: Second Prize), Kavitha Mannava '11
The Erastus C. Benedict, Class of 1821, Prize in Classics (Greek: First Prize), David A. Kealhofer '13
The Erastus C. Benedict, Class of 1821, Prize in Classics (Latin: Second Prize), Megan T. Behrend '12
The Erastus C. Benedict, Class of 1821, Prize in Classics (Latin: First Prize), Jacob D. Addelson '14
The Erastus C. Benedict, Class of 1821, Prize in French (First Prize), Thammika Songkaeo '11
The Erastus C. Benedict, Class of 1821, Prize in French (Second Prize), Madeleine G. Haff '11
The Erastus C. Benedict, Class of 1821, Prize in German (German: First Prize), Michael R. Moss '11
The Erastus C. Benedict, Class of 1821, Prize in History (Second Prize), Peter A. Hick '11
The Erastus C. Benedict, Class of 1821, Prize in History (First Prize), William Lee '11
The Erastus C. Benedict, Class of 1821, Prize in Mathematics (First Prize), James R. Wilcox '13
The Erastus C. Benedict, Class of 1821, Prize in Mathematics (First Prize), Carlos R. Dominguez '13
Gaius C. Bolin, 1889, Prize in Africana Studies, Jacquelin D. Magby '12
Russell H. Bostert Fellowship, Katelyn S. Aldrin '12
Russell H. Bostert Fellowship, Jung Chan Yee '13
Russell H. Bostert Fellowship, Walker Olesen '13
Russell H. Bostert Thesis Prize in History, William Lee '11
Kenneth L. Brown, Class of 1947, Prize in American Studies, Jehanne D. Wyllie '11
Kenneth L. Brown, Class of 1947, Prize in American Studies, Christopher B. Holland '11
Sterling A. Brown, Class of 1922, Citizenship Prize, Courtney N. Smith '11
The Bullock Poetry Prize of the American Academy of Poets, Andrew M. Triska '11
W. Marriott Canby, Class of 1891, Athletic Scholarship Prize, Robert W. Cuthbert '11
Class of 1945 Florence Chandler Fellowship, Mohammed A. Lotif '11
Chinese Government Scholarship, Alexander M. Elvin '11
David Taggart Clark Prize in Latin, Jacob G. Gelman '13
Horace F. Clark, 1833, Prize Fellowship, Andrew K. Victor '11
Class of 1925 ScholarAthlete Award, Elizabeth A. Danhakl '11
Williams College Community Builder of the Year, Gabrielle M. Joffe '11
Williams College Community Builder of the Year, Danielle H. Diuguid '11
The James Bronson Conant and Nathan Russell Harrington, Class of 1893, Prize in Biology, Ang Li '11
Henry Rutgers Conger Memorial Literary Prize, Belle K. Baxley '13
Garrett Wright DeVries, Class of 1932, Memorial Prize in Romance Languages, Julia K. Drake '11
Dewey Prize, Christopher J. Fox '11
Jean Donati Student Employee Award in Music, Noah M. Fields '11
Dorothy H. Donovan Memorial Fellowship, Hwa YueYi '11
Henry A. Dwight, Class of 1829, Botanical Prize, Jillian E. Hancock '11
Environmental Studies Committee Award, Jennifer M. Rowe '11
S. Lane Faison, Jr. 1929 Prize, Allison E. Deutsch '11
The Nicholas P. Fersen Prize in Russian, Leo E. Brown '11
Freeman Foote Prize in Geology, Daniel R. Walsh '11
French Ministry of Education Teaching Assistantship, Cecilia D. DavisHayes '11
Robert W. Friedrichs Award in Sociology, Kathleen T. Durante '11
Fulbright Grant, Madeleine E. Jacobs '11
Fulbright Grant, Ellen E. Song '11
Fulbright Grant, Leo E. Brown '11
Fulbright Grant, Anne E. Kerth '11
Fulbright Grant, Michael R. Moss '11
Fulkerson Award for Leadership in the Arts, Caroline H. O'Connell '11
Gilbert W. Gabriel, Class of 1912, Memorial Prize in Theatre, Adam J. Stoner '11
Sam Goldberg Colloquium Prize in Computer Science, Nicholas A. Arnosti '11
Sam Goldberg Colloquium Prize in Mathematics, Thelonious S. Jensen '11
Sam Goldberg Colloquium Prize in Mathematics, Yuzhong Meng '11
Patricia GoldmanRakic Prize in Neuroscience, Marijke J. DeVos '11
Barry M. Goldwater Scholarship, Jack E. Berry '12
Frank C. Goodrich 1945 Award in Chemistry, Sara A. Turner '11
Frank C. Goodrich 1945 Award in Chemistry, Emily Gao '13
Frank C. Goodrich 1945 Award in Chemistry, Natalia D. Loewen '12
William C. Grant Jr. Prize in Biology, Hilary A. Dolstad '11
The Arthur B. Graves, Class of 1858, Essay Prize in Art, Fiona M. Moriarty '11
The Arthur B. Graves, Class of 1858, Essay Prize in Economics, Meredith L. Annex '11
The Arthur B. Graves, Class of 1858, Essay Prize in History, Madeleine E. Jacobs '11
The Arthur B. Graves, Class of 1858, Essay Prize in Philosophy, Santiago D. Sanchez Borboa '11
The Arthur B. Graves, Class of 1858, Essay Prize in Philosophy, James R. Finley '11
The Arthur B. Graves, Class of 1858, Essay Prize in Political Science, Sasha Y. Zheng '11
Arthur B. Graves, Class of 1858, Essay Prize in Religion, Camille M. Chicklis '11
The Graves Prize for Delivery of Essay, Ayyaz Ahmad '11
The Graves Prize for Delivery of Essay, Hwa YueYi '11
The Graves Prize for Delivery of Essay, Diego M. Flores '11
The Graves Prize for Delivery of Essay, Muhammad A. Liaqat '11
Grosvenor Memorial Cup, William L. Slack '11
Frederick C. Hagedorn, Jr., Class of 1971, Premedical Prize, Heather A. Burrell '11
G. Stanley Hall 1867 Prize in Psychology, Johannes M. Wilson '11
G. Stanley Hall 1867 Prize in Psychology, Joshua M. Wilson '11
Tom Hardie, Class of 1978, Memorial Prize in Environmental Studies, Rooney C. Charest '11
C. David Harris, Jr., Class of 1963, Prize in Political Science, Hari N. Ramesh '11
Kate Hogan 25th Anniversary of Women in Athletics Award, Kathryn B. Friedman '11
372
Willard E. Hoyt, Jr., Class of 1923, Memorial Award, David A. Thompson '11
Willard E. Hoyt, Jr., Class of 1923, Memorial Award, Jonathan F. Carroll '11
Charles W. Hufford Book Prize, Cameron M. Nutting '11
Charles W. Hufford Book Prize, Stefan P. WardWheten '11
Charles W. Hufford Book Prize, Colin J. Killick '12
Charles W. Hufford Book Prize, Chandler E. Sherman '11
Francis Sessions Hutchins, Class of 1900, Memorial Fellowship Prize, SaKiera T. Hudson '11
Francis Sessions Hutchins, Class of 1900, Memorial Fellowship Prize, Mopati M. Morake '11
Hubbard Hutchinson, Class of 1917, Memorial Fellowship (English), Andrew M. Triska '11
Hubbard Hutchinson, Class of 1917, Memorial Fellowship (Art), Yu Rim Chung '11
Hubbard Hutchinson, Class of 1917, Memorial Fellowship (Music), Jacob T. Walls '11
Hubbard Hutchinson, Class of 1917, Memorial Fellowship (Theater), Nathaniel BaschGould '11
Hubbard Hutchinson, Class of 1917, Memorial Fellowship (Dance), Alicia M. Cook '11
Jeffrey Owen Jones 1966 Fellowship in Journalism, Ayesha Shahid '11
Arthur Judson Prize in Music, Alex H. Johnson '11
Arthur Judson Prize in Music, Katherine G. Yosua '11
Lawrence J. and Carolyn M. Kaplan Prize, Leah L. Hurwich '11
Lawrence J. and Carolyn M. Kaplan Prize, Leo E. Brown '11
Arthur Kaufmann, Class of 1899, Prize in English, Santiago D. Sanchez Borboa '11
Muhammad Kenyatta, Class of 1966, Community Service Prize, William Lee '11
William W. Kleinhandler Prize for Excellence in Music, Leo E. Brown '11
William W. Kleinhandler Prize for Excellence in Music, Peter K. Gottlieb '11
William W. Kleinhandler Prize for Excellence in Music, Geoffrey H. Rodriguez '11
William W. Kleinhandler Prize for Excellence in Music, Robert A. Silversmith '11
William W. Kleinhandler Prize for Excellence in Music, Akemi M. Ueda '11
William W. Kleinhandler Prize for Excellence in Music, Stefan P. WardWheten '11
William W. Kleinhandler Prize for Excellence in Music, Aspen L. Jordan '11
William W. Kleinhandler Prize for Excellence in Music, Sara M.K. Dwyer '11
Robert M. Kozelka Prize in Statistics, Ville A. Satopaa '11
Richard Krouse Prize in Political Science, Peter G. Drivas '11
Jack Larned, Class of 1942, International Management Prize, Wentao Xiong '11
Richard Lathers, Class of 1877, Essay Prize in Government, Kara J. Duggan '11
Mary and Nathaniel M. Lawrence Travel Fellowship, James W. Grzelak '13
Mary and Nathaniel M. Lawrence Travel Fellowship, Rigoberto F. RuizBonilla '12
Lawrence S. Graver Prize in Theatre, Amanda C. Keating '12
Dolores Zohrab Liebmann Fund Fellowship, Peter A. Hick '11
Linen Grant for Summer Travel in Asia, Kimberlee D. Sanders '12
Linen Grant for Summer Travel in Asia, Lily V. Wong '12
Linen Grant for Summer Travel in Asia, Robert M. Ainsworth '13
Linen Grant for Summer Travel in Asia, Julian A. Century '12
Linen Grant for Summer Travel in Asia, Tianyue Zhou '12
Linen Grant for Summer Travel in Asia, Hannah E. Hindel '13
Linen Grant for Summer Travel in Asia, Meghan T. Kiesel '13
Linen Grant for Summer Travel in Asia, Sungik Yang '13
Linen Grant for Summer Travel in Asia, Mai Okimoto '13
Linen Grant for Summer Travel in Asia, Leo K. Obata '14
Linen Grant for Summer Travel in Asia, Sabrina S. Castle '14
Linen Senior Prize in Asian Studies, Lane Wang '11
Linen Senior Prize in Asian Studies (Chinese), Jessica P. Harris '11
Linen Senior Prize in Asian Studies (Japanese), Sophia S. Kim '11
Linen Senior Thesis Prize in Asian Studies, Kirsten C. Johnson '11
H. Ganse Little, Jr. Prize in Religion, Charles P. Rousseau '11
David N. Major, Class of 1981, Memorial Prize in Geology, James A. McCarthy '11
Williams College Multicultural Center Student Activist of the Year, Johannes M. Wilson '11
Leverett Mears Prize in Chemistry, Elizabeth M. Kalb '11
Willis I. Milham Prize in Astronomy, Sara Kang '14
John W. Miller Prize in Philosophy, Santiago D. Sanchez Borboa '11
Mellon Mays Undergraduate Fellowship, Anita N. Bateman '13
Mellon Mays Undergraduate Fellowship, Alice A. Sady '13
Mellon Mays Undergraduate Fellowship, Carly B. Valenzuela '13
Mellon Mays Undergraduate Fellowship, Viviana M. Benjumea '13
Mellon Mays Undergraduate Fellowship, Ali M. Mctar '13
John Edmund Moody, 1921, Fellowship, YueYi Hwa '11
Morgan Prize in Mathematics, Patricia J. Klein '11
Nancy McIntire Prize in Women & Gender Studies, Johannes M. Wilson '11
National Science Foundation Fellowship, Robert A. Silversmith '11
James Orton Award in Anthropology, Burge Abiral '11
Frederick M. Peyser Prize in Painting, Laura M. Staugaitis '11
Ursula Prescott Essay Prize in Political Science, Jerusa J. M. Contee '11
Purple Key Trophy (Men's), Gary R. Roberson '11
Purple Key Trophy (Women's), Sara K. Wild '11
Purple Key Trophy (Men's), Brandon T. Whittington '11
Robert Ikemori Quay '04 Outing Club Memorial Fellowship, Stephanie R. Durell '14
James Lathrop Rice, Class of 1854, Prize in Classical Languages, Courtney B. Atkinson '11
Robert F. Rosenburg Prize in Environmental Studies, Joseph J. Augenbraun '11
Robert F. Rosenburg Prize for Excellence in Mathematics, Jake A. Levinson '11
Muriel B. Rowe Prize, Briana M. Marshall '11
Ruchman Student Fellowship, Evelyn C. Denham '12
Ruchman Student Fellowship, Julian A. Century '12
Sidney A. Sabbeth Prize in Political Economy, Muhammad A. Liaqat '11
Bruce Sanderson, Class of 1956, Prize in Architecture, Robert W. Cuthbert '11
Ruth Scott Sanford Memorial Prize in Theatre, Meghan Rose Donnelly '11
Scheffey Award, Madeline S. King '11
Robert C. L. Scott Prize in History, Peter A. Hick '11
Robert C. L. Scott Prize for Graduate Study in History, Mary T. Freeman '11
Sentinels of the Republic Essay Prize in Government, Dale E. Markey '11
Shirin Shakir, 2003, Prize in Political Science, Caroline C. Chiappetti '11
Edward Gould Shumway, Class of 1871, Prize in English, Mark A. Prins '11
James F. Skinner Prize in Chemistry, Zebulon G. Levine '11
Dr. Herchel Smith Fellowship, Charles P. Rousseau '11
373
Dr. Herchel Smith Fellowship, Jehanne D. Wyllie '11
Dr. Herchel Smith Fellowship, Zebulon G. Levine '11
Dr. Herchel Smith Fellowship, Marissa A. Kimsey '11
Dr. Herchel Smith Fellowship, Antoniya A. Aleksandrova '11
Elizur Smith Rhetorical Prize, Sean C. Pegado '11
St. Andrew's Society Scholarship, Hannah M. Cunningham '11
Howard P. Stabler Prize in Physics, Peter K. Gottlieb '11
Shirley Stanton Prize in Music, Noah M. Fields '11
Shirley Stanton Prize in Music, Woo Chan Lee '11
Frederick Eugene Stratton 1872 Fellowship in Biology, Shivon A. Robinson '11
Stanley R. Strauss, Class of 1935, Prize in English, Michelle N. NoyerGranacki '11
Taiwan Ministry of Education Mandarin Scholarship, Kirsten C. Johnson '11
Tompkins Prize in Japanese, Guannan Lu '12
Harry S. Truman Scholarship, Newton L. Davis '12
William Bradford Turner Citizenship Prize, Chandler E. Sherman '11
William Bradford Turner, Class of 1914, Prize in History, Anne E. Kerth '11
Carl Van Duyne Prize in Economics, Zeynep Coskun '12
A.V.W. Van Vechten, 1847, Prize for Extemporaneous Speaking, Andrew K. Victor '11
Laszlo G. Versenyi Memorial Prize, James R. Finley '11
Benjamin B. Wainwright, Class of 1920, Prize in English, Andrew M. Triska '11
Harold H. Warren Prize in Chemistry, Michael P. Girouard '13
Thomas J. Watson Fellowship, Emanuel S. Yekutiel '11
David A. Wells Prize in Political Economy, Gea Hyun Shin '11
David A. Wells Prize in Political Economy, YueYi Hwa '11
Karl E. Weston, Class of 1896, Prize for Distinction in Art (Art Studio), Elizabeth A. Danhakl '11
Karl E. Weston, Class of 1896, Prize for Distinction in Art (Art History), Robert W. Cuthbert '11
Williams College Undergraduate Research Fellowship, Cheng Chai Chiang '13
Williams College Undergraduate Research Fellowship, Pacifique A. Irankunda '13
Williams College Undergraduate Research Fellowship, Phillip A. Parnell '13
Williams College Undergraduate Research Fellowship, Don S. Polite '13
Williams College Undergraduate Research Fellowship, Kwan Y. Tang '13
Williams in Africa Post Graduate Fellowship, Bryant D. Renaud '11
Williams Teaching Fellowship, United College, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Cadence A. Hardenbergh '11
Williams Teaching Fellowship, United College, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Yung Hsien Ng Tam '11
Robert G. Wilmers, Jr., 1990, Memorial Student Travel Abroad Fellowship, Niki Y. Chang '12
Robert G. Wilmers, Jr., 1990, Memorial Student Travel Abroad Fellowship, Rachel C. Patel '12
Robert G. Wilmers, Jr., 1990, Memorial Student Travel Abroad Fellowship, Claire H. Lafave '12
Robert G. Wilmers, Jr., 1990, Memorial Student Travel Abroad Fellowship, Hilary R. Ledwell '12
Robert G. Wilmers, Jr., 1990, Memorial Student Travel Abroad Fellowship, Ian D. Page '12
Robert G. Wilmers, Jr., 1990, Memorial Student Travel Abroad Fellowship, Daniel S. Grossman '12
Robert G. Wilmers, Jr., 1990, Memorial Student Travel Abroad Fellowship, Tiffany Yu '12
Robert G. Wilmers, Jr., 1990, Memorial Student Travel Abroad Fellowship, Thomas E. Bliska '12
Robert G. Wilmers, Jr., 1990, Memorial Student Travel Abroad Fellowship, Kyle V. Martin '12
Robert G. Wilmers, Jr., 1990, Memorial Student Travel Abroad Fellowship, Julia R. Seyferth '12
Robert G. Wilmers, Jr., 1990, Memorial Student Travel Abroad Fellowship, Gonpo D. Lama '12
Robert G. Wilmers, Jr., 1990, Memorial Student Travel Abroad Fellowship, Emily R. Hertz '13
Robert G. Wilmers, Jr., 1990, Memorial Student Travel Abroad Fellowship, Sarai Infante '13
Robert G. Wilmers, Jr., 1990, Memorial Student Travel Abroad Fellowship, Jackline A. Odhiambo '13
Witte Problem Solving Prize, Nicholas A. Arnosti '11
Woodrow WilsonRockefeller Brothers Fund Fellowship for Aspiring Teachers of Color, Gabriela A. Hernandez '11
Woodrow WilsonRockefeller Brothers Fund Fellowship for Aspiring Teachers of Color, Oscar Moreno '11
Class of 1945 Student World Fellowship, Matthew A. Crimp '12
Class of 1945 Student World Fellowship, Michael D. Levy '12
Class of 1945 Student World Fellowship, Brent M. Eng '12
Class of 1945 Student World Fellowship, Jennifer A. Monge '12
Class of 1945 Student World Fellowship, Michelle S. Ryang '13
Class of 1945 Student World Fellowship, Adnan M. Khan '12
Class of 1945 Student World Fellowship, Adriana V. Mendoza Leigh '12
Class of 1945 Student World Fellowship, You Jin Shin '13
Wyskiel Williams Math Award, Patrick A. Aquino '12
374
ENROLLMENT
BY CLASSES, SEPTEMBER 2010
Graduate Students 54
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Seniors 539
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Juniors 532
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sophomores 550
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
First-Year Students 552
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Total 2225
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
BY CLASSES, FEBRUARY 2011
Graduate Students 52
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Seniors 511
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Juniors 522
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sophomores 546
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
First-Year Students 549
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Total 2180
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Of the 532 new first-year students who entered in the fall of 2004, 91% graduated from Williams within 4 years and 95% within 6 years; of the 536 who entered
in 2005, 89% graduated within 4 years and 95% within 6 years. Additional information on this topic is available at the Office of the Registrar.
GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION
U.S.
Alabama 7
Alaska 11
Arizona 9
Arkansas 7
California 239
Colorado 25
Connecticut 135
Delaware 7
District of Columbia 17
Florida 52
Georgia 34
Guam 1
Hawaii 8
Idaho 4
Illinois 74
Indiana 9
Iowa 5
Kentucky 4
Louisiana 4
Maine 34
Maryland 57
Massachusetts 305
Michigan 20
Minnesota 20
Missouri 9
Montana 8
Nebraska 5
Nevada 4
New Hampshire 21
New Jersey 127
New Mexico 6
New York 403
North Carolina 33
North Dakota 1
Ohio 32
Oklahoma 6
Oregon 21
Pennsylvania 55
Puerto Rico 1
Rhode Island 9
South Carolina 10
South Dakota 1
Tennessee 14
Texas 55
Utah 3
Vermont 31
Virginia 40
Washington 38
West Virginia 4
Wisconsin 18
International
Afghanistan 2
Albania 2
Argentina 1
Armenia 1
Australia 2
Austria 1
Bangladesh 2
Bermuda 1
Bhutan 1
Botswana 6
Bulgaria 5
Burkina Faso 1
Burundi 2
Cambodia 1
Canada 20
China 24
Costa Rica 2
Ethiopia 2
Finland 1
France 3
Georgia 1
Germany 2
Ghana 3
Grenada 1
Guam 1
Guinea 1
Honduras 1
Hong Kong 6
375
Hungary 3
India 3
Israel 1
Jamaica 2
Japan 3
Jordan 3
Kenya 6
Republic of Korea 17
Kuwait 2
Kyrgyzstan 1
Lao People's Democratic Republic 1
Lesotho 1
Liberia 1
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 1
Madagascar 2
Malaysia 2
Mauritius 1
Mexico 2
Mozambique 1
Nepal 10
Netherlands 1
Pakistan 9
Peru 1
Qatar 1
Romania 1
Russian Federation 1
Rwanda 1
Saudi Arabia 1
Senegal 1
Singapore 2
South Africa 1
Spain 1
Sri Lanka 1
Swaziland 2
Sweden 1
Switzerland 1
Taiwan 3
Tajikistan 1
United Republic of Tanzania 1
Thailand 5
Turkey 5
Uganda 3
Ukraine 1
United Arab Emirates 3
United Kingdom 6
Uzbekistan 2
Venezuela 1
Viet Nam 9
Zambia 2
Zimbabwe 5
376
INDEX OF TOPICS
A
Academic Advising, 16
Academic Honesty, Statement of, 17
Academic Requirements, 6-8, 13-14
Academic Standards and Regulations, 12-15
Administration, Offices of, 355-362
Advanced Placement, 8-11
Advisors, Special Faculty, 352-353
African-American Studies, Courses in, 31-37
Alumni Funded Tutorials, 20
American Maritime Studies, See Williams-Mystic Maritime Studies Program
American Studies, Courses in, 37-44
Anthropology and Sociology, Courses in, 44-56
Art, Courses in, 56-74
Asian Studies, Courses in, 74
Astronomy, Courses in, 81-85
Attendance, 12
B
Bachelor of Arts, 6-8
Degrees Conferred, 363-368
Bills, College, Payment of, 18-19
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 85-87
Bioinformatics, Genomics, and Proteomics, 87
Biology, Courses in, 87-93
C
Calendar, College, See inside back cover
Center for Development Economics, 23, 127-129
Ceritificate in European Languages, 8-11
Certificate in European Languages
German, 156
Russian, 270
Spanish, 266-267
Chinese, Courses in, 76-77
Classics, Courses in, 98-103
Clusters
Jewish Studies, 187
Leadership Studies, 194
Materials Science Studies, 198
Co-ordinate Programs, 9-11
Cognitive Science, 103
Combined Program in Liberal Arts and Engineering, 8, 21
Committees, 352
Committees:, Trustee, 340
Comparative Literature, 104
Computer Science, Courses in, 111-115
Contract Major, 8-11, 115-116
Correspondence, Directions for, See Inside Front Cover
Course Change Period, 12
Course Load, 12
Course Numbering System, 31
Courses, Requirements for Graduation, 6-8, 13-14
Courses of Instruction, 31-308
Critical Languages, Courses in, 116
Critical Reasoning and Analytical Skills (CRAAS), 282
Cross-enrollment programs, 9-11
Curriculum, 6-11
D
Dance, 117-118
Dean's List, 14
Deficiencies, 13
Degree, Requirements for, 6-8, 13-14
Degrees:
Awarding of, 15
Bachelor of Arts, 6-8
Conferred, 363-368
Distinction, 15
Honors, 10-11
Master of Arts in History of Art, 23
Master of Arts in Policy Economics, 23
Distinctive Undergraduate Scholarships, 20
Distribution Requirements, 6-7
Divisional, 6
Exploring Diversity Initiative, 7
Quantitative/Formal Reasoning, 7
Writing, 7
Divisions, 6-7
E
Early Concentration Rule, 31
Economics, Courses in, 118-129
Endowed Scholarships and Tutorial, 20
Engineering, Combined Program in, 8, 21-22
English, Courses in, 129-143
Enrollment, Statistics on, 372-373
Environmental Studies, Courses in, 143-151
Expenses, 18
Experiential Education, 9-11
Community Service, 9-11
377
Courses offered, 282-283
Internships and Research Opportunities, 9-11
Museum Associates, 10-11
Exploring Diversity Initiative, 283-286
Extensions, Academic, 13
Extracurricular Activities, Eligibility for, 14
F
Faculty, Emeriti, 341-342
Faculty, List of, 343
Fees, College, Payment of, 18-19
Fellowships and Prizes for Graduate Study, 29
Prizes Awarded, 369
Fifth Course, 12
Financial Aid, 19
First-Year Student "W" Rule, 12
First-Year Student Warnings, 13
First-Year Residential Seminar, 151
French, Courses in, 261-266
G
Geosciences, Courses in, 151-155
German, Certificate in, 156
German, Courses in, 155-158
Grading System and Records, 13
Graduate Programs at Williams
Master of Arts in Development Economics, 23, 127-129
Master of Arts in History of Art, 23, 71-74
Graduate Study
Fellowships and Prizes for, 29
Preparation for, 21-22
--Business Administration, 21
--Engineering, 21-22
--Health Professions, 22
--Law, 22
--Religious Study, 22
--Teaching and Research, 22
--Visual Arts, 21
Graduation Rate, 372
Graduation Requirements, 6-8, 13
Graduation with Distinction, 15
Greek, Courses in, 100-261
H
Health Professions Advising, 22
History of Science, Courses in, 182-183
History of the College, 3-4
History, Courses in, 158-182
Hong Kong Program, 30
Honor System, 17
Honors Program, 10-11
I
Independent Study, 10-11
Independent Study, Winter Study, 309
Interdisciplinary Studies Program, 183-184
International Baccalaureate, 8-11
Italian, Courses in, 266
J
Japanese, Courses in, 79-81
Jewish Studies, 187
L
Languages and the Arts, Division of, 6-7
Latin, Courses in, 101-103
Leadership Studies, 194-196
Legal Studies, Courses in, 196
Libraries, 351
M
Major, 7-8
Co-ordinate Programs, 9-11
Completion of, 14
Contract Major, 8-11
Declaring Two Majors, 8
Eligibility for, 14
Fields, 7
General Structure, 8
Major Exercise, 14
Maritime Studies Program, See Williams-Mystic Maritime Studies Program
Master of Arts in Development Economics, 127-129
Master of Arts in History of Art, 23, 71-74
Master of Arts in Policy Economics, 23
Materials Science Studies, 198
Mathematics and Statistics, Courses in, 199-206
Mathematics Courses, 200
Mead, The George J. Fund, 30
Mission and Purposes, 5
Music, Courses in, 206-216
Mystic Program, See Williams Mystic Maritime Studies Program
N
National Theatre Institute, 278
378
Neuroscience, Courses in, 216-217
99's, 309
O
Offices of Administration, 355-362
Oxford Programme, 11, 290-307
P
Pass-Fail Option, 12
Performance Studies, 217
Phi Beta Kappa Society, 14-15
Philosophy, Courses in, 217-227
Physical Education Requirement, 8-11
Physical Education, Athletics, and Recreation, 227
Physics, Courses in, 227-231
Plagiarism, 17
Political Economy, Courses in, 231-233
Political Science, Courses in, 233-245
Premedical Advising, 22
Presidents, List of, 339
Prizes and Awards, 24-30
Awarded, 369-371
Psychology, Courses in, 245-250
Q
Quantitative/Formal Reasoning Courses, 285
R
Readmission to College, 14
Records and Grading System, 13
Refunds, 14, 19
Registration, 12, 31-308
Regulations, Academic, 12-15
Religion, Courses in, 251-261
Requirements, Academic, 6-8, 13-14
Residence Requirement, 8-11
Romance Languages, Courses in, 261-270
Russian, Certificate in, 270
Russian, Courses in, 270-272
S
Science and Mathematics, Division of, 6-7
Science and Technology Studies, 272-273
Separation for Low Scholarship, 14
Social Studies, Division of, 6-7
Sociology, Courses in, See Anthropology and Sociology
Spanish, Certificate in, 266-267
Spanish, Courses in, 266-270
Statistics, Courses in, 205-206
Students Enrolled, 372
Study Away from Williams, 10
T
The Critical Reasoning and Analytical Skills (CRAAS) Initiative, 9
Theatre, Courses in, 273-278
Trustees, 339
Tutorial Program, 10-11
Tutorials, Alumni Funded, 20
W
Warnings, First-Year Student, 13
Williams-Mystic Maritime Studies Program, 11, 308
Williams-EPRI-UCT-Interstudy Cape Town Policy in Action Program, 11
Williams-Exeter Programme at Oxford University, 11, 290-307
Williams-in-Hong Kong, 30
Winter Study, 6, 13
Courses, 309-336
Withdrawal From a Course, 12
Withdrawal From College, 14
Women's and Gender Studies, Courses in, 278-285
Writing-Intensive Courses, 288
382
CALENDAR 2011-2012
2011
Aug. 31- Sept. 6 Wednesday through Tuesday First Days
September 7 Wednesday First-Year Student Advising
September 8 Thursday First day of classes Fall Semester
September 10 Saturday Convocation
October TBA One of the first three Fridays Mountain Day
October 10-11 Monday & Tuesday Fall Reading Period
October 28-30 Friday through Sunday Class of 2015 Family Days
November 12 Saturday Homecoming
November 23-27 Wednesday through Sunday Thanksgiving Recess
December 9 Friday Last day of classes Fall Semester
December 10-13 Saturday through Tuesday Reading Period
December 14-19 Wednesday through Monday Final Examinations
December 20 Tuesday Vacation begins
2012
January 3 Tuesday First day of Winter Study Period
January 26 Thursday Last day of Winter Study Period
February 1 Wednesday First day of classes Spring Semester
(classes to follow a "Thursday" schedule)
February 2 Thursday Claiming Williams Day, no classes
February 3 Friday Classes resume a normal schedule
February 17-18 Friday & Saturday College Holidays (Winter Carnival)
March 17 -April 1 Saturday through Sunday Spring Recess
May 11 Friday Last day of classes Spring Semester
May 12-15 Saturday through Tuesday Reading Period
May 16-21 Wednesday through Monday Final Examinations
June 2 Saturday Class Day
June 2 Saturday Baccalaureate Service
June 3 Sunday, 10:00 a.m. Commencement
June 7-10 Thursday through Sunday Alumni Reunions
NUMBER OF CLASS MEETINGS
Fall Semester
Spring Semester
Evenings
M,W,F
Mornings Afternoons
T,Th M,Th W T,F M
36
36
25
25
25
25
12
12
24
24
12
12
The Winter Study Period covers 24 calendar days.
NOTE: Because no Williams student should ever have to choose between important religious, academic and athletic commitments, College policy provides for students who wish to participate in religious obser
vances that conflict with other obligations to make arrangements with their instructors to do so.
The policy, approved in 1984 by the faculty and trustees in compliance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, states that Any student who is unable, because of his or her religious beliefs, to
attend classes or to participate in any examination, study, or work requirement on a particular day shall be excused from any such requirement, and shall be provided an opportunity to make up such
requirement which s/he may have missed because of such absence nowprovided, however, that such makeup examination or work shall not create an unreasonable burden upon the College. No
adverse or prejudicial effects shall result to any student" who makes use of this provision of college policy.
The faculty (including coaches) receive annual reminders of this policy, and are encouraged to work carefully with students in anticipating and resolving conflicts to their mutual satisfaction.
